THE CODE OF THE TOWN OF VIENNA, VIRGINIA 
____________ 
Published in 2012 by Order of the Town Council 
____________ 
Adopted: November 5, 2012 
Effective: November 19, 2012 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF 
VIENNA, VIRGINIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
M. Jane Seeman 
Mayor 
____________ 
Laurie A. DiRocco, Vice-Mayor 
Laurie Genevro Cole 
Edythe Frankel Kelleher 
Michael J. Polychrones 
Carey J. Sienicki 
Howard J. Springsteen 
Town Council 
____________ 
Mercury T. Payton 
Town Manager 
____________ 
Steven D. Briglia 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Melanie J. Clark, CMC 
Town Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Vienna, Virginia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1969 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the town council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1969 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and, at the same time, new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included in their proper place by using the same decimal system used for sections, articles, etc. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
RELATED LAWS 	RL:1 
SPECIAL ACTS 	SA:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	RLCT:1 
SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	SACT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Daniel F. Walker, Code Attorney, and Beth Tattershall, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Melanie Clark, Town Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Vienna, Virginia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Vienna, Virginia. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Vienna, Virginia. 2012. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE TOWN OF VIENNA, VIRGINIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the Town of Vienna, Virginia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 27, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before May 23, 2011, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished in accordance with Code sections 1-7 and 1-7.1. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the town may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the town to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after May 23, 2011, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective November 19, 2012. 
Passed and adopted by the town council this 5th day of November, 2012. 
	      M. Jane Seeman, Mayor 
 	 
ATTEST: 
      Melanie J. Clark, CMC 
      Town Clerk 	
 	 
1st Reading: October 22, 2012 
2nd Reading: November 5, 2012 
Council Action 
  
Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the town council, held on the 5th day of November, 2012. 
	      Melanie J. Clark, CMC 
      Town Clerk 
 	 
 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The Charter contained herein derives from Chapter 432 of the 1964 Acts of the General Assembly, approved March 31, 1964, as amended. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by the citations following the amended section. Sections without citations derive unchanged from the original act. Catchlines have been added and changed for editorial purposes. A uniform system of capitalization has been employed and a frontal analysis added for the convenience of the user. 
State Law reference— Uniform charter powers, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-204; powers of cities and towns, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1100 et seq.; charter provisions not affected by legislative grant of powers, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1103. 
 
CHAPTER 1. - INCORPORATION AND BOUNDARIES 
 
Sec. 1.1. - Incorporation. 
The inhabitants of the territory comprised within the present limits of the Town of Vienna, as such limitations are now, or may hereafter be altered and established by law, shall constitute and continue a body politic and corporate to be known and designated as the Town of Vienna, and as such shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, contract and be contracted with, and may have a corporate seal which it may alter, renew, or amend at its pleasure by proper ordinance.  
Sec. 1.2. - Boundaries. 
The territory embraced within the Town of Vienna is that territory in the County of Fairfax, Virginia, as established in Chapter 456 of the Acts of Assembly of 1956 as modified by the final order of the Circuit Court of Fairfax County, Virginia, recorded in the Common Law Order Book No. 39, page 99.  
CHAPTER 2. - POWERS 
 
Sec. 2.1. - General grant of powers. 
The Town of Vienna shall have and may exercise all powers which are now or hereafter may be conferred upon or delegated to towns under the Constitution and laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia, as fully and completely as though such powers were specifically enumerated herein, and no enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall be held to be exclusive, and shall have, exercise and enjoy all the rights, immunities, powers and privileges, and be subject to all the duties and obligations now appertaining to and incumbent on the Town as a municipal corporation. 
The powers set forth in 15.2-1100 through 15.2-1131, inclusive, of Chapter 11 of Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia as now exist, and as hereafter amended, are hereby conferred on and vested in the Town of Vienna. 
(Acts of 1976, ch. 481; Acts of 2002, ch. 594)  
CHAPTER 3. - ELECTIONS 
 
Sec. 3.1. - Election of Mayor and Councilmen; composition of Town Council; terms of office of office of Mayor and Councilmen. 
The Town of Vienna shall be governed by Town Council composed of a Mayor and six Councilmen who shall be qualified electors of the Town and who shall be elected in the following manner: 
(a)  In the Town election to be held on the first Tuesday in May, nineteen hundred seventy-one, three Councilmen shall be elected for a term of one year and ten months, said term to begin on the first day of September, nineteen hundred seventy-one, and expire on the last day of June, nineteen hundred seventy-three. 
(b)  In the Town elections to be held the first Tuesday in May, nineteen hundred seventy-two, there shall be elected a Mayor and three Councilmen, all of whom shall serve for a term of two years, such term to begin on the first day of July, nineteen hundred seventy-two, and expire on the last day of June, nineteen hundred seventy-four. 
(c)  Beginning with the Town election held in nineteen hundred seventy-two, the term of office for both the Mayor and all Councilmen shall be two years and shall begin on the first day of July next following his or their elections. 
(Acts of 1971)  
Sec. 3.2. - Filling vacancies on Council. 
Vacancies on Council shall be filled within forty-five days for the unexpired terms, by a majority vote of the remaining members; provided, however, that where a vacancy for Councilmen shall occur more than eighteen months prior to expiration of the term, such vacancy shall be filled by a majority vote of the remaining members only until a successor shall have been chosen by the qualified electors of the Town in the next regularly scheduled Town election and shall have qualified as provided by law. Those candidates elected as Councilmen by the greatest number of popular votes shall be deemed elected to serve full two-year terms of office. That Councilman, or where more than one vacancy exists, those Councilmen, elected by the next greatest number of popular votes shall be deemed elected to fill the said vacancy or vacancies and not a full two-year term. 
(Acts of 1966, ch. 113; Acts of 1970, ch. 320)  
Sec. 3.3. - Council to be continuing body. 
The Council shall be a continuing body, and no measures pending before such body, or any contract or obligation incurred, shall abate or be discontinued by reason of the expiration of the term of office or removal of any of its members.  
Sec. 3.4. - Conduct of municipal elections. 
Elections in the Town of Vienna shall be conducted pursuant to, and in accord with all applicable provisions of Title 24.2 of the Code of Virginia, except insofar as same are amended by subsections (a) and (b) of this section of the Charter. 
(a)  The Mayor shall issue to those elected certificates of election which shall be countersigned by the Town Clerk. Tie votes shall be decided by lot, and contests shall be tried and finally determined by a majority vote of all members of Council in office and serving at the time the contested election is held, provided that any member or members of the Council who are parties to any such contest shall not participate in the trial of or vote in the determination of the contest to which they are parties. 
(b)  Candidates for Town offices shall not be identified on the ballot by political affiliation. 
(Acts of 1966, ch. 113; Acts of 1968, ch. 68; Acts of 1973; Acts of 2002, ch. 594)  
CHAPTER 4. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL 
 
Sec. 4.1. - General grant of power to Council. 
The Council shall have all powers and authority that are now or may hereafter be granted to councils of towns by the general laws of this state and by this act, and the recital of special powers and authorities herein shall not be taken to exclude the exercise of any power and authority granted by the general laws of this state to Town councils, but not herein specified.  
Sec. 4.2. - Meetings. 
The Council shall by ordinance fix the time of their stated meetings, and they shall meet at least once a month. Special meetings may be called at any time by the Mayor or by four members of the Council, provided, that all members are duly notified a reasonable period of time prior to such meetings, and no business shall be transacted at a special meeting thereof except that for which it shall be called unless all members of the Council be present.  
Sec. 4.3. - Quorum; reconsideration of action. 
Four members of the Council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. No vote taken at any meeting shall be reconsidered or rescinded at any subsequent special meeting unless at such special meeting there be as many members of the Council present as were present when such vote was taken. 
(Acts of 1966, ch. 113; Acts of 1968, ch. 68)  
Sec. 4.4. - Powers and duties of Mayor generally. 
The Mayor shall preside over the meetings of the Council and shall have the same right to vote and speak therein as other members but shall not possess the power of veto. He shall be recognized as the head of the Town government for all ceremonial purposes, the purpose of military law and the service of civil processes.  
Sec. 4.5. - Mayor pro tempore; filling vacancy in office of Mayor. 
In the case of the absence or inability of the Mayor to act, the Mayor pro tempore of the Council, to be chosen by a majority of the Council present at its organizational meeting following each election, shall possess the same powers, and discharge the same duties during such absence or inability. 
In the event of the death or resignation of the Mayor, the Council shall, within forty-five days thereafter, choose, by majority vote, a Mayor to serve for the unexpired term; provided, that when such death or resignation occurs more than eighteen months prior to expiration of the Mayor's term of office, the replacement so chosen by the Council shall serve only until a successor shall have been elected to fill the remainder of the Mayor's unexpired term in the Town election held on the first Tuesday in May next following the occurrence of such vacancy, and shall have qualified as provided by law. The term of office for the Mayor so elected to fill the remainder of the unexpired term shall begin on the first of July next following his election. 
(Acts of 1968, ch. 68; Acts of 1972, ch. 42)  
Sec. 4.6. - Council to fix salaries generally; limitations on salaries of Mayor and Councilmen. 
The Council is hereby authorized to fix the salary of the Mayor, members of the Council, members of boards or commissions, and all appointed officers and employees of said Town, at a sum not to exceed any limitations placed by the laws and Constitution of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(Acts of 1973; Acts of 2002, ch. 594)  
Sec. 4.7. - Appointive officers. 
The Council shall appoint a Town Manager, a Town Clerk, a Town Treasurer, Town Attorneys and a Town Sergeant, all of whom shall hold office at and during the pleasure of the Council, and shall execute such bonds as may be prescribed by resolution of the Council and shall perform such duties as are required by general law, as well as such additional duties not inconsistent with general law as this charter or the Council may prescribe; and the Council shall have power to fill any vacancy in any of such offices. Upon the failure of any Council to appoint such officers, all of such officers then in office shall so continue in office until removed by that or a succeeding Council. The same person may be appointed to fill two offices at the discretion of the Council except for Town Attorney and Town Sergeants. 
(Acts of 1971; Acts of 1976, ch. 481)  
Sec. 4.8. - Town clerk. 
The Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Council and shall keep the journal of its proceedings and shall record all ordinances and resolutions in a book or books kept for the purpose. He shall be the custodian of the corporate seal of the Town and shall be the officer authorized to use and authenticate it. He shall perform such other duties and keep such other records as the Council or the general laws of the State require of Town Clerks. All records in his office shall be public records and open to inspection at any time during regular business hours. 
(Acts of 2002, ch. 594)  
CHAPTER 5. - TOWN MANAGER 
 
Sec. 5.1. - Qualifications; powers and duties. 
The Town Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to his actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of his office. At the time of his appointment, and for the six months next following his appointment, he need not be domiciled in the Town or the Commonwealth. Thereafter and during his remaining tenure of office he shall be a domiciliary of the Town. The Town Manager shall be the chief administrative officer and head of the administrative branch of the Town government. He shall execute the laws and ordinances and administer the government of the Town and be responsible therefor to the Council. He shall: 
(1)  Except with respect to 4.7 above, appoint all directors, or heads of the administrative departments, and all other administrative officers and employees of the Town; 
(2)  When deemed necessary and in accordance with policies approved by the Council, suspend, demote or remove all such directors or heads and all other administrative officers and employees of the Town appointed by him except as he may authorize the head of a department, an officer or an agency to exercise such powers respecting subordinates in such department, office or agency; 
(3)  Supervise and control, directly or indirectly, all administrative departments, agencies, officers and employees of the Town; and when directed by the Council he shall examine the records and books of the office of Treasurer; 
(4)  Prepare a budget annually and submit it to the Council, be responsible for the administration of the budget after it goes into effect, and recommend to the Council any changes in the budget which he deems desirable; 
(5)  Submit to the Council a complete report as of the end of the fiscal year on the finances and administrative activities of the Town for the preceding year; 
(6)  Keep the Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the Town, and make such recommendations on matters of policy and other matters to the Council as may seem to him desirable; 
(7)  Have power, whenever the interests of the Town require, to assign employees of any department, bureau, office or agency, to the temporary performance of duties in another department, bureau, office or agency; 
(8)  Have such other powers and duties consistent with the Town Charter as the Council may prescribe. 
(Acts of 2002, ch. 594)  
CHAPTER 6. - FISCAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 6.1. - Fiscal control; establishment, operation, etc., of water system, sewer system, etc. 
The Council shall have the power to control and manage the fiscal and municipal affairs of the Town and all property, real and personal, belonging to said Town, and to make such ordinances, orders and resolutions relating to the same as it may deem necessary. After the close of each fiscal year, the Council shall cause to be made an independent audit of the accounts, books, records and financial transactions of the Town by the Auditor of Public Accounts of the Commonwealth or by a firm of independent certified public accountants to be selected by the Council. The report of such audit shall be filed within such time as the Council shall specify and one copy thereof shall always be available for public inspection in the office of the Clerk to the Council during regular business hours. The Council shall have the further power to purchase, hold, sell and convey all real and personal property, within or without the corporate limits, necessary for its use and purposes. 
(a)  The Council shall have power and authority to acquire, or otherwise obtain control of or establish, maintain, operate, extend and enlarge waterworks, sewage disposal plants, gasworks, electric plants, and other public utilities within or without the limits of the Town; to acquire within or without the limits of the Town by purchase, condemnation, but insofar as such power of condemnation is exercised as to lands of a public service corporation, [provisions of section] 25-233 [of the Code of Virginia] shall be applicable, or otherwise, whatever land may be necessary for acquiring, locating, establishing, maintaining, operating, extending and enlarging said waterworks, sewage disposal plants, electric plants and other utilities, and the rights-of-way, rails, pipes, poles, conduits and wires connected therewith or any of the fixtures or appurtenances thereof; and promulgate and enforce reasonable rates, rules and regulations for use of same, any or all of which rates, rules and regulations the Council may alter at any time without notice. 
(b)  In the event the fees, rents, or charges charged for the use and services of the public water system or sewage disposal system by, or in connection with any real estate, shall not be paid when due, interest shall at the time begin to accrue thereon at the rate of one per cent per month. Such fees, rents, charges and the interest due thereon shall constitute a lien, which shall rank on a parity with liens for unpaid Town or County taxes, against the property, which lien may be indexed and filed among the Judgment Records of the Circuit Court of Fairfax County, the cost of such filing to be included in the total amount of such lien. Such fees, rents, charges and the interest due thereon also may be recovered by the Town of Vienna by action at law, or suit in equity. 
(c)  The Council shall have the power and authority to require the owners or occupants of the real estate within the corporate limits of the Town which may front or abut on the line of any sewer or water pipe line or conduit to make connections therewith, and to use such sewer pipes and conduits and water furnished by the Town under such ordinances and regulations as the Council may deem necessary to secure the proper service thereof and to improve and secure good sanitary conditions; and shall have the power to enforce the observance of all such ordinances and regulations by the imposition and collection of fines and penalties, to be collected as other fines and penalties under the provisions of this act. 
(Acts of 1966, ch. 113; Acts of 1968, ch. 68; Acts of 1970, ch. 320)  
Sec. 6.2. - Authority of Council to contract loans generally, issue notes, bonds, etc. 
The Council, within the limits of the Constitution of this State and in accordance with the provisions of the general laws thereof, may, in the name of, and for the use of the Town, contract loans or cause to be issued certificates of debt, notes or bonds.  
Sec. 6.3. - Authority of Council to negotiate temporary loans. 
The Council shall have the power to negotiate temporary loans, in anticipation of taxes, for the purpose of paying current expenses of the Town; such loans to be evidenced by bonds or notes bearing interest at a rate permitted by general law for towns; such bonds or notes shall be payable within one year from the date of issue out of the current revenue of the year in which same are issued. No such temporary loan shall in the aggregate exceed seventy-five percent of the previous year's income. 
The Council shall also have the power to issue notes to raise capital in anticipation of a bond issue, which notes shall be paid within five years from the date of issuance thereof. In the issuance of bonds and notes, the Town shall be subject to the limitations as to amount contained in 10 (a) of Article VII of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Virginia only. 
(Acts of 1970, ch. 320; Acts of 1971; Acts of 1974, ch. 209)  
Sec. 6.4. - Sinking fund. 
There shall be set apart annually from the revenues of the Town a sinking fund sufficient in amount to pay the outstanding indebtedness of the Town, as it matures, which by its terms, is payable in not less than one year, and the Council may, in its discretion annually from time to time, set aside such additional sinking fund as may be deemed proper, and invest all of the sinking fund as hereinafter set forth. 
(a)  All sinking funds shall be used exclusively in the payment or purchase and redemption of the outstanding bonds of the Town, and when such sinking funds are not required or may not within a reasonable time be required for payment of any bond of the Town, or cannot be used to advantage in the purchase and redemption of any bonds of the Town which may be outstanding, the same shall be securely invested in interest bearing municipal, state or United States government bonds, or invested in any securities approved by the general laws of the state for the investment of such funds, or deposited in a bank on a reasonable rate of interest. Such sinking fund may be used in the payment or purchase and redemption of all bonds of the Town at the discretion of the Council.  
Sec. 6.5. - Signing and sealing of bonds. 
All bonds and other evidences of indebtedness of the Town shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Town Clerk; and to all bonds the Clerk of the Town shall affix the corporate seal of the Town and attest the same.  
CHAPTER 7. - TAXATION 
 
Sec. 7.1. - Authority of Town to tax. 
The Town is empowered to levy and collect taxes on all subjects of taxation, except as restrained by the Constitution or by general law heretofore or hereafter adopted, provided that it shall impose no taxes on the bonds of the said Town; and provided further, that such levy shall not be increased beyond the rate of two dollars on the one hundred dollar assessed valuation of real and personal property (except as permitted by state law for increases beyond charter limitations) without the affirmative vote of the majority of citizens voting as determined by a referendum held for this purpose.  
Sec. 7.2. - Assessment of real and personal property. 
The assessment of real and personal property in the Town for the purpose of municipal taxation shall be the same as the assessment for the purpose of County taxation; but where the Treasurer for the Town knows of property that has been omitted by the Commissioner of Revenue of the County from his books, the Treasurer of the Town may by the same proceedings as are provided for County Commissioners of Revenue in similar cases assess such omitted property, real or personal, for Town taxation. 
(a)  Where the Treasurer for the Town knows of property that has been erroneously assessed in the Town of Vienna by the Commissioner of Revenue of the County of Fairfax from his books, the Treasurer of the Town may by the same proceedings as are provided for County Commissioners of Revenue in similar cases release such erroneous assessments from the Town of Vienna tax rolls.  
CHAPTER 8-A. - PROPERTY FOR ROADWAY OR OTHER PUBLIC PURPOSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
(Acts of 1972, ch. 42) 
 
Sec. 8-A.1. - Gift, bequest, purchase or lease; ownership and use of property. 
The Town shall have for the purpose of carrying out any of its powers and duties in the construction or reconstruction of roadways and streets, or for other public purposes, power to acquire by gift, bequest, purchase or lease, and to own and make use of within the Town lands, buildings, other structures and personal property including any interest, right, easement or estate therein, and in acquiring such property to exercise, within the Town, the right of eminent domain as hereinafter provided in this chapter. 
(Acts of 1971)  
Sec. 8-A.2. - Eminent domain generally. 
The Town is hereby authorized to acquire by condemnation proceedings lands, buildings, structures and personal property or any interest, right, easement or estate therein of any person or corporation, whenever in the opinion of the Council a public necessity exists therefore, which shall be expressed in the resolution or ordinance directing such acquisition, and whenever the Town cannot agree on terms of purchase or settlement with the owners of the subject of such acquisition because of the incapacity of such owner, or because of the inability to agree on the compensation to be paid or other terms of settlement or purchase, or because the owner or some one of the owners is a nonresident of the state or cannot with reasonable diligence be found in the state or is unknown. 
Such proceedings shall be instituted in the Circuit Court of Fairfax County. The provisions of [section] 25-233 of the Code of Virginia shall apply as to any property owned by a corporation possessing the power of eminent domain that may be sought to be taken by condemnation under the provisions of this act. 
(Acts of 1966, ch. 113)  
Sec. 8-A.3. - Alternative procedures in condemnation. 
The Town may, in exercising the right of eminent domain conferred by the preceding section, make use of the procedure prescribed by the general law or may elect to proceed as hereinafter provided. In the later event, the resolution or ordinance directing the acquisition of any property as set forth in the preceding section shall provide therein in a lump sum the total funds necessary to compensate the owners thereof for such property to be acquired or damaged, the amount of such sum to be determined by two competent impartial appraisers. Upon the adoption of such resolution or ordinance, the Town shall file a petition in the Clerk's office of the Circuit Court of Fairfax County which shall be signed by the Town Manager and set forth the interest or estate to be taken in the property and the uses and purposes for which the property or the interest or estate therein is wanted or when property is not to be taken but is likely to be damaged, the necessity for the work or improvement which will cause or is likely to cause such damage. 
There shall also be filed with the petition a plat of a survey of the property with a profile showing cuts and fills, trestles and bridges, or other contemplated structures, if any, and a description of the property which, or an interest or estate in which, is sought to be taken or likely to be damaged and a memorandum showing names and residences of the owners of the property, if known, and showing also the quantity of property which, or an interest or estate in which, is sought to be taken or which will be or is likely to be damaged. There shall be filed also with said petition a notice directed to the owners of the property, if known, copies of which shall be served on such owners or tenants of the freehold of such property, if known. If the owner or tenant of the freehold be unknown or a nonresident of the State or cannot with reasonable diligence be found in the State, or if the residence of the owner or tenant be unknown, he may be proceeded against by order of publication which order, however, need not be published more than once a week for two successive weeks and shall be posted at a main entrance to the courthouse. The publication shall in all other respects conform to [§§] 8-71, 8-72 and 8-76 of the Code of Virginia. 
Upon the filing of said petition and the deposit of the funds provided by the Council for the purpose with the Clerk of the Court in such proceedings and the filing of a certificate of deposit therefore, the interest or estate of the owner of such property shall terminate and the title to such property or the interest or estate to be taken in such property shall be vested absolutely in the Town, and such owner shall have such interest or estate in the funds so deposited as he had in the property taken or damaged and all liens by deed of trust, judgment, or otherwise, upon said property or estate shall be transferred to such funds and the Town shall have the right to enter upon and take possession of such property for its uses and purposes and to construct its works and improvements. The Clerk of the Court shall make and certify a copy of the petition, exhibits filed therewith, and orders, and record the same in his deed book and index them in the name of the person or persons who had the property before and in the name of the Town, for which he shall receive the same fees prescribed for recording a deed which shall be paid by the Town. 
If the Town and the owner of the property so taken or damaged agree upon compensation therefore, upon filing such agreement in writing in the Clerk's office of such court, the court or judge thereof in vacation shall make such distribution of such funds as to it may seem right, having due regard to the interest of all persons therein whether such interest be vested, contingent or otherwise; and to enable the court or judge to make a proper distribution of such money, it may in its discretion direct inquiries to be taken by a special commissioner in order to ascertain what persons are entitled to such funds and in what proportions and may direct what notice shall be given of the making of such inquiries by such special commissioner. 
If the Town and the owner cannot agree upon the compensation for the property taken or damaged, if any, upon the filing of a memorandum in the Clerk's office of said court to that effect signed by either the Town or the owner, the court shall appoint commissioners provided for in § 25-46.20 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, and all proceedings thereafter shall be had as provided in §§ 25-46.17 to 25-46.34, inclusive, of the Code of Virginia, as amended, insofar as they are then applicable and are not inconsistent with the provisions of this and the preceding section, and the court shall order the deposit in bank to the credit of the court of such additional funds as appear to be necessary to cover the award of the commissioners or shall order the return to the Town of such funds deposited that are not necessary to compensate such owners for property taken or damaged. The commissioners so appointed shall not consider improvements placed upon the property by the Town subsequent to its taking, nor the value thereof, nor the enhancement of the value of said property by said improvements in making their award. 
(Acts of 1966, ch.113)  
Sec. 8-A.4. - Consideration of enhancement in value of remaining property. 
In all cases hereunder, the enhancement, if any, in value of the remaining property of the owner by reason of the construction or improvement contemplated or made by the Town shall be offset against the damage, if any, resulting to such remaining property of such owner by reason of such construction or improvement, provided such enhancement in value shall not be offset against the value of the property taken, and provided further, that if such enhancement in value shall exceed the damage, there shall be no recovery over against the owner for such excess. 
(Acts of 1966, ch. 113)  
Sec. 8-A.5. - Unclaimed funds in condemnation cases. 
Whenever any money shall have remained for five years in the custody or under the control of the court enumerated in 8-A.2, in any condemnation proceeding instituted therein by the Town, without any claim having been asserted thereto, such court shall, where the amount is one hundred dollars or more, cause a publication to be made once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation published in the Town, setting forth the amount of such money, the source from which it was derived and the proceeding in which it is held, and requiring all persons having any claim to said money to appear before said court within such time after the completion of the publication as the court may prescribe, and establish their claim. If the sum be less than one hundred dollars, the court shall direct the same to be paid into the treasury of the Town, and a proper receipt for the payment taken and filed among the records of the proceeding. If no person shall appear and show title in himself, the court shall order the money, after deducting there from the costs of such publication if such publication is made, and any other proper charges, to be paid into the treasury of the Town and a proper receipt for the payment to be taken and filed among the records of the proceeding. 
The Director of Finance shall, in a book provided for the purpose, keep an account of all money thus paid into the Town treasury showing the amount thereof, when, by whom, and under what order it was paid and the name of the court; and as far as practicable, a description of the suit or proceeding in which the order was made and, as far as known, the names of the parties entitled to said funds. Money thus paid into the treasury of the Town shall be paid out on the order of the court having jurisdiction of the proceeding to any person entitled thereto who had not asserted a claim therefore in the proceeding in which it was held upon satisfactory proof that he is entitled to such money. If such claim be established, the net amount thereof, after deducting costs and other charges, shall be paid to the claimant out of the treasury of the Town on the warrant of the Director of Finance. No claim to such money shall be asserted after ten years from the time when such court obtained control thereof; provided, however, if the person having such claim was an infant, insane, or imprisoned at the time the claim might have been presented or asserted by such person, claim to such money may be asserted within five years after the removal of such disability. 
(Acts of 1966, ch. 113)  
Sec. 8-A.6. - Sale of Town property. 
No rights of the Town in and to its public lands, streets, avenues, parks, bridges or other public places, or its water works, shall be sold except by an ordinance or resolution passed by a recorded affirmative vote of three-fourths of all members of the Town Council, and in accordance with all other provisions of Section 9, Article VII, of the Constitution of Virginia. 
(Acts of 1971)  
CHAPTER 8-B. - ARCHITECTURAL CONTROL DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 8-B.1. - Authority of Town Council to designate. 
In order to protect and promote the general welfare, and to prevent deterioration of the appearance of the Town which tend to create hazards to public health, safety and morals and destroy opportunity for the development of business and industry, the Town Council may designate, within any land areas except those zoned for single-family, detached residential use, Architectural Control Districts in which no structure shall be erected, reconstructed, altered or restored until approved by a Board of Architectural Review. 
Provided that any lot, parcel or area of land which is used for other than single-family, detached residences, or which is the subject of an application for a use permit or building permit involving any such other use, may be designated as an architectural control district without regard to its zoning classification. 
(Acts of 1971)  
Sec. 8-B.2. - Board of Architectural Review—Authority to create; composition; appointment; qualifications and terms of office of members; powers and duties; appeals from actions. 
The Council may create a Board of Architectural Review. The Board shall consist of five members appointed by majority vote of the Council for terms not to exceed three years. At least one member of the Board shall be an architect registered in Virginia and at least one shall be a member of the Virginia State Bar. All members of the Board shall be residents of the Town of Vienna except one architect member who may, or may not, be a resident of the Town of Vienna. In the event that the one architect member shall not be a resident of the Town of Vienna, his appointment shall be for a period of one year. The Council shall prepare and publish appropriate standards, rules, regulations and procedures for the operation of the Board and to carry out the purposes and objectives herein set forth; provided that the Council shall not adopt as part of any such standards a specific architectural style; it shall provide for appeals to the Town Council from any final decision of the Board, which appeal shall stay the Board's decision pending the outcome of the appeal before the Council. The Council, on appeal, shall apply the same standards as those established for the Board and may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the Board, in whole or in part. Parties aggrieved by the decision of the Town Council shall have the right to appeal to the Circuit Court of Fairfax County for review by filing a petition at law, setting forth the alleged illegality of the Town Council's action, provided such petition is filed within thirty days after the final decision is rendered by the Town Council. The filing of the said petition shall stay the Council's decision pending the outcome of the appeal to the court. The court may reverse or modify the decision of the Council in whole or in part if it finds upon review that the decision of the Council is contrary to law or that its decision is arbitrary and constitutes an abuse of discretion, or it may affirm the decision of the Council. 
(Acts of 1966, ch. 113; Acts of 1968, ch. 68)  
Sec. 8-B.3. - Same—Purposes. 
The purpose of the Board shall be to assure that all buildings, signs, landscaping and other external improvements erected in the designated Architectural Control Districts conform to accepted architectural standards for permanent improvements, as contrasted with engineering standards designed to satisfy safety requirements only. Such improvements shall exhibit external characteristics as to material, texture, color, lighting, dimensions, line and mass of demonstrated architectural and aesthetic durability. The Board shall not authorize in such districts improvements of extremely unusual design, improvements where the characteristics are designed to serve as advertisements or commercial displays or improvements which in terms of material, texture, color, dimension, lighting, line or mass exhibit characteristics likely to deteriorate rapidly or be of short-term architectural or aesthetic acceptability, be plainly offensive to human sensibilities or otherwise constitute a reasonably foreseeable detriment to the community. (An emergency existing, this act is in force from its passage.) 
(Acts of 1966, ch. 113; Acts of 1977, ch. 199)  
CHAPTER 9. - MISCELLANEOUS 
 
Sec. 9.1. - Continuation of existing ordinances. 
All ordinances now in force in the Town of Vienna, not inconsistent with this act, shall be and remain in force until altered, amended or repealed by the Council.  
Sec. 9.1.1. - Final passage of ordinances. 
(a)  The object of every proposed ordinance shall be expressed in its title and no ordinance except an emergency ordinance shall be passed until after a notice of intention to propose the same for passage shall have been published once a week for two successive weeks prior to its passage in some newspaper published in the county; and no such ordinance shall become effective until ten days after it shall have been published in full or by its title and an informative summary of such ordinance in a like newspaper. If such publication is by title and informative summary, the publication shall include a statement that a copy of the full text of the ordinance is on file in the office of the Town Clerk. The provisions of this section governing publication shall not apply, however, to any ordinance enacted pursuant to a State statute where such statute specifically provides the manner of publication. 
(b)  On final vote on any ordinance or resolution, the name of each member of Council voting and how he voted shall be recorded. 
(c)  No ordinance or resolution appropriating funds exceeding the sum of five hundred dollars, imposing taxes, or authorizing the borrowing of money shall be passed except by a recorded affirmative vote of a majority of all members elected to the Council. 
(Acts of 1971)  
Sec. 9.1.2. - Emergency ordinances. 
Any ordinance passed as an emergency shall require a two-thirds vote of all the Council, and shall be void and of no effect at the expiration of sixty days from the date of adoption unless sooner repealed or reenacted as provided in [section] 9.1.1 hereof.  
Sec. 9.2. - Continuation of present officers in office. 
The present elected officers of the Town shall be and remain in office until expiration of their several terms, and until their successors have been duly elected and qualified.  
Sec. 9.3. - Eligibility of United States government employees to be Town officers, employees, etc. 
No person otherwise eligible shall be disqualified, by reason of his accepting or holding an office, post, trust or emolument under the United States government, from serving as an officer or employee of the Town, or as a member, officer, or employee of any board or commission.  
Sec. 9.4. - Authority to license dogs, appoint dog warden, establish pound, etc. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Town Council shall have power to impose and collect a dog license tax and such tax shall be the only license tax on dogs required of residents within the Town. The dog license tax shall be collected by the Director of Finance. The Town Council may appoint a dog warden for the Town and such deputy wardens as may be required. Such warden and deputy wardens shall have authority to enforce all dog laws within the Town. The Town may provide facilities for the capture and confinement and disposition of unlicensed dogs or dogs owned, kept or harbored in violation of the dog laws. The Town Council may enact local ordinances corresponding in nature and scope and not in conflict with the provisions of Chapter 9.2 of Title 29 of the Code of Virginia, and may repeal, modify or amend such ordinances provided that no penalty imposed by such ordinance shall be greater than the penalty imposed for a similar offense under Chapter 9.2 of Title 29 of the Code of Virginia. The Director of Finance of the Town shall not be required to remit any portion of the funds collected from the licensing of dogs to the State Treasurer. (An emergency existing, this ordinance is in force from its passage.) 
(Acts of 1978, Ch. 577, 4-5-1978)  
Sec. 9.5. - Authority to permit use of sidewalks for bicycle riding. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Town Council may authorize children under fifteen years of age to ride bicycles upon the sidewalks in areas of the Town prescribed by Council and to regulate the riding of bicycles thereon in such manner as the Council may deem to be in the public interest. 
(Acts of 1973) 
State Law reference— For state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.1-229, as amended.  
Sec. 9.6. - Authority to establish historic districts. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Town Council may establish one or more historic districts for the purpose of promoting the general welfare, education and recreational pleasure of the public through the perpetuation of these general areas or individual structures and premises which have been officially designated by the Town Council as having historic or architectural significance. The establishment of historic districts shall be by amendment of the zoning ordinance and consistent with the purposes, criteria and procedures set forth in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2306. 
(Acts of 1974, Ch. 209)  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
ACTS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Act 
Year 	Date 	Chapter 	Section 
this Charter 
1966 		113 	3.2 
			3.4 
			4.3 
			6.1 
			8-A.2—8-A.5 
			8-B.2 
			8-B.3 
1968 		68 	3.4 
			4.3 
			4.5 
			6.1 
			8-B.2 
1970 		320 	3.2 
			6.1 
			6.3 
1971 			3.1 
			4.7 
			6.3 
			8-A.1 
			8-A.6 
			8-B.1 
			9.1.1 
1972 		42 	Ch. 8-A(note) 
1973 			3.4 
			9.5 
1974 		209 	6.3 
			9.6 
1976 		481 	3.4 
			4.7 
			Ch. 8(note) 
1977 		199 	8-B.3 
1978 	 4- 5-1978 	577 	9.4 
2002 		594 	2.1 
			3.4 
			4.5 
			4.8 
			5.1 
  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local ordinances incorporating state law by reference, Code of Virginia, § 1-220; codification and recodification of ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433. 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the Town of Vienna, Virginia," and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as "Vienna Town Code." 
(Code 1969, § 1-1)  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the interpretation and construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions of the Town, the following rules of construction and definitions shall be observed unless otherwise specifically provided or unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing with such surety, if any, as the council may direct, may be sufficient. 
Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day is Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
Council. The term "council" or "the council" means the Town Council of the Town of Vienna, Virginia. 
County. The term "county" or "the county" means the County of Fairfax in the State of Virginia. 
Following. The term "following," when used by way of reference to any section, shall be construed to mean next following that in which such reference is made. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only may extend and be applied to females and to corporations as well as males. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, see Code of Virginia, § 1-216. 
In the Town. The phrase "in the Town" means any territory jurisdiction of which for the exercise of its regulatory power has been conferred on the Town by public or private law. 
May. The term "may" shall be permissive. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well as to one person or thing; and a word importing the plural number only may extend and be applied to one person or thing, as well as to several persons or things. 
State Law reference— Similar state law as to number, Code of Virginia, § 1-227 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, see Code of Virginia, § 1-228. 
Occupant or tenant. The term "occupant" or "tenant" applied to a building or land means any person who holds a written or oral lease of or actually occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Official time standard. Whenever particular hours are specified in this Code relating to the time within which any act shall or shall not be performed by any person, the time applicable shall be official standard time or daylight saving time, whichever may be in current use in the Town. 
Owner. The term "owner" applied to a building or land includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" includes a firm, partnership, association of persons, corporation, organization or any other group acting as a unit. 
State Law reference— Definition of person, Code of Virginia, § 1-230. 
Preceding. The term "preceding", when used by way of reference to any section, shall be construed to mean next preceding that in which such reference is made. 
Property. The term "property" means real, personal or mixed property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means the parks and all public lands owned or leased by the Town, and those parts of public places which do not form traveled parts of streets as defined in this section. 
Shall. The term "shall" shall be mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline, or the lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature, subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write, his name being written near it and being witnessed by a person who writes his own name as a witness. 
State. The term "state" or "the state" means the State of Virginia. 
Street. The term "street" includes avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto and all other public thoroughfares in the Town, and shall mean the entire width thereof between abutting property lines. The term "street" shall be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath unless the contrary is expressed or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council. 
Swear, sworn. The term "swear" or "sworn" shall be equivalent to the word "affirm" or "affirmed" in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 1-250. 
Town. The term "Town" or "the Town" means the Town of Vienna in the County of Fairfax and the State of Virginia. 
VAC. The abbreviation "VAC" means Virginia Administrative Code. 
Written, in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" include typewriting, printing on paper, and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
(Code 1969, § 1-2)  
Sec. 1-3. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are in substance the same as those of the 1962 Ordinances of the Town of Vienna, Virginia, the 1969 Code of Ordinances, and all ordinances adopted subsequent thereto and included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1969, § 1-3)  
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1969, § 1-4)  
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Town Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1969, § 1-5)  
Sec. 1-6. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1969, § 1-6) 
State Law reference— Similar state law applicable to statutes, Code of Virginia, § 1-217.  
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violation. 
Whenever in this Code, or in any ordinance or resolution of the Town, or rule or regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the Town under authority duly vested in him or it, any act is prohibited or is declared to unlawful or a misdemeanor, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, and no specific penalty is provided for the violation thereof, the violation of any such provision of this Code, or of such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,500.00 or by imprisonment in jail for a period not exceeding 12 months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day any such violation shall continue shall constitute, except where otherwise provided, a separate offense. 
(Code 1962, § 1-6; Code 1969, § 1-7; Ord. of 10-1990) 
State Law reference— Power of council to prescribe fines and other punishment for violation of ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1429; penalty for misdemeanor in absence of specific penalty, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-12.  
Sec. 1-7.1. - Punishment for conviction of misdemeanor. 
Whenever in this Code a misdemeanor is identified or referred to by class, the authorized punishments for conviction of a misdemeanor are: 
(a)  For Class 1 misdemeanors, confinement in jail for not more than 12 months and a fine of not more than $2,500.00, either or both. 
(b)  For Class 2 misdemeanors, confinement in jail for not more than six months and a fine of not more than $1,000.00, either or both. 
(c)  For Class 3 misdemeanors, a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(d)  For Class 4 misdemeanors, a fine of not more than $250.00. 
(Code 1969, § 1-7.1; Ord. of 9-10-1991)  
Sec. 1-8. - Collection and disposition of fines. 
All fines and penalties imposed under this Code or other ordinances of the Town shall be for the use of the Town. Fines may be collected by execution returnable within 30 days after the date of issue. The officer levying such execution shall sell the property upon which a levy has been made at auction, for cash, at some public point within the Town, after advertising the time and place of such sale for ten days by posting notices thereof at three conspicuous places within the Town. 
(Code 1962, § 1-3; Code 1969, § 1-8)  
Sec. 1-9. - Reserved.  
Sec. 1-9.1. - Fee charged for passing bad checks to Town. 
Every person who shall utter, publish or pass any check or draft to the Town in payment of taxes or any other sums due which is subsequently returned for insufficient funds or because there is no account, or the account is closed, shall pay to the Town for each such check or draft a fee of $20.00 in addition to the tax or other sum due and for which the check or draft was uttered, published or passed. Such fees shall be collectible and disposed of as all other fines and penalties. 
(Code 1969, § 1-9.1; Ord. of 6-1986)  
Sec. 1-10. - Right of entry for purposes of inspection. 
Whenever any officer or employee of the Town is required or authorized by statute, the provisions of this Code or any ordinance or resolution, or rules and regulations, or orders issued thereunder, in order to carry out his duties thereunder, to enter any premises or vehicle for the purpose of making an inspection thereof, or anything therein contained, such officer or employee shall have the right to enter any such premises or vehicle at any reasonable time in pursuance of such duties. 
(Code 1962, § 1-17; Code 1969, § 1-10)  
Sec. 1-11. - Town seal. 
The official seal of the Town shall be a metallic disc 1½ inches in diameter with a barred rim, and with such words and figures engraved thereon as will, when used, reproduce impressions to be described as follows: 
With the barred rim at a distance of three-eighths of an inch therefrom shall be a beaded circle; in the space between the rim and the beaded circle shall be the words "The Town of Vienna, Virginia"; and at the bottom thereof shall be the numerals "1890." The numerals at either end shall be separated from the beginning and end of the words by a star at equidistance. Within the beaded circle shall be impressed Virtus, the genius of the commonwealth, dressed as an Amazon, resting on a spear in her right hand, point downward, touching the earth; and holding in her left hand a sheathed sword, or parazonium, pointing upward; her head erect and face upturned; her left foot on the form of Tyranny represented by the prostrate body of a man, with his head to her left, his fallen crown nearby, a broken chain in his left hand, and a scourge in his right. Above the group and within the border conforming therewith shall be the word "Virginia" and in the space below, on a curved line, shall be the motto, "Sic Semper Tyrannis." 
(Code 1962, § 1-8; Code 1969, § 1-11)  
Sec. 1-12. - Schedule of planning and zoning fees. 
Following is the Town's schedule of planning and zoning fees: 
THE TOWN OF VIENNA—SCHEDULE OF PLANNING AND ZONING FEES: 
CHANGES IN ZONING: 	$15,000.00 
SUBDIVISIONS: 
Subdivision Plats 	$3,000.00 plus $150.00 per lot 
Revised Subdivision Plats 	$300.00 
Revised Subdivision Plats or Re-approval of Expired Subdivision Plats 	$300.00 
Public Improvement Completion Time Extension Requests 	$300.00 
SITE PLAN REVIEW: 
Site Plan for New Development 	$6,000.00 
Update/revision of existing site plan with 2,500 square feet or more of land disturbance 	$3,000.00 
Update/revision of existing site plan with less than 2,500 square feet or more of land disturbance 	$1,500.00 
Wall Waivers, Modifications of Requirements 	$1,000.00 
As-built Plan Review for Residential and Commercial Construction (per occurrence) 	$400.00 
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS: 
Appeals, Variances or Zoning Map Interpretations 	$1,000.00 
Conditional Use Permits 	$1,500.00 
BOARD OF ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW: 
New Development Review 	$200.00 
Existing Development Review (Includes Revised Landscape Plans) 	$100.00 
WINDOVER HEIGHTS BOARD OF REVIEW: 
Appeals to Town Council from decision of WHBR 	$250.00 
OCCUPANCY PERMITS: 	$100.00 
SIGN PERMITS: 
Permanent Sign 	$95.00 
Temporary Signs 	$95.00 
FENCE PERMITS: 	$50.00 
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING PERMITS: 
(Zones RS-16, RS-12.5, RS-10, RM-2 and RTH) 	NSFD: $1,000.00, Large Additions: $300.00, All other: $100.00 
COMMERCIAL BUILDING PERMITS: 
(Zones T, MAC, C-1, C-1A, C-1B, C-2, C-M, CMP and PR) 	$200.00 + $0.15 per square foot of construction 
DRIVEWAY PERMITS: 	$100.00 for each permit 
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR INTERPRETATION/DETERMINATION LETTER: 	$500.00 fee per address 
BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT, LOT CONSOLIDATION OR EASEMENT PLAT: 	$300.00 fee per occurrence 
PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINER: 	$25.00 fee per occurrence 
 
(Code 1969, § 1-12; Ord. of 6-16-2003; Ord. of 11-7-2005; Ord. of 8-20-2007; Ord. of 1-2009; Ord. of 6-6-2011(1), § 1; Ord. of 11-7-2016(1) ; Ord. of 5-13-2019(2) )  
Sec. 1-13. - Schedule of public works fees. 
Following is the Town's schedule of public works fees: 
TOWN OF VIENNA SCHEDULE OF PUBLIC WORKS FEES: 
STREET CUT AND RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS: 
Base Permit and Inspection Fee 	$100.00 
Plus Utility Lines or Crossings 	$50.00 for first 100' and $25.00 for each additional 100' 
Lane Closure or Dumpster in R/W 	$50.00 
Defect Re-inspection 	$50.00 per occurrence 
60-Day Permit Extensions 	$50.00 per occurrence 
Street Cut Bond 	$5,000.00 
EROSION AND SILTATION CONTROL PLANS: 
E & S Permit Review and Inspection Fee 	$500.00 
Erosion and Siltation Bond 	$2,000.00 
ALLEY OR RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION REQUEST 	$250.00 
RESIDENTIAL WATER AND SEWER FEES: 
Sewer Availability Res. S.F. 	$8,340.00 
Sewer Availability Res. all else 	$6,672.00 
Local Facilities Sewer (Front Footage) 	$152.00 per linear foot; $7,625.00 minimum, $15,250.00 maximum 
Drainage Fixture Unit (Commercial Industry or other uses) 	$417.00 
Sewer Tap Inspection 	$100.00 
Water Availability 1" 	$14,400.00 
Water Availability 1½" 	$28,800.00 
Water Availability 2" 	$46,080.00 
Water Availability 3" 	$92,160.00 
Water Availability 4" 	$144,000.00 
Local Facilities — Water 	$18,030.00 
Water Tap Inspection 	Less than 1" $450.00, 1" or greater $530.00 
Emergency Repairs/after hours 	Actual cost plus 40% general and administrative overhead 
Night Work Inspection 	Actual cost plus 40% general and administrative overhead, not less than $100.00 
WATER METER PURCHASE CHARGE: 
?" 	$1,370.00 
1" 	$1,790.00 
1½" 	$3,380.00 
2" 	$4,120.00 
3" 	Actual cost plus 40% for general and administrative overhead, but not less than $4,200.00 
FIRE HYDRANT METER CHARGES: 
5/8 " Meter with hydrant wrench 	$400.00 deposit plus $1.00/day 
3" Meter with hydrant wrench 	$1,720.00 deposit plus $5.00/day 
Fire Flow Tests 	$250.00 
Fire Hydrant Replacement Fee 	Actual cost plus 40% general and administrative overhead 
 
TOWN OF VIENNA SCHEDULE OF WATER AND SEWER RATES: 
WATER AND SEWER CONSUMPTION RATES: 
Residential Water—Block Rate 
Structure per 1,000 gallons 	0— 9,000 gallons 	$5.65 per 1,000 gallons 
	9,001—18,000 gallons 	$6.10 per 1,000 gallons 
	18,001 plus gallons 	$7.05 per 1,000 gallons 
Residential Sewer—Block Rate 
Structure per 1,000 gallons 	0—9,000 gallons 	$7.95 per 1,000 gallons 
	9,001—18,000 gallons 	$8.60 per 1,000 gallons 
	18,001 plus gallons 	$9.95 per 1,000 gallons 
Commercial Water—Block Rate 
Structure per 1,000 gallons 	0—120,000 gallons 	$5.65 per 1,000 gallons 
	120,001 to 360,000 gallons 	$6.10 per 1,000 gallons 
	360,001 plus gallons 	$7.05 per 1,000 gallons 
Commercial Sewer—Block Rate 
Structure per 1,000 gallons 	0—120,000 gallons 	$7.95 per 1,000 gallons 
	120,001—360,000 gallons 	$8.60 per 1,000 gallons 
	360,001 plus gallons 	$9.95 per 1,000 gallons 
Base Rate: 	
 Residential all meters 	$30.00 per quarter 
 Commercial 5/8 " 	$43.30 per quarter 
 Commercial 1" 	$108.25 per quarter 
 Commercial 1.5" 	$216.50 per quarter 
 Commercial 2" 	$346.40 per quarter 
 Commercial 3" 	$692.80 per quarter 
 Commercial 4" 	$1,082.50 per quarter 
Setup Fee per account 	$35.00 
Tenant Deposit 	$225.00 
Unauthorized Use 	$250.00 
Reconnect Fee 	$50.00 
Late Fee 	10% 
 
*Amount derived from 2018 Water and Sewer Rate study. 
  
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FEES — INITIAL PERMIT ISSUANCE: 	Total Fee 1 	Portion 
Paid 
to DEQ 2 
Basic Stormwater Review and Inspection (sites with land disturbance equal to or greater than 2,500 s.f. and less than one acre not within Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas and not subject to General Permit coverage) 	$275.00 	$0.00 
Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act Land Disturbing Activity (sites with land disturbance equal to or greater than 2,500 s.f. and less than 1 acre within Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas but not subject to General Permit coverage) 	$290.00 	$0.00 
General/Stormwater Management — Small Residential Activity (single family detached residential areas within or outside a common plan of development or sale, that is equal to or greater than one acre but less than five acres) 	$275.00 	$0.00 
General/Stormwater Management — Small Activity (areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage less than one acre) 	$356.00 	$81.00 
General/Stormwater Management — Small Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than one acre and less than five acres) 	$2,700.00 	$756.00 
General/Stormwater Management — Large Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than five acres and less than ten acres) 	$3,400.00 	$952.00 
General/Stormwater Management — Large Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than ten acres and less than 50 acres) 	$4,500.00 	$1,260.00 
General/Stormwater Management — Large Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than 50 acres and less than 100 acres) 	$6,100.00 	$1,708.00 
General/Stormwater Management — Large Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than 100 acres) 	$9,600.00 	$2,688.00 
 
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FEES — MODIFICATIONS OR TRANSFERS: 	Total Fee 
General/Stormwater Management — Small Activity (areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage less than one acre) 	$20.00 
General/Stormwater Management — Small Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than one acre and less than five acres) 	$200.00 
General/Stormwater Management — Large Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than five acres and less than ten acres) 	$250.00 
General/Stormwater Management — Large Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than ten acres and less than 50 acres) 	$300.00 
General/Stormwater Management — Large Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than 50 acres and less than 100 acres) 	$450.00 
General/Stormwater Management — Large Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than 100 acres) 	$700.00 
 
  
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FEES — PERMIT MAINTENANCE: 	Total Fee 
Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act Land Disturbing Activity (sites with land disturbance equal to or greater than 2,500 s.f. and less than one acre within Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas but not subject to General Permit coverage) 	$50.00 
General/Stormwater Management — Small Activity (areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage less than one acre) 	$50.00 
General/Stormwater Management — Small Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than one acre and less than five acres) 	$400.00 
General/Stormwater Management — Large Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than five acres and less than ten acres) 	$500.00 
General/Stormwater Management — Large Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than ten acres and less than 50 acres) 	$650.00 
General/Stormwater Management — Large Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than 50 acres and less than 100 acres) 	$900.00 
General/Stormwater Management — Large Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than 100 acres) 	$1,400.00 
 
1 Reference section 23-24 for additional details on the applicability of stormwater management fees. 
2 This is the portion of the total fee that is paid to the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ). If the project is completely administered by DEQ such as may be the case for a state or federal project or projects covered by individual state permits, the entire applicant fee shall be paid to DEQ. 
(Code 1969, § 1-13; Ord. of 6-2009; Ord. of 6-6-2011(1), § 1; Ord. of 11-19-2012, § 1; Ord. of 7-1-2013, § 1; Ord. No. 2014-003, § 1, 5-12-14, eff. 7-1-2014; Ord. No. 2014-007, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014; Ord. of 5-23-2016(1) , § 1; Ord. of 11-7-16(2) , § 1; Ord. of 5-8-17 , § 1; Ord. of 5-21-18 ; Ord. of 5-13-2019(1) ; Ord. of 5-11-2020 )  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— As to Board of Architectural Review, see §§ 4-3 to 4-12 of this Code. As to fire appeals board, see §§ 7-16 to 7-29. 
State Law reference— Counties, cities and towns, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-100 et seq.; local government, Va. Const. art. VII.; adoption of ordinances and resolutions generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1427. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2-2. - Duties and powers of police force. 
The officers constituting the police force of the Town shall have the powers and duties of enforcing this Code and other Town ordinances, and all other powers and duties vested in them by the laws of the state. 
(Code 1962, § 2-8; Code 1969, § 2-2) 
State Law reference— Powers and duties of police force, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1704; authority of council to preserve peace and good order, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1700; certain records to be kept by law enforcement, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1722.  
ARTICLE 2. - TOWN OFFICERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— As to attendance of Town officers at council meetings, see §§ 2-27 to 2-29 of this Code. As to fire marshal, see §§ 7-12 to 7-15. As to political activities by Town employees, see § 10-76. 
 
Sec. 2-3. - Duties, powers and functions of mayor. 
The mayor shall have such duties, powers and functions as set out in the Charter and in state law. 
(Code 1969, § 2-3)  
Sec. 2-4. - Duties of Town clerk. 
The Town clerk shall attend the meetings of the Town Council and shall keep a correct and complete record of the proceedings of the council. He shall have charge of the records of the Town, faithfully preserve the same and perform such other services and functions as he may be directed by the council to perform. 
(Code 1962, § 2-5; Code 1969, § 2-4) 
Charter reference— For Charter provision as to powers and duties of Town clerk generally, see Charter § 4.8.  
Sec. 2-5. - Town treasurer—Duties; inspection of books by mayor or Town Council. 
(a)  The Town treasurer shall receive all taxes and other money and revenues belonging to the Town, and deposit the same in such bank as the Town Council may direct. He shall keep the bank books and check books so that they will accurately reflect the state of his accounts. Each check shall be drawn payable to the order of the person for whose benefit it is drawn, and shall contain a notation on its face which will indicate the purpose for which it is drawn. All checks and vouchers shall be carefully preserved. 
(b)  The treasurer shall also so keep the books so that all receipts and disbursements and the source and character of the same may appear, and that a true and accurate understanding of the financial affairs and conditions of the Town may be readily ascertained therefrom. All of the treasurer's books and records shall be open at any time to the inspection of the mayor and any member of the council, or such persons as the council may direct. 
(Code 1962, § 2-6; Code 1969, § 2-5)  
Sec. 2-6. - Same—Annual audit of books. 
An audit of the books of the Town treasurer shall be made annually, as soon as practical after the close of the fiscal year, by such persons as the council may designate for the purpose, assisted by the treasurer, and a report of such audit made to the council. This report shall also indicate the amount of uncollected assets of the Town in the hands of the treasurer for collection. 
(Code 1962, § 2-6; Code 1969, § 2-6)  
Sec. 2-7. - Same—Bond. 
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Town treasurer shall execute a bond with surety approved by the council in the amount of not less than $50,000.00 conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his office, for the proper collection of and accounting for all money which shall come into his hands or which it shall be his duty to collect and for the payment of all money by him, on proper order of the council, to those entitled to receive the same. 
(Code 1962, § 2-6; Code 1969, § 2-7)  
Sec. 2-8. - Town sergeant—Powers and duties. 
(a)  The Town Council shall from time to time prescribe the general and other duties to be performed by the Town sergeant. The sergeant shall perform the duties, receive the compensation and perform such other functions as may be ordered by the council. 
(b)  The sergeant shall have the powers and generally discharge the same duties as were formerly had and discharged by constables. The sergeant shall have the power to arrest without warrant and carry before the proper authority to be dealt with as the law provides any and all persons who shall violate any provision of this Code or other ordinances of the Town in his presence. It shall be his duty to swear out warrants for the arrest of any person who he may have reason to believe has committed a violation of any provision of this Code or other ordinances of the Town. 
(Code 1962, § 2-7; Code 1969, § 2-8)  
Sec. 2-9. - Same—Bond. 
The Town sergeant shall be required to give bond in the amount of $5,000.00 with surety approved by the Town Council, payable to the Town, for the faithful performance of his duties. 
(Code 1962, § 2-7; Code 1969, § 2-9)  
Sec. 2-9.1. - Town attorney; powers and duties. 
(A)  Town attorneys and their designates shall have power to prosecute in the courts of the commonwealth all violations of law constituting misdemeanors and traffic violations committed within the Town, whether violations of Town ordinances or laws of the commonwealth. 
(B)  The Town Council shall from time to time prescribe the general and other duties to be performed by the Town attorneys. 
(Code 1969, § 2-9.1; Ord. of 3-18-1991)  
ARTICLE 3. - TOWN COUNCIL[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Governing bodies of counties, cities and towns, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1400 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-10. - Powers, duties and functions. 
The powers, duties and functions of Town Council shall be as set out in the Charter and state law. 
(Code 1969, § 2-10) 
Charter reference— For Charter provisions as to powers and duties of Town Council generally, see Charter §§ 4.1 to 4.7. As to election of councilmembers, see Charter §§ 3.1 to 3.4.  
Sec. 2-11. - Use of Robert's Rules of Order. 
The meetings of the Town Council, except as its own rules of procedure may otherwise provide, shall be conducted according to Robert's Rules of Order. 
(Code 1962, § 2-3; Code 1969, § 2-11)  
Sec. 2-12. - Authority to fine and expel members. 
The Town Council may fine its members for improper conduct and, with the concurrence of six members, expel a member. 
(Code 1962, § 2-3; Code 1969, § 2-12; Ord. of 2-1970)  
Sec. 2-13. - Records of proceedings. 
The Town Council shall keep an accurate record of its proceedings, which record shall be fully indexed and open to inspection by anyone entitled to vote for members of the council. 
(Code 1962, § 2-3; Code 1969, § 2-13)  
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS 
 
Sec. 2-14. - Date and time of regular meetings. 
The Town Council shall meet in regular session on the first and third Mondays of each month at 8:00 p.m., or at such other times as may be fixed by resolution; provided that at least one regular meeting per month shall be held as required by section 4.2 of the Charter. When the first or third Monday of a month falls on a legal holiday, the council may by motion postpone or advance the regular meeting scheduled for such a holiday, and notice of such postponement or advancement, together with the substitute date selected, shall be published by such means as the council may select. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-14; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-15. - Special meetings. 
(a)  Special meetings of the Town Council may be called, in accordance with section 4.2 of the Charter, any time by the mayor or by four members of the council; provided that all members are duly notified a reasonable time prior to such meeting as to the time and place for which the meeting is called and the business to be considered during such meeting. Such notice shall be deemed to have been served when the councilmember is personally advised by telephone or when a written copy of the same is delivered to his last known place of residence; either by leaving it with an adult member of the member's immediate family or by affixing it to the door of the member's place of residence in the event that no such person can be located. In the event a member is known to be temporarily out of the area, notice by telegraph or long distance telephone shall be deemed sufficient. No business shall be transacted at a special meeting except that for which it shall be called, unless all members of the council are present. 
(b)  When the necessity for a special meeting can be foreseen, it shall be called during the preceding regular meeting. The date, time, place of and the subjects to be discussed at all special meetings shall be publicly announced and publicized whenever practical. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-15; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-16. - Quorum. 
In accordance with section 4.3 of the Charter, a quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of four councilmembers. In the event a quorum cannot be obtained, a majority of those present may adjourn the meeting. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-16; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-17. - Excusing members from meetings. 
No member shall be excused from attendance at a Town Council meeting after he has answered to the initial roll call unless he has been excused by the presiding officer. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-17; Ord. of 9-7-1965; Ord. of 2-1970)  
Sec. 2-18. - Adjourned sessions. 
Any meeting of the Town Council may, by majority vote, be continued or adjourned to any future time certain, which occurs prior to the beginning of the next succeeding regular meeting. 
(Code 1962, app.3; Code 1969, § 2-18; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-19. - Conference sessions. 
The mayor or any four councilmembers may call the Town Council together for a conference session at any time. Notice of time and place for all conference sessions shall be given councilmembers as in the case of a special meeting, except that there shall be no limitation of matters to be discussed. A conference session may consider any matter of interest upon which an exchange of information appears desirable. No formal vote shall be taken on any matter during a conference session, nor shall any member be required to formally commit his vote on any question. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed as prohibiting an informal expression of opinion on any question by any member. The procedure at all conference sessions shall be informal. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-19; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-20. - Executive sessions. 
An executive session of the Town Council may be convened by the mayor or by any four members of the council. Notice of executive sessions shall be as for special meetings and the same limitation on business transacted shall apply as for special meetings. The council may, by majority vote, exclude from any executive session all persons not members of the council. Formal votes may be had only on such matters as involve problems relating to specific employees of the Town or its instrumentalities, contract negotiations or other matters which cannot be discussed in public without injury to the interest of the Town. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-20; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
DIVISION 3. - PRESIDING OFFICER 
 
Sec. 2-21. - Mayor to preside; voting and veto powers of mayor. 
In accordance with section 4.4 of the Charter, the mayor shall preside at all meetings and sessions of the Town Council. He shall have the same right to vote and speak therein as other members of the council, but shall not have power of veto. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-21; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-22. - Mayor pro tempore. 
In the event that the mayor is absent or unable to act, the mayor pro tempore of the Town Council, to be chosen at its organization meeting following the installation of members of council after each Town election, shall preside at all such meetings and sessions. The term of office for the mayor pro tempore shall be one year with the privilege to succeed himself. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-21; Ord. of 9-7-1965; Ord. of 2-1970)  
Sec. 2-23. - Temporary chair in absence of mayor and mayor pro tempore. 
In the event that both the mayor and mayor pro tempore are absent or unable to act, and if a quorum is present, the senior member present shall call the meeting of Town Council to order. One of the members present shall be elected to serve as temporary chair of the meeting until the return of the mayor or mayor pro tempore. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-22; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
DIVISION 4. - PRIVILEGES OF THE FLOOR 
 
Sec. 2-24. - Members of council. 
During Town Council meetings, councilmembers shall observe order and shall not delay or interrupt the proceedings nor refuse to obey the orders of the presiding officer or the rules of the council. Every councilmember desiring to speak shall address the chair and, upon recognition by the presiding officer, shall confine himself to the question under debate and shall avoid all personalities and indecorous language. Every councilmember desiring to question the administrative staff shall address his question to the mayor or Town Manager who shall be entitled either to answer the inquiries himself or to designate some member of his staff for that purpose. A councilmember, once recognized, shall not be interrupted while speaking unless called to order by the presiding officer or unless a point of order is raised by another member, or unless the speaker chooses to yield to questions from another member. If a councilmember is called to order while he is speaking, he shall cease speaking immediately until the question of order is determined. If ruled to be in order, he shall be permitted to proceed. If ruled to be not in order, he shall remain silent or shall alter his remarks so as to comply with rules of the council. All members of the council shall afford courtesy to each other, to Town employees and to public members appearing before the council. Councilmembers shall confine their questions as to the particular matters before the assembly and in debate shall confine their remarks to the issues before the council. If the presiding officer fails to act, any member may move to require him to enforce the rules and the affirmative vote of a majority of the council shall require the presiding officer to act. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-24; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-25. - Members of Town staff. 
Members of the administrative staff and employees of the Town shall observe the same rules of procedure and decorum applicable to members of the Town Council. While the presiding officer shall have the authority to preserve decorum in meetings as far as staff members and Town employees are concerned, the Town Manager also shall be responsible for the orderly conduct and decorum of all Town employees. The Town Manager or any staff member desiring to address the council may be recognized by the chair. When recognized, he shall limit his remarks to the matter under discussion. No staff member, other than staff member having the floor, shall enter into any discussion without permission of the presiding officer. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-25; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-26. - Members of the public. 
(a)  Any member of the public desiring to address the Town Council may be recognized by the chair. He shall state his name and address in an audible tone for the record, and shall limit his remarks to the question under discussion. 
(b)  Public members attending council meetings shall observe the same rules of propriety, decorum and good conduct applicable to members of the council. Any person making personal, impertinent and slanderous remarks or who becomes boisterous while addressing the council or while attending the council meeting may be removed from the room by the Police Department upon request of the presiding officer, and such persons may be barred from further audience before the council. Aggravated cases may be prosecuted on an appropriate complaint signed by the presiding officer. In case the presiding officer shall fail to act, any member of the council may move to require him to act to enforce the rules. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-26; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
DIVISION 5. - ATTENDANCE OF TOWN OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
 
Sec. 2-27. - Town Manager. 
The Town Manager shall attend all meetings, hearings and sessions of the Town Council as requested by council. He shall advise and make recommendations to the council on all agenda items as requested by the presiding officer and shall be afforded floor privileges in the same manner as councilmembers. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-27; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-28. - Town clerk. 
The Town clerk shall be the clerk of the council and shall perform such duties in connection with such office as may be assigned by the mayor, council or Town Manager. The Town clerk shall attend all meetings, hearing and sessions of the council as requested. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-28; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-29. - Town attorney. 
The Town attorney shall attend all meetings, hearing and sessions of the council as requested; either in person or by a deputy. Any member of the council may call upon the Town attorney, through the mayor, for an oral or written opinion on any question of law, but not on any question of parliamentary procedure. The Town attorney shall be afforded the privilege of the floor to explain any matter of legal significance to the pending business. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-29; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
DIVISION 6. - RULES OF PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 2-30. - Seating of members. 
Members shall occupy the respective seats in the council chamber assigned to them by the mayor, but any two or more members may exchange seats upon mutual agreement. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-30; Ord. of 9-7-1965; Ord. of 2-1970)  
Sec. 2-31. - Recognition of members. 
Recognition shall be requested by addressing the chair as "Mr. Mayor." When recognized by the chair, a member shall confine his remarks to the question under debate, avoid personalities and refrain from impugning the motives of any other member's argument or vote. No member shall address the chair or demand the floor while any vote is being taken, except to raise a point of order or to demand the ayes and nays. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-31; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-32. - Question of order. 
Any member may interrupt Town Council proceedings to raise a point of order. The pending business shall be suspended thereupon, and the chair shall rule on the point of order after affording both sides an opportunity to be heard. Such ruling shall be subject to being overruled by majority vote upon a duly made and seconded motion. A tie vote sustains the ruling of the chair. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-32; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-33. - Limitation on debate. 
No member shall be allowed to speak more than once upon any one subject until every other member choosing to speak thereon shall have spoken. Each councilmember and the mayor shall have the right to speak once on each motion, resolution, ordinance and on each amendment thereto. No member shall speak for longer than ten minutes each time without leave of council. The total time during which any business shall be considered may be limited by a majority vote of members present and voting. A motion to so limit debate is in order at any time. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-33; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-34. - Voting procedure. 
Every member present when a question is put shall vote either "aye" or "nay," unless the Town Council shall excuse him from voting. Application to be excused from voting shall be made before the votes are called for. The member having briefly stated the reason for his request, the decision thereon shall be made without debate. Upon demand of any member, made before a decision is announced by the chair, the roll shall be called for "ayes" and "nays" upon any question before council. It shall not be in order for members to explain their vote during the roll call. Each councilmember and the mayor shall have one vote on all questions. A roll call vote is required as to all actions involving expenditure of bond funds. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-34; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-35. - Questions of personal privilege. 
The right of a member to address the Town Council on a question of personal privilege shall be limited to cases in which his integrity, character or motives are assailed, questioned or impugned. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-35; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-36. - Extension of remarks. 
Any member shall have the right to formally express approval of or dissent from or protest against any ordinance or resolution adopted by Town Council and have the reason therefor entered upon the journal. Such dissent or protest shall be filed in writing, couched in respectful language, and presented to council not later that the next regular meeting following the date of passage of the ordinance or resolution objected to. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-36; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-37. - Motions to be stated by chair; procedure for withdrawing motions. 
When a motion is made and seconded, it shall be restated by the chair before debate upon request by any member. A motion may not be withdrawn by the mover without the consent of the member seconding it and the approval of the Town Council. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-37; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-38. - Introduction of ordinances, motions, etc., out of regular order. 
By a majority vote of the members present, a member may be permitted to introduce an ordinance, resolution or motion out of the regular order; provided that in the case or ordinance, the provisions of section 9.1.1 of the Charter shall apply. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-38; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-39. - Motion to adjourn. 
A motion to adjourn shall be in order at any time, except as follows: 
(a)  When repeated without intervening business or discussion; 
(b)  When made as an interruption of a member while speaking; 
(c)  When the previous question has been ordered; and 
(d)  While a vote is being taken. 
A motion to adjourn is debatable only as to the time to which the meeting is adjourned. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-39; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-40. - Motion to lay on the table. 
A motion to lay on the table shall preclude all amendments or debate of the subject under consideration. If the motion shall prevail, the consideration of the subject may be resumed only upon motion of a member voting with the majority and with the consent of two-thirds of the members present. A motion to lay on the table takes precedence over all subsidiary motions and over such incidental questions as are pending. It yields to privileged motions and is not debatable. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-40; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-41. - Motion to postpone. 
All motions to postpone, except a motion to postpone indefinitely, may be amended as to time. If a motion to postpone indefinitely is carried, the principal question shall be declared lost. A motion to postpone is debatable. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-41; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-42. - Procedure to make subject special order. 
To make any subject a special order shall require the consent of a majority of the members present. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-42; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-43. - Motion to reconsider. 
After the decision on any question, any member who voted with the majority may move a reconsideration of the prior action at the same or the next succeeding meeting, provided that a resolution authorizing or relating to any contract may be reconsidered at any time before the final execution thereof; and provided that there are at least as many members present as were present when the original action was taken. A motion to reconsider shall require a majority of those members present and voting. After a motion for reconsideration has once been acted on, no other motion for a reconsideration thereof shall be made without unanimous consent. If the motion for reconsideration succeeds, any motion disposing of the substantive question is in order. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-43; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-44. - Procedure for moving previous question. 
A motion on the previous question is not debatable, requires a two-thirds majority and cannot be amended. A member moving the previous question at a time when the main motion plus one or more amendments are pending shall specify the question of which the question is demanded. Upon the previous question being moved and seconded, the chair shall immediately put it to a vote. If approved, the chair shall thereupon put to a vote all questions to which the motion on the previous question was directed. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-44; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-45. - Division of question. 
If the question is divisible into two or more propositions, the presiding officer may, and upon request of a member shall, divide the same. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-45; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-46. - Amendments. 
It shall be in order to amend any ordinance, resolution or motion at any time during its consideration. A motion to amend an amendment shall be in order, but one to amend an amendment to an amendment shall not be introduced. An amendment modifying the intention of a motion shall be in order, but an amendment relating to an entirely different matter shall not be in order. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-46; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-47. - Tie vote. 
In case of a tie vote on any proposal, the proposal shall be considered lost. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-47; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-48. - Precedence of motion. 
When a question is before the Town Council, no motion shall be entertained except: 
(a)  To adjourn; 
(b)  To fix the hour of adjournment; 
(c)  To lay on the table; 
(d)  To refer; 
(e)  To amend; 
(f)  For the previous question; 
(g)  To postpone to a certain day; and 
(h)  To postpone indefinitely. 
These motions shall have precedence in the order indicated. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-48; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-49. - Procedure in absence of rule. 
In the absence of a rule in this article to govern a point of procedure, Robert's Rules of Order shall control. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-49; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
DIVISION 7. - AGENDA 
 
Sec. 2-50. - Order of business. 
The business of all regular meetings of the Town Council shall be transacted in the following order, except that the council, by a majority vote of members present and voting, may change the order: 
(a)  Invocation. 
(b)  Call of the roll. 
(c)  Approval of the minutes of any preceding meetings. 
(d)  Opening of competitive bids, if any. 
(e)  Receipt of communications. 
(f)  Reports by committees of council and Town officials: 
(1)  Work sessions. 
(2)  County liaison. 
(3)  Requests and inquiries of councilmembers. 
(4)  Report of Town Manager. 
(5)  Report of mayor. 
(6)  Proposals for addition of items to agenda. 
(g)  Items of business postponed from a previous meeting or which have been considered as agenda items at a previous meeting and upon which action has not been completed. 
(h)  New business. 
(i)  Items not included on written agenda. 
(j)  Adjournment. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-50; Ord. of 9-7-1965; Ord. of 10-23-1967)  
Sec. 2-51. - Procedure for adding items. 
No item which does not appear on the written prepared agenda for a regular council meeting, as provided in sections 2-52 and 2-53, may be proposed for consideration unless the Town Manager or a member of the Town Council determines that it is a matter of such an emergency nature that its consideration cannot be postponed to the next regular council meeting, provided that such a proposal shall be stated during consideration of section 2-50(f)(6). The affirmative vote of a majority of the members present and voting shall be required to add such items to the agenda. 
(Code 1969, § 2-51, Ord. of 9-7-1976)  
Sec. 2-52. - Preparation; delivery to members. 
The Town clerk and the Town Manager shall prepare a written agenda for each meeting of the Town Council. All items to be considered, except for those added pursuant to section 2-51, shall appear on the written agenda, which shall be delivered, together with all supporting and appurtenant documents, to each member of the council not later than 24 hours prior to the start of the subject meeting. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-52; Ord. of 9-7-1965; Ord. of 2-1970)  
Sec. 2-53. - Items to be included. 
(a)  The Town Manager shall place on the agenda for each Town Council meeting all items as in his opinion, after consultation with the Town attorney and the Town clerk, require or are appropriate for council consideration. Such items shall be supported by a brief written description of the facts and circumstances giving rise to the problem and accompanied by suggestions for desired council action. The same shall be distributed to members with the prepared agenda. Proposed motions shall be complete with names, dates, conditions, terms, places and other details. 
(b)  The mayor and each member of the council shall have the right to have included on any prepared agenda such items as he deems appropriate for council consideration. The mayor and members of the council desiring to submit items for inclusion on the prepared agenda shall notify the Town clerk or Town Manager of the nature of the matter they wish considered in sufficient detail as to enable the item to be properly formulated and the Town Manager to be prepared for discussion. Such notification may be oral or written, and shall be delivered sufficiently prior to the meeting at which consideration is desired to allow the Town staff reasonable time to include the items on the prepared agenda, and undertake any investigation required. If the member desires the council to adopt any resolution, ordinance or motion, he shall prepare the same and deliver it to the Town clerk in reasonable time to allow for duplication and distribution in accordance with section 2-52. All material pertinent to items scheduled hereunder shall be distributed to members with the prepared agenda. 
(c)  Any member of the public directly affected or aggrieved by circumstances, conditions or occurrences arising within the Town, and over which the Town can reasonably be expected to exercise control or influence, shall have the right to have placed on the prepared agenda of any regular or special meeting and have considered a separately numbered item appropriate to the problem or request to which it is desired to direct the attention of the council. Requests from members of the public for inclusion of such items on the agenda shall be in writing and contain a brief description of the circumstances giving rise to same. If it is desired that the council adopt a particular ordinance, resolution or motion, the same should be prepared and submitted with the written statement. Such written request shall be delivered to the Town clerk or Town Manager at least 20 working hours (three working days) prior to the start of the meeting at which consideration is desired (Thursday 12:00 noon for meeting following Monday); provided that in cases involving an emergency, as found by the Town Manager, the 20-hour requirement may be waived. Members of the public at whose request items are included on the agenda are advised to be present at the council meeting during which their item is discussed in order to offer additional explanation and so that members may have the opportunity to question them. All material pertinent to items scheduled hereunder shall be distributed to members with the prepared agenda. 
(d)  In addition to specific items placed on the prepared agenda of any meeting pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, members of the public may appear and be heard briefly under the agenda item entitled "Receipt of Petitions and Communications" for the purpose of directing attention to or requesting action on matters not included on the prepared agenda. Such appearances shall be limited to a short resume of the situation or problem involved and the action directed. At the conclusion of such appearances, all matters discussed shall be referred to the Town Manager for investigation and report; except as same may be considered by the council after being added to the prepared agenda pursuant to sections 2-50(f)(6) and 2-51. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-53; Ord. of 9-7-1965; Ord. of 10-23-1967)  
DIVISION 8. - ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS 
 
Sec. 2-54. - Introduction. 
Ordinances and resolutions and amendments thereto may be introduced orally or in writing, but any councilmember may request a copy in writing before a vote on final passage is had on any ordinance or resolution or amendment thereto of general applicability or involving the regulation of public conduct, imposition of taxes, fines or penalties, appropriation of public funds, improvement or construction of highways, streets, sidewalks or other public works or an ordinance or resolution or amendment thereof upon which a public hearing is required by law. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-54; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-55. - Compliance with Charter. 
The following procedural requirements as to enactment of ordinances are required by chapter 9 of the Charter: 
(a)  The object of every proposed ordinance shall be expressed in its title. 
(b)  No ordinance except an emergency ordinance shall be passed until after a notice of intention to propose the same for passage shall have been published once a week for two successive weeks prior to its passage in some newspaper published in the county. 
(c)  No such ordinance shall become effective until ten days after it shall have been published in full or by its title and an informative summary of such ordinance in a like newspaper. If such publication is by title and an informative summary, the publication shall include a statement that a copy of the full text of the ordinance is on file in the office of the Town clerk. 
(d)  The provisions of this section governing publication shall not apply, however, to any ordinance enacted pursuant to a state statute where such statute provides for the manner of publication. 
(e)  Any ordinance passed as an emergency shall require a two-thirds vote of all the council, and shall be void and of no effect at the expiration of 60 days from the date of adoption, unless sooner repealed or reenacted as provided in section 9.1.1 of the Charter. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-55; Ord. of 9-7-1965; Ord. of 9-7-1976)  
Sec. 2-55.1. - Identification of proposers of ordinances, resolutions, or amendments to ordinances. 
In addition to the procedural requirements as to the enactments of ordinances required by chapter 9 of the Charter, and as stated in section 2-55, a proposal to adopt or amend an ordinance, or to adopt a resolution, shall identify the member of the Town Council, Town staff, or member of the public who has recommended the adoption thereof or the amendment thereto. 
(Code 1969, § 2-55.1; Ord. of 9-7-1976)  
Sec. 2-56. - Emergency ordinances. 
(a)  Emergency ordinances shall take effect upon passage and shall be limited to the immediate preservation of public peace, property, health, safety or morals. The emergency giving rise to the ordinance shall be set forth in the preamble to the ordinance. 
(b)  If any emergency ordinance shall fail to receive the affirmative vote of two-thirds of all councilmembers, such measure shall cease to be before the council as an emergency measure. Thereafter, a motion to strike the emergency clause shall be in order. If such motion is adopted, the original ordinance shall thereupon be before the council for a vote on final passage without the emergency clause. If no such motion to strike is made, the ordinance shall be deemed lost. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-56; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
Sec. 2-57. - Effective date of resolution and motions. 
The effective date of all resolutions and motions adopted by the Town Council shall be stated where appropriate, and may be set for any time certain subsequent to adoption. 
(Code 1962, app. 3; Code 1969, § 2-57; Ord. of 9-7-1965)  
ARTICLE 4. - CIVIL EMERGENCY AND MOB ACTION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— State law as to riots, routs and unlawful assemblies, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-404 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-58. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Civil emergency means: 
(a)  A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power to execute by three or more persons acting together without authority of law. 
(b)  Any natural disaster or manmade calamity including flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake, or explosion within the Town resulting in the death or injury of persons or the destruction of property to such an extent the extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
Curfew means a prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises within the Town, except persons officially designated to duty with reference to a civil emergency. 
(Code 1962, § 19-1; Code 1969, § 2-58; Ord. of 8-19-1968)  
Sec. 2-59. - Mayor's emergency powers. 
When, in the judgment of the Town Council, a civil emergency is deemed to exist or when in its judgment there exists an imminent threat of any civil commotion or disturbance, the Town Council shall have power to impose by proclamation any or all of the following regulations necessary to preserve the peace and order of the Town: 
(a)  Impose a curfew upon all or any portion of the Town thereby requiring all persons in such designated curfew areas to forthwith remove themselves from the public streets, alleys, parks or other public places; provided that physicians, nurses and ambulance operators performing medical services, utility personnel maintaining essential public services, firemen and city authorized or requested law enforcement officers and personnel may be exempted from such curfew. 
(b)  Order the closing of all retail liquor stores. 
(c)  Order the closing of all beer taverns. 
(d)  Order the closing of all private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating liquor or beer is permitted. 
(e)  Order the discontinuance of the sale of beer. 
(f)  Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle. 
(g)  Order the closing of gasoline stations and other establishments, the chief activity of which is the sale, distribution or dispensing of liquid flammable or combustible products. 
(h)  Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever. 
(i)  Order the closing of any or all establishments or portions thereof, the chief activity of which is the sale, distribution, dispensing or giving away of firearms or ammunition. 
(j)  Designate any public street, thoroughfare or vehicle parking areas closed to motor vehicles and pedestrian traffic. 
(k)  Call upon regular and auxiliary law enforcement agencies and organizations within or without the Town to assist in preserving and keeping peace within the Town. 
(l)  Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection of life and property. 
(Code 1962, § 19-2; Code 1969, § 2-59; Ord. of 8-19-1968)  
Sec. 2-60. - Period of emergency. 
The proclamation of emergency shall become effective upon its issuance by the mayor and shall remain in effect for such period as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1962, § 19-3; Code 1969, § 2-60; Ord. of 8-19-1968)  
Sec. 2-61. - Calling of special meeting of Town Council; actions of Town Council. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the mayor, immediately upon issuance of a proclamation of emergency, to call a special meeting of the Town Council. The proclamation shall remain in effect until such special meeting of the Town Council is had. 
(b)  At such special meeting the Town Council may continue in force the proclamation of the mayor for such period of time as in the judgment of the council may be necessary or may enact such emergency ordinance as in their judgment may be required, consistent with the existing emergency and in the best interests of public safety and welfare. 
(Code 1962, § 19-4; Code 1969, § 2-61; Ord. of 8-19-1968)  
Sec. 2-62. - Obedience to officers or personnel enforcing article. 
No person shall fail or refuse to comply with the orders of duly authorized law enforcement officers or personnel charged with the responsibility of enforcing any proclamation of emergency or any emergency ordinance of the council authorized in this article. 
(Code 1962, § 19-5; Code 1969, § 2-62; Ord. of 8-19-1968)  
ARTICLE 5. - DISCLOSURE OF REAL ESTATE HOLDINGS 
 
Sec. 2-63. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Board of architectural review means the Board of Architectural Review of the Town of Vienna, Virginia. 
Board of zoning appeals means the board of zoning appeals of the Town of Vienna, Virginia. 
Candidate means any person having done those things required by law to have his name placed on the ballot in any Town election. 
Department head means that official in charge of the Town government departments of finance, public works, police, and parks and recreation. 
Planning commission means the planning commission of the Town of Vienna, Virginia. 
Town Council means the Town Council of the Town of Vienna, Virginia. 
Town Manager means the Town Manager of the Town of Vienna, Virginia. 
(Code 1969, § 2-63; Ord. of 7-21-1975; Ord. of 12-1-1975; Ord. of 12-19-1983; Ord. of 1-9-1984)  
Sec. 2-64. - Disclosure. 
On or before January 15 of each year, every member of council, planning commission, board of zoning appeals, Board of Architectural Review, the Town Manager and each department head shall complete a disclosure of real estate holdings form and financial disclosure form and cause the same to be filed with the Town clerk. 
(Code 1969, § 2-64; Ord. of 7-21-1975; Ord. of 12-19-1983; Ord. of 1-9-1984)  
Sec. 2-65. - Content of forms. 
Each form used for such filing shall be obtained from the Town clerk and shall be that form furnished the said clerk by the secretary of the commonwealth pursuant to law. 
(Code 1969, § 2-65; Ord. of 7-21-1975; Ord. of 12-19-1983; Ord. of 1-9-1984)  
Sec. 2-66. - Candidates for office. 
Any candidate for elective office in Town shall file the same disclosure form specified in section 2-64 not more than 60 nor less than 30 days prior to the day of election in which he is a candidate for office, and thereafter, if elected, no later than January 15 of each year. 
(Code 1969, § 2-66; Ord. of 7-21-1975; Ord. of 12-19-1983; Ord. of 1-9-1984)  
Sec. 2-67. - Forms maintained. 
All such forms shall be maintained as public records by the Town clerk for a period of five years. 
(Code 1969, § 2-67; Ord. of 7-21-1975; Ord. of 12-19-1983; Ord. of 1-9-1984)  
ARTICLE 6. - POLLING PLACE 
 
Sec. 2-68. - Polling place. 
Pursuant to Code of Virginia § 24.2-308 (1950 as amended), the Town Council of Vienna has established one voting precinct for the Town of Vienna local elections and effective upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the Town of Vienna elections shall be temporally relocated from its current location of the Vienna Community Center located at 120 Cherry Street, SE, Vienna, VA 22180, to the Vienna Presbyterian Church located at 124 Park Street, NE, Vienna, VA 22180. 
( Ord. of 7-6-2015(3) )  
ARTICLE 7. - DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY ACQUIRED BY A LAW-ENFORCEMENT OFFICER PURSUANT TO HIS DUTIES OR SEIZED BY POLICE 
 
Sec. 2-69. - Property acquired by a law-enforcement officer pursuant to his duties or seized by police; disposition and manner of public auction in accordance with Code of Virginia § 15.2-1719 (1950 as amended). 
Except where notice and publication is not specifically required, in accordance with Code of Virginia § 15.2-1719 and the duly adopted Vienna Police Department General Order 84.1.7 Final Disposition of Property, whenever the Vienna Police Department desires to sell property seized or taken possession thereof, the Chief of Police or his agent shall publish or cause to be published, in two or more newspapers published or having general circulation in the County of Fairfax, a description of such property and shall give notice that if such property be not claimed by the rightful owner thereof within 30 days from the initial date of such publishing such property will be sold through PropertyRoom.com, or an authorized web based auction site; provided, however, that all such unclaimed property of use to the Town may be retained for the use of the Town. 
( Ord. No. 2015-007, § 1, 10-19-2015 )  
Sec. 2-70. - Sale or donation of unclaimed bicycles. 
Any bicycle not necessary to any court action seized or taken into possession by the police which has been in the possession of the police department, unclaimed, for more than 30 days (as set forth in Town of Vienna Code section 2-69 may be sold through PropertyRoom.com, an authorized web based auction site, or at public auction or donated to a charitable organization, provided more than 30 days have passed since the chief of police or his agent has caused to be published at least once a week for two successive weeks in newspapers of general circulation within the county, a description of the bicycle. Where a bicycle seized or taken into possession by the police department is necessary to court action, the above time periods shall begin to run as of the date of final disposition of said action. 
( Ord. No. 2015-007, § 1, 10-19-2015 )  
Sec. 2-71. - Property acquired by a law-enforcement officer pursuant to his duties or seized by police; disposition of proceeds of sale of property. 
The proceeds of any sale made as provided in section 2-69-70 shall be paid into the Town treasury and credited to the Town of Vienna General Fund or may be paid into a dedicated fund maintained by the Vienna Police Department for a Crime Solvers' Program. 
( Ord. No. 2015-007, § 1, 10-19-2015 )  
Chapter 3 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate keeping of animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6544; regulation of keeping of animals and fowl, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6543; offenses involving animals, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-403.1 et seq.; burial or cremation of animals, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-510; regulations pertaining to pounds maintained by local governments, 2 VAC 5-110-10. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Position of animal warden created. 
There is hereby created the position of Town animal warden who shall have the power to enforce this chapter, and all laws for the protection of domestic animals. The Town Council may also appoint one or more deputy animal wardens to assist the animal warden in dog inspection activities and dog law enforcement. Such animal wardens and deputy animal wardens shall have a knowledge of the animal control and protection laws of the commonwealth which they are required to enforce. When in uniform or upon displaying a badge or other credentials of office, animal wardens and deputy animal wardens shall have the power to issue a summons to any person found in the act of violating any such law or any ordinance of the Town. The animal warden and the deputy animal wardens shall be paid as the Town Council shall prescribe. 
(Code 1969, § 3-1; Ord. of 10-1988)  
Sec. 3-2. - Cruelty to animals; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who: 
(i)  Overrides, overdrives, overloads, tortures, ill-treats, abandons, willfully inflicts inhumane injury or pain not connected with bona fide scientific or medical experimentation, or cruelly or unnecessarily beats, maims, mutilates, or kills any animal, whether belonging to himself or another; 
(ii)  Deprives any animal of necessary sustenance, food, drink or shelter; 
(iii)  Willfully sets on foot, instigates, engages in or in any way furthers any act of cruelty to any animal; 
(iv)  Carries or causes to be carried in or upon any vehicle, vessel or otherwise any animal in a cruel, brutal, or inhumane manner, so as to produce torture or unnecessary suffering; or 
(v)  Causes any of the above things; or being the owner of such animal, permits such acts to be done by another; 
shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who abandons any dog, cat or other domesticated animal in any public place, including the right-of-way of any public highway, road or street or on the property of another, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the dehorning of cattle. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the term "animal" shall be construed to include birds and fowl. 
(Code 1969, § 3-2; Ord. of 10-1988) 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6570.  
Sec. 3-2.1. - Fighting cocks or other animals; attendance at fighting; penalty. 
Any person engaging in the fighting of cocks, dogs or other animals, for money, prize or anything of value, or betting or wagering money or anything of value on the result of such fight, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. Attendance at the fighting of cocks, dogs or other animals where an admission fee is charged, directly or indirectly, shall also constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 3-2.1; Ord. of 10-1988)  
ARTICLE 2. - DOGS GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 3-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
At large means off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner or his agent either by leash, cord or chain. 
Dangerous dog means a canine or canine crossbreed that has bitten, attacked, or inflicted injury on a person or companion animal, or killed a companion animal; however, when a dog attacks or bites another dog, the attacking or biting dog shall not be deemed dangerous if: 
(i)  No serious physical injury as determined by a licensed veterinarian has occurred to the other dog as a result of the attack or bite; or 
(ii)  Both dogs are owned by the same person. 
No dog shall be found to be a dangerous dog as a result of biting, attacking or inflicting injury on another dog while engaged with an owner or custodian as part of lawful hunting or participating in an organized, lawful dog handling event. 
Dog means both male and female sexes of the species and unsexed dogs. 
Own and owner mean any person having a right of property in a dog and any person who keeps or harbors a dog or has it in his care or who acts as its custodian or any person who permits a dog to remain on or about any premises occupied by him. 
Run at large means roaming, running or self-hunting off the property of its owner or custodian and not under its owner's or custodian's immediate control. 
Unlicensed dogs means any dog without an attached current license tag issued by the Town. 
Vicious dog means a canine or canine crossbreed that has: 
(i)  Killed a person; 
(ii)  Inflicted serious injury to a person, including multiple bites, serious disfigurement, serious impairment of health, or serious impairment of a bodily function; or 
(iii)  Continued to exhibit the behavior that resulted in a previous finding by a court or an animal control officer as authorized by local ordinance pursuant to section 3-9(J), that it is a dangerous dog, provided that its owner has been given notice of that finding. 
(Code 1969, § 3-3; Ord. of 2-1977; Ord. of 12-1987; Ord. of 10-1988; Ord. of 5-2005)  
Sec. 3-4. - Dog license required; license tax on dogs. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own a dog four months old or older in the Town of Vienna unless such dog is licensed as provided by the provisions of this chapter. 
(B)  There is hereby provided and levied an annual license tax upon any dog within the Town, four months or older, of $10.00. No license tax shall be levied on any assistance dog. For the purposes of this section, "assistance dog" means a dog that has been or is being trained as a guide dog, hearing dog, or service dog. Such terms are further defined as follows: 
Guide dog. A dog that has been or is being specially trained to aid a particular blind or visually impaired person. 
Hearing dog. A dog that has been or is being specially trained to aid a particular deaf or hard of hearing person. 
Service dog. A dog that has been or is being specially trained to aid a particular physically disabled person with a physical disability other than sight or hearing. 
(C)  On January 1 and not later than January 31 of each year, the owner of any dog four months old or older shall pay a license tax prescribed in the preceding section. 
Upon application and payment of such license tax to the Director of Finance of the Town of Vienna, the director of finance shall issue a dog license tag, which tag shall bear only the words "Town of Vienna Dog Tag," an assigned number and the current license year. 
(D)  If a dog shall become four months of age or come into the possession of any person between January 1 and November 1 of any year, the license tax for the current calendar year shall be paid by the owner. 
(E)  If a dog shall become four months of age or come into the possession of any person between October 31 and December 31 of any year, the license tax for the succeeding calendar year shall be paid by the owner, and this license shall protect the dog from the date of purchase. 
(F)  The director of finance shall keep a list of all tags issued annually, together with a separate account of funds received from such tax. An annual report shall be made to the Town Council on the number of license tags issued and the receipts from such tax. All unissued license tags for the current license year shall be destroyed at the end of such year. 
(Code 1969, § 3-4; Ord. of 2-1977; Ord. of 12-1983; Ord. of 10-1988; Ord. of 3-1989; Ord. of 2-2005; Ord. of 10-1-2012(1), § 1)  
Sec. 3-4.1. - Effect of dog not wearing collar as evidence. 
Any dog not wearing a collar bearing a license tag of the proper calendar year shall prima facie be deemed to be unlicensed; and in any proceedings under this chapter, the burden of proof of the fact that such dog has been licensed, or is otherwise not required to bear a tag at the time, shall be on the owner of the dog. 
(Code 1969, § 3-4.1; Ord. of 10-1988)  
Sec. 3-4.2. - What dog license shall consist of. 
A dog license shall consist of a license receipt and a metal tag. The tag shall be stamped or otherwise permanently marked to show the jurisdiction issuing the license, the sex of the dog, the calendar year for which it is issued and shall bear a serial number. 
(Code 1969, § 3-4.2; Ord. of 10-1988)  
Sec. 3-4.3. - Duplicate license tags. 
If a dog license tag shall become lost, destroyed or stolen, the owner or custodian shall at once apply to the Town for a duplicate license tag, presenting the original license receipt. Upon affidavit of the owner or custodian that the original license tag has been lost, destroyed or stolen, the Town shall issue a duplicate license tag which the owner or custodian shall immediately affix to the collar of the dog. The Town shall endorse the number of the duplicate and the date issued on the face of the original license receipt. The fee for a duplicate tag for any dog shall be $1.00. 
(Code 1969, § 3-4.3; Ord. of 10-1988)  
Sec. 3-4.4. - Displaying receipts; dogs to wear tags. 
Dog license receipts shall be carefully preserved by the licensees and exhibited promptly on request for inspection by any animal warden or other officer. Dog license tags shall be securely fastened to a substantial collar by the owner or custodian and worn by such dog. It shall be unlawful for the owner to permit any licensed dog four months old or older to run or roam at large at any time without a license tag. The owner of the dog may remove the collar and license required by this section: 
(i)  When the dog is engaged in lawful hunting; 
(ii)  When the dog is competing in a dog show; 
(iii)  When the dog has a skin condition which would be exacerbated by the wearing of a collar; 
(iv)  When the dog is confined; or 
(v)  When the dog is under the immediate control of its owner. 
(Code 1969, § 3-4.4; Ord. of 10-1988)  
Sec. 3-5. - Evidence showing inoculation for rabies prerequisite to obtaining dog license. 
No license tag shall be issued for any dog unless there is presented to the Town Manager at the time application for license is made, evidence satisfactory to him showing that such dog has been inoculated or vaccinated against rabies by a currently licensed veterinarian. 
(Code 1969, § 3-5; Ord. of 10-1988)  
Sec. 3-6. - Owner allowing dog to run prohibited. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any dog to allow his dog, whether licensed or unlicensed, to run at large in the Town at any time. 
(B)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor and punished by fine not to exceed $250.00. 
(Code 1969, § 3-6; Ord. of 9-1978; Ord. of 10-1988; Ord. of 5-1992; Ord. of 6-2004) 
State Law reference— Locality may prohibit dogs running at large, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6538.  
Sec. 3-7. - Impounding. 
Any dog running at large in the Town, either with or without a license tag, may be impounded and kept at the county impounding facility. If such dog has upon it the name of the owner, or if the name and address is otherwise known, the owner shall be notified within 24 hours after seizure of such dog, or within such time thereafter as the owner can be located using due care and diligence. The owner of any dog so impounded may contact the appropriate county authorities at the impounding facility. The owner's rights to the return of such dog shall be controlled by the applicable county laws, regulations and requirements. 
(Code 1962, § 18-7; Code 1969, § 3-7; Ord. of 7-1967; Ord. of 2-1977)  
Sec. 3-8. - Disposition of unredeemed impounded dogs. 
Any dog which has been impounded and has not been redeemed by the owner may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of in accordance with the applicable law and regulations promulgated by the Town authorities. 
(Code 1962, § 18-8; Code 1969, § 3-8; Ord. of 7-1967; Ord. of 2-1977)  
Sec. 3-9. - Dangerous and vicious dogs. 
(A)  Any animal control officer or police officer with local jurisdiction who has reason to believe that a canine or canine crossbreed within his jurisdiction is a dangerous dog or vicious dog shall apply to a magistrate of the jurisdiction for the issuance of a summons requiring the owner or custodian, if known, to appear before a general district court at a specific time. The summons shall advise the owner of the nature of the proceeding and the matters at issue. The animal control officer shall confine the animal until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. If the animal control officer determines that the owner or custodian can confine the animal in a manner that protects the public safety, he may permit the owner or custodian to confine the animal until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. The court, through its contempt powers, may compel the owner, custodian or harborer of the animal to produce the animal. If, after hearing the evidence, the court finds that the animal is a dangerous dog, the court shall order the animal's owner to comply with the provisions of this section. If, after hearing the evidence, the court finds that the animal is a vicious dog, the court shall order the animal euthanized in accordance with the provisions of state law. 
(B)  No canine or canine crossbreed shall be found to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog solely because it is a particular breed, nor shall the Town Council prohibit the ownership of a particular breed of canine or canine crossbreed. No animal shall be found to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who was: 
(i)  Committing, at the time, a crime upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian; 
(ii)  Committing, at the time, a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian; or 
(iii)  Provoking, tormenting, or physically abusing the animal, or can be shown to have repeatedly provoked, tormented, abused, or assaulted the animal at other times. 
No police dog that was engaged in the performance of its duties as such at the time of the acts complained of shall be found to be a dangerous dog or a vicious dog. No animal which, at the time of the acts complained of, was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself, its kennel, its offspring, or its owner or owner's property, shall be found to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog. 
(C)  The owner of any animal found to be a dangerous dog shall, within ten days of such finding, obtain a dangerous dog registration certificate from the local animal control officer for a fee of $50.00 or an amount as set by local ordinance but not to exceed the costs incurred by the locality to administer this program, in addition to other fees that may be authorized by law. The local animal control officer shall also provide the owner with a uniformly designed tag that identifies the animal as a dangerous dog. The owner shall affix the tag to the animal's collar and ensure that the animal wears the collar and tag at all times. All certificates obtained pursuant to this subsection shall be renewed annually for the same fee and in the same manner as the initial certificate was obtained. 
(D)  All certificates or renewals thereof required to be obtained under this section shall only be issued to persons 18 years of age or older who present satisfactory evidence: 
(i)  Of the animal's current rabies vaccination, if applicable; 
(ii)  That the animal is and will be confined in a proper enclosure or is and will be confined inside the owner's residence or is and will be muzzled and confined in the owner's fenced-in yard until the proper enclosure is constructed; 
(iii)  That the animal has been neutered or spayed; and 
(iv)  That the owner has liability insurance coverage, to the value of at least $100,000.00, that covers animal bites. 
In addition, owners who apply for certificates or renewals thereof under this section shall not be issued a certificate or renewal thereof unless they present satisfactory evidence that their residence is and will continue to be posted with clearly visible signs warning both minors and adults of the presence of a dangerous dog on the property and the animal has been permanently identified by means of a tattoo on the inside thigh or by electronic implantation. 
(E)  While on the property of its owner, an animal found to be a dangerous dog shall be confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked structure of sufficient height and design to prevent its escape or direct contact with or entry by minors, adults, or other animals. The structure shall be designed to provide the animal with shelter from the elements of nature. When off its owner's property, an animal found to be a dangerous dog shall be kept on a leash and muzzled in such a manner as not to cause injury to the animal or interfere with the animal's vision or respiration, but so as to prevent it from biting a person or another animal. 
(F)  If the owner of an animal found to be a dangerous dog is a minor, the custodial parent or legal guardian shall be responsible for complying with all requirements of this section. 
(G)  After an animal has been found to be a dangerous dog, the animal's owner shall immediately, upon learning of same, notify the local animal control authority if the animal: 
(i)  Is loose or unconfined; 
(ii)  Bites a person or attacks another animal; 
(iii)  Is sold, given away, or dies; or 
(iv)  Has been moved to a different address. 
(H)  The owner of any animal that has been found to be a dangerous dog who willfully fails to comply with the requirements of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(I)  All fees collected pursuant to this section, less the costs incurred by the animal control authority in producing and distributing the certificates and tags required by this section, shall be paid into a special dedicated fund in the Town treasury for the purpose of paying the expenses of any training course required under Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.104:1. 
(J)  The animal control officer may determine, after investigation, whether a dog is a dangerous dog. If the animal control officer determines that a dog is a dangerous dog, he may order the animal's owner to comply with the provisions of this section. If the animal's owner disagrees with the animal control officer's determination, he may appeal the determination to the general district court for a trial on the merits. 
(Code 1969, § 3-9; Ord. of 12-1987; Ord. of 5-2005) 
State Law reference— Registration requirements for owners of dangerous dogs, 2 VAC 5-620-30; registration requirements for local animal control officers, 2 VAC 5-620-40; notification requirements for dangerous dog incidents, 2 VAC 5-620-80.  
Sec. 3-10. - Female dogs in season; allowing dogs to urinate, etc., on another's property; noisy dogs; offensive odors from dogs. 
The following acts are declared unlawful nuisances and are prohibited: 
(A)  Any owner permitting his female dog to leave his premises when such dog is in season, except when such female dog is restrained by leash, cord or chain. 
(B)  Any owner knowingly and willfully permitting his dog to urinate or defecate or otherwise discharge body fluids or solids on the privately owned property of other persons or on public property except curbs, streets, alleys and parks. 
(C)  Any owner keeping a dog which, by loud and persistent noises, disturbs the peace of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(D)  Any owner keeping a dog in such a manner as to cause offensive odors beyond the confines of his property. 
(E)  Keeping or harboring a destructive dog or noisy dog. 
(Code 1962, § 18-10; Code 1969, § 3-10; Ord. of 7-1967)  
Sec. 3-10.1. - Removal of excrement. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, keeper or walker of a dog to fail to immediately remove the dog's excrement from any property other than the dog owner's property on which such dog had defecated. Any first violation of this section shall result in a warning of possible future penalty. Any conviction of a second or subsequent violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 3-10.1; Ord. of 10-26-1992)  
Sec. 3-11. - Destructive or noisy dogs. 
In addition to other penalties provided in this article, any person owning or harboring or having in his possession or under his control a dog suspected of constituting a destructive dog or a noisy dog may be summoned before the district court to show cause why such dog should not be confined or removed beyond the Town limits; and upon proof that such dog is destructive or noisy, such dog shall, upon order of the district court, either be confined or removed beyond the Town limits as may be directed by the court. For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  A destructive dog is one that has: 
(A)  Frequently and habitually injured or destroyed property or performed acts which might reasonably lead to the destruction or injury of property of any person other than the owner or custodian thereof. 
(B)  Frequently or habitually turned over garbage cans. 
(2)  A noisy dog is one that has, by loud, frequent and habitual barking, howling or crying, or other noises, caused annoyance or disturbed the peace or quiet of any person in the neighborhood. 
(Code 1962, § 18-11; Code 1969, § 3-11; Ord. of 7-1967)  
Sec. 3-12. - Killing certain dogs which cannot safely be taken and impounded. 
If any vicious or dangerous dog, or any dog suspected of or having rabies, found at large cannot be safely taken and impounded, such dog may be slain by any police officer or animal warden. 
(Code 1962, § 18-12; Code 1969, § 3-12; Ord. of 7-1967; Ord. of 10-1988)  
Sec. 3-13. - Prima facie evidence of dog being unlicensed. 
Any dog not wearing a collar bearing a license tag of the proper calendar year shall, prima facie, be deemed to be unlicensed and in any proceedings instituted under this article, the burden of proof of the fact that such dog has been licensed, or is otherwise not required to bear a license tag at the time, shall be upon the owner of the dog. 
(Code 1962, § 18-13; Code 1969, § 3-13; Ord. of 7-1967; Ord. of 10-1988)  
Sec. 3-14. - Enforcement of article. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the police and Town animal warden, the health officer and director of animal control of the county, or their authorized agents, and any other persons designated by the Town Council or the county board of supervisors. 
(Code 1962, § 18-14; Code 1969, § 3-14; Ord. of 7-1967; Ord. of 2-1977; Ord. of 10-1988)  
ARTICLE 3. - RABIES CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Rabies exposure; local authority and responsibility plan, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6562.1; rabid animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6522. 
 
Sec. 3-15. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal includes, but is not limited to, domestic animals, livestock, birds and fowl. 
Own and owner mean any person having a right of property in a dog, any person who keeps or harbors a dog or has it in his care or who acts as its custodian; and any person who permits the dog to remain at or about any premises occupied by him. 
(Code 1962, § 11-1; Code 1969, § 3-15; Ord. of 1-1967)  
Sec. 3-16. - Inoculation of dogs against rabies required. 
It shall be unlawful for an owner to keep, harbor or have in his care, custody or control a dog four months old or older unless such dog has been vaccinated or inoculated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian within the time prescribed by law with a rabies vaccine approved by the United States Department of Agriculture. 
(Code 1962, § 11-3; Code 1969, § 3-16; Ord. of 11-1969)  
Sec. 3-16.1. - Inoculation of cats against rabies required. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for an owner to keep, harbor or have in his care, custody, or control, a cat four months old or older unless such cat has been vaccinated or inoculated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian annually or tri-annually, depending upon the initial vaccine utilized as approved by the United State Department of Agriculture. 
B.  The provisions of sections 3-20, 3-21, and 3-22, providing procedures to be followed when rabid animals bite persons or other animals or themselves die, shall likewise be applicable to cats and the owners thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 3-16.1; Ord. of 12-1982; Ord. of 1-1983; Ord. of 10-1988)  
Sec. 3-17. - Impoundment of uninoculated dogs; redemption of impounded dogs. 
A.  It shall be the duty of any of the officials charged with the enforcement of this article to impound in the county pound any dog which has not been vaccinated or inoculated, as provided in section 3-16. The dog shall be held in the pound for a period of not more than five days, unless the dog is rabid or suspected of being rabid, in which case the dog shall be held for further observation or destroyed upon the authorization of a licensed veterinarian or any person charged with the enforcement of this article. 
B.  Any dog so seized and impounded and not rabid or suspected of being rabid may be redeemed by the owner at any time within five days after the impoundment upon: 
(a)  Payment of a fee. 
(b)  Payment of a boarding fee. 
(c)  Purchase of a license tag if unlicensed. 
(d)  Presentation of a certificate from a licensed veterinarian showing that the dog has been vaccinated or inoculated within the time prescribed by law. 
C.  The redemption fees shall be paid to the director of finance for the county. License fees shall be paid to the director of finance of the Town. The receipt for the fees, together with the veterinarian's certificate of inoculation or vaccination, shall be presented at the pound for the dog's release. 
D.  Any dog not redeemed within five days from the date of its seizure shall be destroyed in a humane manner by the county director of animal control or his designated agent, or shall be sold to any person who will pay for the cost of impounding, licensing and vaccinating or inoculation. The money so derived shall be credited to the dog fund by the county director of finance. 
(Code 1962, § 11-4; Code 1969, § 3-17; Ord. of 7-1967; Ord. of 2-1977; Ord. of 10-1988)  
Sec. 3-18. - Certificate of rabies vaccination required for license tag. 
No license tag shall be issued for any dog by the Town director of finance unless there is presented to the director of finance at the time application is made for the license, a certificate of rabies vaccination or inoculation signed by a licensed veterinarian and certifying that the dog for which the license is to be issued has been vaccinated or inoculated by the veterinarian within the time prescribed by law prior to the date the tag is issued. The certificate shall show the date of inoculation, the rabies tag number, the sex and breed of the dog and the name of the owner. The director of finance shall note on the certificate the date of issuance and the number of the license tag, and return the certificate to the applicant. 
(Code 1962, § 11-5; Code 1969, § 3-18)  
Sec. 3-19. - Duty of officials to impound or destroy dog suspected of rabies. 
It shall be the duty of any of the officials charged with the enforcement of this article to impound in the county pound, at the owner's expense, any dog showing active signs of rabies or suspected of having rabies, or upon the request of the owner and at his expense, the dog may be placed in the custody of a licensed veterinarian. The dog shall be confined for such period of time as may be necessary to establish a diagnosis. If confinement is impossible or impractical, such dog shall be destroyed upon the authorization of a licensed veterinarian or any person charged with the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1962, § 11-6; Code 1969, § 3-19; Ord. of 5-1972)  
Sec. 3-20. - Procedure when dog bites person. 
A.  The owner of a dog which has bitten a person, or any person having knowledge of any dog which has bitten a person, shall immediately notify the Town animal warden or police. The animal warden or any health officer of the county, or any person charged with the enforcement of this article shall immediately examine the dog, and, in his discretion: 
(a)  Impound the dog in the county pound for a period of ten days, at a cost to the owner in an amount charged by the county for such impoundment, unless the animal develops active symptoms of rabies, or expires before that time. 
(b)  Place the dog in the custody of a licensed veterinarian or a licensed veterinary hospital for a period of ten days, if requested by the owner and at the owner's expense. 
(c)  Chain or confine the dog in a strong enclosure on the owner's premises and isolated from all other animals and persons for a period of ten days. 
B.  The dog may be released from confinement after the ten-day period upon the authorization of a licensed veterinarian or any person charged with the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1962, § 11-7; Code 1969, § 3-20; Ord. of 5-1972; Ord. of 2-1977)  
Sec. 3-21. - Procedure when animal bites another animal. 
The owner of any animal known to have been bitten by a rabid animal or rabid dog, or by an animal or dog suspected of being rabid, shall immediately notify the Town animal warden or police. The animal shall be destroyed immediately or confined at the owner's expense in the pound, licensed veterinary hospital or enclosure approved by the county health officer, for a period of six months. If the animal has been vaccinated within the time prescribed by law with a rabies vaccine approved by the United States Department of Agriculture, the animal shall be revaccinated and confined in a like manner for a period of 90 days. 
(Code 1962, § 11-8; Code 1969, § 3-21; Ord. of 2-1977; Ord. of 10-1988)  
Sec. 3-22. - Procedure when rabid animal has been killed or dies. 
Any person killing an animal that is rabid or suspected of being rabid, or any person having knowledge that an animal has died of rabies, or is suspected of having died of rabies, shall immediately notify the Town animal warden or the Police Department of the location of the body of such animal. The head of the animal killed because it was rabid or suspected of being rabid, or which is suspected of having died of rabies, shall be surrendered to any person charged with the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1962, § 11-9; Code 1969, § 3-22; Ord. of 2-1977; Ord. of 10-1988)  
Sec. 3-23. - Enforcement of article. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the police and animal warden of the Town, the health officer and director of animal control of the county, or their authorized agents, and any other persons designated by the county board of supervisors. 
(Code 1962, § 11-10; Code 1969, § 3-23; Ord. of 2-1977)  
ARTICLE 4. - KEEPING OF WILD, EXOTIC OR VICIOUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED 
 
Sec. 3-24. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Vicious animal means any animal that constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other animals, not to include vicious dogs, which are addressed separately within this chapter. 
Wild or exotic animal means any live monkey (non-human primate), raccoon, skunk, wolf, squirrel, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any other warm-blooded animal, poisonous snake or tarantula that can normally be found in the wild state or any other member of the crocodilian order, including, but not limited to, alligators, crocodiles, caimans, and gavials. Ferrets, nonpoisonous snakes, rabbits, and laboratory rats that have been bred in captivity and that have never known the wild are excluded from this definition. 
(Code 1969, § 3-24; Ord. of 3-17-2008)  
Sec. 3-25. - Keeping prohibited; exceptions. 
No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild, exotic or vicious animal for any purposes, except that this prohibition shall not apply to a single certified service animal in a household, zoological parks, traveling animal exhibitions, circuses or veterinary clinics that are properly licensed by the federal government or the commonwealth. The wild or exotic animals of such licensed establishments shall not be exhibited or displayed in such a manner that persons other than their handlers can pet, fondle, or otherwise come in direct physical contact with such animals; however, this prohibition shall not apply to the riding of elephants by persons other than the elephants' handlers while under the direct supervision of the elephants' handlers where such elephants are performing in zoological parks, animal exhibitions or circuses which are properly licensed by the federal government or the commonwealth and the Town. 
(Code 1969, § 3-25; Ord. of 3-17-2008)  
Sec. 3-26. - Notice required at place of sale. 
Any person who offers for sale an exotic animal shall post conspicuously at the place of sale or display the following notice: 
"No person may lawfully keep or permit to be kept in the Town of Vienna, other than a certified service animal, any live monkey (non-human primate), raccoon, skunk, wolf, squirrel, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion lynx or any other warm-blooded animal, poisonous snake or tarantula, crocodile or alligator, which can normally be found in the wild state or any other member of the crocodilian order, including, but not limited to, alligators, crocodiles, caimans and gavials." 
(Code 1969, § 3-26; Ord. of 3-17-2008)  
Sec. 3-27. - Disposition of animals. 
Any person who keeps a wild, exotic, or vicious animal in contravention of this article may dispose of the animal by removal of the animal from the Town, by giving or selling the animal to a zoological park or by releasing the animal to the county animal services division. 
(Code 1969, § 3-27; Ord. of 3-17-2008)  
Sec. 3-28. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the police and animal warden of the Town, the health officer and director of animal control of the county, or their authorized agents, and any other persons designated by the Town Council or the county board of supervisors. 
(Code 1969, § 3-28; Ord. of 3-17-2008)  
Sec. 3-29. - Penalties. 
Violation of any provision of this article constitutes a Class 4 misdemeanor unless otherwise stated. 
(Code 1969, § 3-29; Ord. of 3-17-2008)  
Sec. 3-30. - Compliance with other Code requirements. 
Compliance with the provisions of this chapter does not relieve any person of the obligation to comply with any other applicable provisions of this Code, including, but not limited to, the zoning provisions of chapter 18 and provisions governing health and sanitation. 
(Code 1969, § 3-30; Ord. of 3-17-2008)  
Sec. 3-31. - Compliance with state comprehensive animal laws. 
The provisions of this chapter are intended to complement, not supersede, the state comprehensive animal laws. 
(Code 1969, § 3-31; Ord. of 3-17-2008)  
Chapter 4 - ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— For Charter provision authorizing Town to designate architectural control districts, see Charter § 8-B.1. For Charter provisions as to Board of Architectural Review, see Charter §§ 8-B.2, 8-B.3. Also see Acts of general assembly. Acts of 1974, Chap. 209. 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Purposes of chapter. 
(a)  The Town Council hereby finds that bizarre, garish or otherwise inappropriate exterior design and appearance of buildings, structures and improvements erected in commercial and industrial areas adversely affects the desirability of immediately adjacent and neighboring properties; impairs the benefits of occupancy as to existing properties in such areas; jeopardizes the economic stability and taxable value of businesses, land and buildings in such areas, and in the Town as a whole; prevents the optimum use of real estate in the Town; induces physical degeneration of property with attendant deterioration of conditions bearing directly on the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens; deprives the Town of tax revenue and destroys a proper balance between the taxable value of real property and the cost of municipal services. 
(b)  In order to encourage the construction of attractive buildings, to protect and promote the general welfare and to prevent deterioration of the appearance of the Town which would tend to create hazards to public health, safety and morals, destroy opportunity for the development of business and industry, and thereby deteriorate taxable land values and commerce below levels necessary to finance acceptable levels of municipal services, it is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the designation of architectural control districts within land areas zoned for commercial, industrial and public building use, to establish a Board of Architectural Review to regulate the exterior appearance of buildings, structures and improvements proposed for alteration or erection in such districts and to set standards and procedures to be followed by such board and, on appeal from its decision, by the Town Council. 
(Code 1962, § 17-1; Code 1969, § 4-1)  
Sec. 4-2. - Designations of architectural control districts. 
All land areas in the Town which are zoned other than single-family detached residential are hereby designated as an architectural control district, and any lot, parcel or area of land within any area zoned for single-family detached residences, which is used for other than single-family detached residences, or which is the subject of an application for a use permit or building permit involving any such other use, is designated an architectural control district. 
(Code 1969, § 4-2; Ord. of 9-20-1971)  
Sec. 4-3. - Board of architectural review—Established; composition; qualifications, appointment and terms of office of members; jurisdiction generally. 
There is hereby established a Board of Architectural Review to consist of five citizens of the Town appointed by majority vote of the Town Council for terms not to exceed three years. At least one member of the board shall be an architect registered in the state, and one a member of the state Bar. The architect member may, or may not, be a resident of the Town. In the event that the one architect member shall not be a resident of the Town, his appointment shall be for a period of one year. Members of the Town Council and the planning commission shall be eligible to serve on the board. The board shall elect a chair to preside at all meetings, a vice-chair to act in his absence and a secretary who shall be responsible for keeping a written record of all board proceedings and all notices, petitions, records, pleading and appeals pertinent thereto. The board shall have exclusive original jurisdiction to hear and decide all cases arising under this chapter, but shall have no power to modify or waive any requirement imposed by another provision of this Code. 
(Code 1962, § 17-3; Code 1969, § 4-3; Ord. of 7-1968)  
Sec. 4-4. - Same—Meeting schedule; special meetings. 
(a)  The Board of Architectural Review shall hold a regular meeting at least once each month at a time which it shall fix by resolution. Special meetings may be held at other times; provided that all members of the board are notified at least 24 hours in advance of the time and place of same. 
(b)  No application pending before the board shall be voted upon at any special meeting unless notice of intention to do so shall appear in a newspaper of general circulation, published in the county, at least seven days prior to such a special meeting. 
(Code 1962, § 17-2; Code 1969, § 4-4)  
Sec. 4-5. - Same—Meetings to be recorded; exception. 
All meetings of the Board of Architectural Review, except informal work sessions, shall be recorded verbatim by shorthand or by mechanical or electrical recording equipment. 
(Code 1962, § 17-5; Code 1969, § 4-5)  
Sec. 4-6. - Same—Quorum for meetings. 
A quorum shall consist of three members of the Board of Architectural Review. In the event a quorum is not obtained at any regular meeting, a special meeting shall thereupon be scheduled within ten days thereafter. 
(Code 1962, § 17-6; Ord. of 7-1968)  
Sec. 4-7. - Same—Conduct of meetings. 
(a)  All meetings of the Board of Architectural Review shall be conducted by the chair, or, in his absence, by the vice-chair. 
(b)  All members of the board shall be entitled to vote, and the decisions of the board shall be by majority vote of those members present. 
(c)  All meetings of the board shall be open to the public and all decisions shall be by record vote of the ayes and nays spread upon the proceedings. 
(d)  In matters covering procedures for the board not specified in this chapter, Robert's Rules of Order shall govern. 
(Code 1962, § 17-5; Code 1969, § 4-7)  
Sec. 4-8. - Same—Approval of erections, reconstructions and alterations in architectural control districts required; waiver of requirements. 
(a)  No structure, building, sign or other improvements or other major landscape features surrounding such building, structure, sign or improvement located on any land within any architectural control district shall be erected, reconstructed, altered or restored until the plans for such shall have been approved by the Board of Architectural Review; provided that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the regular maintenance of the same as opposed to the reconstruction, alteration or restoration. For the purposes of this section, the repainting of a structure, building or sign which results in the complete change of color of the said structure, building or sign or a substantial portion thereof shall be deemed an alteration and not regular maintenance. 
(b)  The board may, after hearing the evidence in any case properly before it involving reconstruction or alteration only, waive the requirements of this chapter upon a written finding that the application involves reconstruction or alteration only and will not materially affect the exterior appearance of the structure involved. Such decision of waiver shall constitute a final decision of the board within the meaning of sections 4-11 and 4-12 and shall be appealable. 
(Code 1962, § 17-2; Code 1969, § 4-8; Ord. of 4-19-1971; Ord. of 9-20-1971; Ord. of 6-2003)  
Sec. 4-9. - Same—Application for approval. 
(a)  Application for approval by the board for the construction, reconstruction, alteration or restoration of any building within an architectural control district shall be submitted to the zoning administrator of the Town accompanied by: 
(1)  An architectural rendering and plans of all buildings and structures showing style of architecture prepared by a registered architect. All colors, materials and finishes shall be shown by notation or by use of accepted architectural symbols; 
(2)  An approved site plan; and 
(3)  A vicinity map and renderings or photographs of all development on immediately adjacent properties. 
The applicant may submit such additional material in writing, and graphically, as he desires. For purposes of this chapter, no site plan shall be required where there is proposed no change in any external dimension or the location of any existing structure. The board may from time to time waive such other of the requirements of this subsection (a) as it may deem proper in the determination of any particular application. In cases where the application involves reconstruction or alteration only, and will not materially affect the exterior design or appearance, or result in an increase in the size, area, height, or lot coverage of any structure, building, or sign, the zoning administrator may waive such of the requirements of subsection (a)(1), (2), and (3) of this section, as he deems appropriate, and permit the applicant to supply information necessary to the board's consideration of the application in the form of photographs, descriptive product information material, sketches, drawings, and other written materials. Each application shall be accompanied by a check or cash payment to the Town in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees adopted by the Town and shall be assigned a docket number by the zoning administrator. 
(b)  Upon filing of an application, the zoning administrator, after determining that the requirements of subsection (a) of this section have been satisfied, shall within 20 days thereafter, forward the application, together with his recommendations on the same to the chair of the Board of Architectural Review. 
(c)  Upon receipt of any such application, the chair of the board shall thereupon place the application on the agenda for consideration at the first regular meeting of the architectural review to be held not less than ten days after such receipt by the chair. 
(Code 1962, § 17-5; Code 1969, § 4-9; Ord. of 4-1971; Ord. of 3-1988; Ord. of 6-2003)  
Sec. 4-10. - Same—Application hearing. 
During the consideration of an application filed under this chapter, the Board of Architectural Review shall hear the testimony of any party desiring to be heard in support of or in opposition to the application. Such testimony shall be strictly confined to the question of whether the proposed construction, reconstruction, alteration or restoration satisfies or does not satisfy the criteria for the same set out in this chapter. The board shall hear any oral testimony that the zoning administrator desires to present. 
(Code 1962, § 17-5; Code 1969, § 4-10)  
Sec. 4-11. - Same—Application decisions; certificate of approval. 
(a)  The Board of Architectural Review shall vote and publish its decision in writing on any matter properly before it not later than the next regular meeting after the conclusion of hearing evidence on the matter, unless time is extended by mutual agreement between the board and the applicant. 
(b)  In all final decisions rendered pursuant to this chapter, the board shall briefly state its findings in writing, and, in the case of disapproval, it may make recommendations to the applicant with respect to the design, texture, material, color, line, mass, dimension or lighting of the building involved. In case of disapproval, accompanied by such recommendations thereon, the applicant may again be heard before the board if, within 90 days, he can comply with all such recommendations of the board. 
(c)  Approval by the board of any application filed hereunder shall be evidenced by issuance of a certificate, signed by the chair and attested by the secretary, designating the docket number, name of applicant, date of approval, identification of property involved and a brief description of the construction approved. 
(Code 1962, § 17-5; Code 1969, § 4-11)  
Sec. 4-12. - Same—Appeals of decisions. 
Whenever the Board of Architectural Review shall, in a final decision, approve or disapprove, or waive jurisdiction over any application filed pursuant to this chapter, the applicant, or any other person with justifiable cause, shall be entitled to appeal such decision and be heard thereon before the Town Council; provided that there is filed with the Town clerk, on or before 14 days after the decision of the board, by the appellant, a notice in writing of such appeal and a fee of $125.00, or as otherwise set forth in the schedule of fees adopted by the Town, to cover the cost of advertising for the council hearing; provided, further, that whenever such notice of appeal is filed by a party other than the applicant, such notice shall be accompanied by a petition for such appeal in writing, signed by 20 electors of the Town. Upon the filing of notice of appeal as provided herein, the Town clerk shall thereupon schedule a public hearing before the Town Council, not more than 30 days after the filing of such notice; provided that no such hearing shall be had unless and until the Town clerk has caused to be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the county, at least seven days before such proposed hearing, an advertisement stating the time, date and place of the hearing before the council, the location of the property involved, the name of the applicant and the nature of the building for which approval is sought. 
(Code 1962, § 17-8; Code 1969, § 4-12; Ord. of 6-2003)  
Sec. 4-13. - Hearing before Town Council. 
On any appeal to the Town Council, the final decision of the Board of Architectural Review shall be stayed pending the decision of the Town Council. The council shall conduct a full and impartial public hearing on the matter before rendering any decision. The same procedure and standards shall be applied by the council as are established for the Board of Architectural Review. The council may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the board, in whole or in part. The decision of the council shall be final, subject to the provision of section 4-14. 
(Code 1962, § 17-9; Code 1969, § 4-13)  
Sec. 4-14. - Appeals to county circuit court. 
Parties aggrieved by the decision of the Town Council, rendered pursuant to section 4-13, shall have the right to appeal to the circuit court of the county for review by filing a petition, at law, setting forth the alleged illegality of the Town Council's action, provided that such petition is filed within 30 days after the final decision is rendered by the Town Council. The filing of the petition shall stay the council's decision pending the outcome of the appeal to the court. The court may reverse or modify the decision of the council, in whole or in part, if it finds upon review that the decision of the council is contrary to law, or that its decision is arbitrary and constitutes an abuse of discretion, or it may affirm the decision of the council. 
(Code 1962, § 17-10; Code 1969, § 4-14)  
Sec. 4-15. - Design criteria. 
The Board of Architectural Review, and, on appeal, the Town Council, shall use the following standards and criteria in considering applications filed under this chapter: 
(a)  Whether or not the proposed architectural design is suitable for a good suburban community in terms of external architectural features, including signs subject to public view, general design and arrangement, texture, color, line, mass, dimension, material and lighting. 
(b)  Whether or not the proposed structure, building or improvement is compatible with existing well-designed structures, acceptable to the board, in the vicinity and in the Town as whole. 
(c)  Whether or not, and to what extent, the proposed structure, building or improvement would promote the general welfare and protect the public health, safety and morals by tending to maintain or augment the Town's tax base as a whole, generating business activity, maintaining and creating employment opportunity, preserving historical sites and structures and making the Town a more attractive and desirable place in which to live. 
(d)  Whether or not proposed freestanding buildings use the same or architecturally harmonious materials, color, texture and treatment for all exterior walls; and in the case of partially freestanding buildings, whether or not the same or architecturally harmonious materials, color, texture and treatment are used on all portions of all exterior walls exposed to public view. 
(e)  Whether or not the combination of architectural elements proposed for a structure, building or improvement, in terms of design, line, mass, dimension, color, material, texture, lighting, landscaping and roofline and height conform to accepted architectural principles for permanent buildings as contrasted with engineering standards designed to satisfy safety requirements only; and exhibit external characteristics of demonstrated architecture and aesthetic durability. 
(f)  Whether or not, in terms of design, material, texture, color, lighting, landscaping, dimension, line, mass, or roofline and height, the proposed structure, building or improvement is designed to serve primarily as an advertisement or commercial display, exhibits exterior characteristics likely to deteriorate rapidly, would be of temporary or short-term architectural or aesthetic acceptability, would be plainly offensive to human sensibilities or would otherwise constitute a reasonable foreseeable detriment to the community. 
(Code 1962, § 17-7; Code 1969, § 4-15)  
Sec. 4-16. - No specific architectural style to be required. 
The Board of Architectural Review, and the Town Council on appeal, shall not adopt or impose any specific architectural style in the administration of this chapter. 
(Code 1962, § 17-7; Code 1969, § 4-16)  
Sec. 4-17. - Deviations from approved plans prohibited. 
Any person who, once having obtained the approval required by section 4-8, deviates substantially from the approved plan shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1962, § 17-12; Code 1969, § 4-17; Ord. of 7-1968)  
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of Town relative to building regulations, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-906, 15.2-908; uniform statewide building code, Code of Virginia, § 36-97 et seq.; Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, 13 VAC 5-63-10 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Fire districts established. 
The fire districts of the Town are hereby established as Fire District No. 1 and Fire District No. 2, and are hereby based on and related to the official zoning map of the Town and any amendment thereto: 
(a)  Fire District No. 1 shall consist of that area of the Town which is zoned: 
C-1A 	Special Commercial 
C-2 	General Commercial 
CM 	Limited Industrial 
CMP 	Industrial Park 
 
(b)  Fire District No. 2 shall include all of the areas zoned as follows: 
C-1 	Local Commercial 
RS-10 	Single-Family 
RS-12.5 	Single-Family 
RS-16 	Single-Family 
RM-2 	Multifamily 
RTH 	Townhouse 
T 	Transitional Zone 
 
(Code 1962, § 3-1; Code 1969, § 5-1)  
Sec. 5-2. - Effect of chapter. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter or in the building code adopted by this chapter shall be held to affect any zoning or sanitation provision of this Code or other ordinance adopted by the Town. 
(b)  Nothing is this chapter or in the building code adopted by this chapter shall be held to void any part of the Virginia Fire Hazard Act, Code of Virginia, §§ 27-65 to 27-85, as amended, or the rules and regulations promulgated under the authority of that Act. 
(Code 1962, § 3-2; Code 1969, § 5-2)  
ARTICLE 2. - BASIC BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 5-3. - Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, removal, placement, demolition, equipment and maintenance of buildings and structures, including permits and penalties, that certain building code known as the Fairfax County Building Code section 61-1-1 et seq., which includes the adoption of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, including standards and amendments as adopted by the Virginia State Board of Housing and Community Development as part of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code of which not less than two copies are filed and available in the office of the Town clerk and may be viewed during the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, inclusive, except holidays, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(Code 1969, § 5-3; Ord. of 5-23-2005)  
Sec. 5-4. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of the building code adopted by this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Administrative authority means the building official. 
Board of appeals means the county board of appeals as constituted in section 127 of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
Building official means the director of public works or his authorized agent and the county building inspector as authorized by the Town. 
Department of building inspection means the department of public works and the office of the building inspector of the county as authorized by the Town. 
Farm building means a building located or to be located on land used for agricultural purposes for use in the production and storage of agricultural products, the housing of farm animals and the housing and storage of tools, equipment and machinery used in agricultural operations, but not including such buildings or portions thereof which are used or are to be used for human habitation. 
Municipality, name of municipality or city means the Town of Vienna, Virginia. 
(Code 1962, § 3-3; Code 1969, § 5-4; Ord. of 5-23-2005)  
ARTICLE 3. - NUMBERING OF HOUSES 
 
Sec. 5-5. - Uniform system established; compliance with article. 
There is hereby established a uniform system of numbering houses and buildings fronting on all streets, avenues and public ways in the Town. All houses and buildings shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1962, § 9-1; Code 1969, § 5-5; Ord. of 3-7-1977)  
Sec. 5-6. - Assignment of numbers; use of numbers required; numbering map. 
There shall be assigned to each house and building located on any street, avenue, alley or highway in the Town, its respective number under the uniform system provided for in this article. When each house and building has been assigned its respective number, the owner, occupant or agent shall place or cause to be placed upon each house or building controlled by him the number assigned under the uniform system provided for in this article and in accordance with the Numbering Map of Vienna, approved March 17, 1958, together with all amendments subsequently adopted, filed in the office of the Town clerk. 
(Code 1962, § 9-2; Code 1969, § 5-6; Ord. of 3-7-1977)  
Sec. 5-7. - Placement of numbers. 
Each house or building number shall be placed within 20 days after the assigning of the proper number. The numbers shall be conspicuously placed immediately above, on or at the side of the proper door of each building so that the number can be seen plainly from the street. Whenever any building is situated more than 50 feet from the street line, the number of such building shall be conspicuously displayed at the street line, near the walk, driveway or common entrance to such building and upon the gatepost, fence, tree, post or other appropriate place so as to be easily discernible from the sidewalk. 
(Code 1962, § 9-3; Code 1969, § 5-7; Ord. of 3-7-1977)  
Sec. 5-8. - Multiple use of same number. 
Where only one number can be assigned to any house or building, the owner, occupant or agent of such house or building who shall desire distinctive numbers for the upper or lower portion of any such house or building, or for any part of such house or building, fronting on any street shall use the suffix A, B, C, etc. as may be required. 
(Code 1962, § 9-4; Code 1969, § 5-8; Ord. of 3-7-1977)  
Sec. 5-9. - Obtaining numbers for new buildings; number required prior to issuance of building permit. 
Whenever any house, building or structure shall be erected or located in the Town, in order to preserve the continuity and uniformity of numbers of the houses, buildings and structures, it shall be the duty of the owner to procure the correct number for the property as designated from the director of public works or his authorized agent, and immediately to fasten the number so assigned upon the building as provided by this article. No building permit shall be issued for any house, building or structure until the owner has procured from the director of public works or his authorized agent the official number of the premises. 
(Code 1962, § 9-5; Code 1969, § 5-9; Ord. of 3-7-1977)  
ARTICLE 4. - HEATING, AIR CONDITIONING, REFRIGERATION AND VENTILATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The sections of this article pertaining to heating, air conditioning, refrigeration and ventilation have been declared obsolete due to the adoption of the statewide building code. They have been deleted at the discretion of the Town. 
 
Secs. 5-10, 5-11. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 5. - PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 5-12. - Violation; penalties. 
Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter, or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding 12 months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1969, § 5-12; Ord. of 3-7-1977)  
Sec. 5-13. - Abatement of violation. 
The imposition of the penalties prescribed in section 5-12 shall not preclude the legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or use of a building or structure in or about any premises. 
(Code 1969, § 5-13; Ord. of 3-7-1977)  
Chapter 6 - FINANCE AND TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— General authority of town relative to taxes and assessments, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1104; taxation generally, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the Town shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30. 
(Code 1962, § 1-4; Code 1969, § 6-1)  
Sec. 6-1.1. - Fiscal control; establishment, operation, etc., of water system, sewer system, etc. 
The council shall have the power to control and manage the fiscal and municipal affairs of the Town and all property, real and personal, belonging to said Town, and to make such ordinances, orders and resolutions relating to the same as it may deem necessary. After the close of each fiscal year, the council shall cause to be made an independent audit of the accounts, books, records and financial transactions of the Town by the auditor of public accounts of the Commonwealth or by a firm of independent certified public accountants to be selected by the council. The report of such audit shall be filed within such time as the council shall specify and one copy thereof shall always be available for public inspection in the office of the clerk to the council during regular business hours. The council shall have the further power to purchase, hold, sell and convey all real and personal property, within or without the corporate limits, necessary for its use and purposes. 
(a)  The council shall have power and authority to acquire, or otherwise obtain control of or establish, maintain, operate, extend and enlarge waterworks, sewage disposal plants, gasworks, electric plants, and other public utilities within or without the limits of the Town; to acquire within or without the limits of the Town by purchase, condemnation, but insofar as such power of condemnation is exercised as to lands of a public service corporation, [provisions of section] 25-233 [of the Code of Virginia] shall be applicable, or otherwise, whatever land may be necessary for acquiring, locating, establishing, maintaining, operating, extending and enlarging said waterworks, sewage disposal plants, electric plants and other utilities, and the rights-of-way, rails, pipes, poles, conduits and wires connected therewith or any of the fixtures or appurtenances thereof; and promulgate and enforce reasonable rates, rules and regulations for use of same, any or all of which rates, rules and regulations the council may alter at any time without notice. 
(b)  In the event the fees, rents, or charges charged for the use and services of the public water system or sewage disposal system by, or in connection with any real estate, shall not be paid when due, interest shall at the time begin to accrue thereon at the rate and manner in compliance with Code of Virginia § 15.2-2119, as amended. Such fees, rents, charges and the interest due thereon shall constitute a lien, which shall rank on a parity with liens for unpaid Town or County taxes, against the property, which lien may be indexed and filed among the Judgment Records of the Circuit Court. Such fees, rents, charges and the interest due thereon also may be recovered by the Town of Vienna by action at law, or suit in equity. 
(c)  The council shall have the power and authority to require the owners or occupants of the real estate within the corporate limits of the Town which may front or abut on the line of any sewer or water pipe line or conduit to make connections therewith, and to use such sewer pipes and conduits and water furnished by the Town under such ordinances and regulations as the council may deem necessary to secure the proper service thereof and to improve and secure good sanitary conditions; and shall have the power to enforce the observance of all such ordinances and regulations by the imposition and collection of fines and penalties, to be collected as other fines and penalties under the provisions of this act. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2013, § 1; Ord. No. 2013-004, § 1, 6-3-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. of 6-3-2013, § 1, set out provisions intended to amend § 6.1. Inasmuch as said section did not exist, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 6-1.1.  
Sec. 6-2. - Form of budget. 
The form of the budget for the Town shall be the standard municipal budget form recommended by the auditor of public accounts of the state and the Virginia League of Municipalities. 
(Code 1962, § 1-5; Code 1969, § 6-2)  
Sec. 6-3. - Due date of real estate taxes; when same deemed delinquent; penalty for failure to pay taxes when due. 
(a)  All taxes assessed on real estate in the Town shall be due and payable to the Town treasurer, without discount, on or before July 28 of the year in which assessed, but may be paid in two equal installments, the first to be paid not later than July 28 and the last installment not later than December 5; but if the first installment of such real estate tax is not paid on or before July 28, the amount of such installment shall be delinquent as of that date, and if the second installment is not paid on or before December 5, the amount of such second installment shall be delinquent as of that date. Any payment made on real estate taxes after a penalty has accrued on the first half of the installment shall be applied first to the payment of the first half of the installment. 
(b)  To all real estate taxes that may be delinquent, there shall be added and collected as a part thereof a penalty as follows: on the first half of the installment, a penalty of ten percent, or the sum of $5.00, whichever is greater, if not paid on or before July 28, and on the second half of the installment, a penalty of ten percent, or the sum of $5.00, whichever is greater, if not paid on or before December 5. In addition to such penalties, interest of ten percent per annum shall be due on such taxes and penalties commencing not earlier than the first day following the day such taxes are due, until paid. 
(c)  All erroneously assessed taxes refunded by the Town pursuant to law shall be repaid with interest at a rate not to exceed the rate imposed by the Town for delinquent taxes. Such interest shall run from the date such taxes were required to be paid or were paid, whichever is later. Penalties collected with erroneously assessed taxes shall likewise be refunded with such repayment. 
(Code 1969, § 6-3; Ord. of 10-1973; Ord. of 6-1974; Ord. of 6-1975; Ord. of 4-1977; Ord. of 6-1980; Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 4-1990)  
Sec. 6-4. - Reserved.  
Sec. 6-4.1. - Tax relief for the elderly and handicapped—Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in sections 6-4.1 through 6-4.7, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Net combined financial worth means all assets of the owners of the dwelling and of the spouse of any owner who resides therein, including equitable interest, excluding the value of the dwelling and the land in an amount not to exceed one acre upon which it is situated and furnishings therein. 
Total combined income means gross income from all sources, of the owners of the dwelling residing therein and of any relatives of the owner who reside in the dwelling, provided that the $6,500.00 of income of each relative, other than the spouse, of the owners, who is living in the dwelling, and the first $7,500.00 of any income received by the applicant for relief as permanent disability compensation shall not be included in such total. 
(Code 1969, § 6-4.1; Ord. of 2-1974; Ord. of 2-1975; Ord. of 12-1982; Ord. of 2-1989)  
Sec. 6-4.2. - Same—Eligibility for exemption or deferral. 
(a)  Any person not less than 65 years of age by December 31 of the year preceding the date of application or any person permanently and totally disabled as provided in section 6-4.3.B, or any husband and wife of whom at least one spouse is not less than 65 or is permanently and totally disabled, who owns or partially owns a dwelling as the sole dwelling of that person, shall be eligible for and may apply for an exemption from or a deferral of real estate taxes on such dwelling and the land in an amount not to exceed one acre, on which it is situated, provided that the net combined financial worth as of December 31 of the immediately preceding year, did not exceed $340,000.00. 
(b)  Exemptions from or deferral of real estate taxes on such dwelling shall thereupon be permitted as follows: 
A.  Where total combined income was during the immediately preceding year at least $62,001.00 and not in excess of $72,000.00, such person shall be exempted from payment of 25 percent of the real estate tax. 
B.  Where total combined income was during the immediately preceding year at least $52,001.00 and not in excess of $62,000.00, such person shall be exempted from payment of 50 percent of the real estate tax. 
C.  Where total combined income was during the immediately preceding year less than $52,000.00, such person shall be exempted from payment of the total real estate tax. 
(Code 1969, § 6-4.2; Ord. of 2-1980; Ord. of 1-1981; Ord. of 1-1982; Ord. of 2-1989; Ord. of 12-1989; Ord. of 9-2002; Ord. of 12-2003; Ord. of 4-2005; Ord. of 12-2005)  
Sec. 6-4.3. - Same—Application for exemption or deferral; affidavit. 
A.  Application for exemption or deferral provided for herein shall be made not later than December 31 of each year for which exemption or deferral is sought, to the director of finance on forms to be provided by him, except that application for exemption because of permanent and total disability for tax year 1977 shall be made no later than September 1, 1977. The application shall be accompanied by an affidavit setting forth the names of all persons occupying such dwelling and stating that the total combined income, and the net combined financial worth, do not exceed the limitations set forth in section 6-4.2(b)A, B and C. The director of finance may require an applicant to answer questions under oath as to his requirements under sections 6-4.1 through 6-4.7 and/or to produce for inspection certified federal income tax returns for the preceding three years to establish the total combined income or net combined financial worth. 
B.  If the application is made by a person filing for exemption or deferral because of permanent and total disability, the application shall also be accompanied by a certification by the Veterans Administration or the Railroad Retirement Board, or if such person is not eligible for certification by any of these agencies, a sworn affidavit by two medical doctors licensed to practice medicine in the commonwealth to the effect that such person is permanently and totally disabled. The affidavit of at least one such doctor shall be based upon a physical examination of such person by such doctor. The affidavit of one of such doctors may be based upon medical information contained in the records of the Civil Service Commission which is relevant to the standards for determining permanent and total disability. The director of finance shall find a person permanently and totally disabled for purposes of this section if he finds such person is certified as required by this section as unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment or deformity which can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for the duration of such person's life. The director of finance may require an applicant to answer questions under oath, as may be reasonably necessary to determine qualification or to produce for inspection such medical or hospital records as may be reasonably necessary to determine the applicant's qualification. 
C.  The director of finance is authorized to accept late filing of applications hereunder when filed by first-time applicants and in any case where the director finds that the late filing was the result of a hardship case. 
(Code 1969, § 6-4.3; Ord. of 9-1977; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 2-1980; Ord. of 2-1989; Ord. of 2-1993; Ord. of 9-2002)  
Sec. 6-4.4. - Same—Effective date; change in circumstances. 
A.  Changes in income, financial worth, ownership of property or other factors occurring during the taxable year for which an affidavit is filed and having the effect of exceeding or violating the limitations and conditions provided herein shall nullify any exemption or deferral for the then-current taxable year and the taxable year immediately following. 
B.  A change in ownership to a spouse, when such change resulted solely from the death of the qualifying individual, or a sale of such property, shall result in a prorated exemption or deferral for the then-current taxable year. The proceeds of the sale which would result in the prorated exemptions or deferral shall not be included in the computation of net worth or income as provided in subsection A of this section. Such prorated portion shall be determined by multiplying the amount of the exemption or deferral by a fraction, wherein the number of complete months of the year such property was properly eligible for such exemption of deferral is the numerator, and the number 12 is the denominator. 
(Code 1969, § 6-4.4; Ord. of 2-1980; Ord. of 2-1989)  
Sec. 6-4.5. - Same—Amount of exemption or deferral. 
Real estate described in section 6-4.2 shall be exempt or deferred from real estate taxes under the provisions of sections 6-4.1 through 6-4.7, for any year in which proper application is made, unless application is made in 1977 for exemption because of permanent and total disability, in which case real estate described in section 6-4.2 shall be exempt from 50 percent of the real estate taxes for 1977; provided that if the ownership of the property for which application for exemption or deferral is made is not solely by the applicant, or jointly with the applicant's spouse, then the amount of the tax exemption or deferral hereunder shall be in proportion to the applicant's ownership interest in the subject real property, as that ownership interest may appear. 
(Code 1969, § 6-4.5; Ord. of 2-1980)  
Sec. 6-4.6. - Same—Deduction. 
The director of finance shall deduct the amount of exemption or deferral from the applicant's real estate tax bill for the year. 
(Code 1969, § 6-4.6; Ord. of 2-1980)  
Sec. 6-4.7. - Same—Absence from property. 
The fact that persons who are otherwise qualified for tax exemption or deferral by sections 6-4.1 through 6-4.7 are residing in hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent homes or other facilities for physical or mental care for extended periods of time shall not be construed to mean that the real estate for which tax exemption or deferral is sought does not continue to be the sole dwelling of such persons during such extended periods of other residence, so long as such real estate is not used by or leased to others for consideration. 
(Code 1969, § 6-4.7; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 2-1980)  
Sec. 6-5. - Lien for delinquent real estate taxes; certificate as to inability to collect taxes and levies. 
A.  Real estate taxes. Real estate within the Town shall be subject to a lien in favor of the Town to secure the payment of taxes assessed against the same. 
B.  Collection of delinquent taxes and levies. The Town treasurer, after using the due diligence to collect taxes and levies due the Town, shall, before the first regular meeting of the Town Council in July of each year, prepare a list of the taxes and levies which he has been unable to collect, which list the treasurer shall certify by oath as follows: 
"I, ___________, Treasurer of the Town of Vienna, after having been duly sworn, do certify that I have used due diligence to collect the foregoing taxes and levies and that I have been unable to collect them." 
Such certificate shall be acknowledged before an officer qualified to administer oaths. 
(Code 1962, § 2-11; Code 1969, § 6-5)  
Sec. 6-6. - Certificates of unpaid taxes. 
A.  The Town treasurer shall issue, to any applicant therefor, a certificate setting forth the entire amount of unpaid taxes assessed against any real estate within the Town, by or on behalf of the Town, up to and including the last day of the calendar month preceding the date of the certificate. 
B.  A separate certificate shall be issued for each separate piece of property as the same appears upon the current tax records of the Town. A fee of $1.00 shall be charged for each certificate. 
C.  The facts as set forth in each certificate shall be binding upon the Town. No taxes other than those reported as unpaid in the certificate shall thereafter constitute a lien upon the real estate referred to in the certificate. 
D.  The certificates provided for herein shall be designated "Certificates of Unpaid Taxes" and shall be substantially in the following form: 
I hereby certify that the records in the office of the treasurer for the Town of Vienna, Virginia, show that all Town taxes due against the following property known as Lot _____, Block _____, Subdivision _____, on the Town of Vienna tax records and currently assessed in the name of _____, are paid in full to _____, with the exception of the following _____: 

_____
 Treasurer 	
 
(Code 1962, § 2-12; Code 1969, § 6-6)  
Sec. 6-7. - Tax on net capital of banks—Located in Town. 
A.  There is hereby imposed a tax in the amount of 80 percent of the state rate of taxation on each $100.00 of net capital of any bank located within the Town. 
B.  If any such bank described in subsection A of this section has a branch located outside the Town, the tax imposed shall be upon such proportion of the taxable value of the net capital as the total deposits of the bank or offices located in the Town bear to the total deposits of the bank as of the end of the preceding year. 
(Code 1962, § 2-13; Code 1969, § 6-7; Ord. of 4-21-1980) 
State Law reference— Bank franchise tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1200 et seq.; tax by city on banks within jurisdiction, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1208.  
Sec. 6-8. - Same—Branch located in Town. 
There is hereby imposed on the branch of any bank whose principal office is located outside the Town, a tax not to exceed 80 percent of the state rate of taxation on such proportion of the taxable value of the net capital in such bank as the deposits through the branch so located in the Town bear to the total deposits of the bank as of the beginning of the tax year. 
(Code 1969, § 6-8; Ord. of 6-1980)  
ARTICLE 2. - UTILITY TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to impose consumers' tax on water, heat, light and power services, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814. 
 
Sec. 6-9. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
CCF means the volume of gas at standard pressure and temperature in units of 100 cubic feet. 
Consumer means every person who, individually or through agents, employees, officers, representatives or permittees, makes a taxable purchase of electricity or natural gas services in the Town. 
Gas utility means a public utility authorized to furnish natural gas service in the commonwealth. 
Kilowatt hours (kWh) delivered means 1000 watts of electricity delivered in a one-hour period by an electric provider to an actual consumer, except that in the case of eligible customer-generators (sometimes called cogenerators) as defined in Code of Virginia, § 56-594, it means kWh supplied from the electric grid to such customer-generators, minus the kWh generated and fed back to the electric grid by such customer-generators. 
Person means any individual, corporation, company or other entity. 
Pipeline distribution company means a person, other than a pipeline transmission company, which transmits, by means of a pipeline, natural gas, manufactured gas or crude petroleum and the products or byproducts thereof to a purchaser for purposes of furnishing heat or light. 
Residential consumer means the owner or tenant of property used primarily for residential purposes, including, but not limited to, apartment houses and other multiple-family dwellings. 
Service provider means a person who delivers electricity to a consumer or a gas utility or pipeline distribution company which delivers natural gas to a consumer. 
Used primarily relates to the larger portion of the use for which electric or natural gas utility service is furnished. 
(Code 1969, § 6-9; Ord. of 1-1976; Ord. of 9-25-2000)  
Sec. 6-10. - Electric utility consumer tax. 
A.  Imposition, levy of tax. In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of electricity delivered to consumers by a service provider, classified as determined by such provider, as follows: 
1.  Residential consumers. Such tax shall be $1.40 plus the rate of $0.015111 on each kWh delivered monthly to residential consumers by a service provider not to exceed $3.00 monthly. 
2.  Nonresidential consumers. Such tax on nonresidential consumers shall be at the rates per month for the classes of nonresidential consumers as set forth below: 
(i)  Commercial consumers. Such tax shall be $1.72 plus the rate of $0.010206 on each kWh delivered monthly to commercial consumers, not to exceed $45.00 monthly. 
(ii)  Industrial consumers. Such tax shall be $1.72 plus the rate of $0.010206 on each kWh delivered monthly to industrial consumers, not to exceed $45.00 monthly. 
(iii)  Master metered units with residential use. Such tax per unit shall be $1.40 plus the rate of $0.015111 on each kWh delivered monthly to master metered dwelling units by a service provider, not to exceed $3.00 per unit monthly. 
B.  Exemptions. The following consumers of electricity are exempt from the tax imposed by this section. 
1.  Any public safety agency as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3813. 
2.  The United States of America, the commonwealth and the political subdivisions thereof, including this jurisdiction. 
C.  Billing, collection and remittance of tax. 
1.  The service provider shall bill the electricity consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers electricity and shall remit the same to this jurisdiction on a monthly basis. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to this jurisdiction in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814(F) and (G), and Code of Virginia, § 58.1-2901. If any consumer receives and pays for electricity but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify the Town of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and, upon collection of the bill or any part thereof, must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for electric service and the tax and remit the tax portion to the Town. 
2.  Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to the Town. 
3.  In the case of multiple-unit housing projects, including, but not limited to, apartments or condominiums, served by a master meter or by a central plant, the computation of tax shall be made as though each living unit in the project were separately billed or separately metered and billed. 
D.  Computation of bills not on monthly basis. Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this section if submitted 12 times per year of approximately one month each. Accordingly, the tax for a bi-monthly bill (approximately 60 days) shall be determined as follows: 
(i)  The kWh will be divided by two; 
(ii)  A monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth in this section; 
(iii)  The tax determined by subsection D(ii) of this section shall be multiplied by two; 
(iv)  The tax in subsection D(iii) of this section may not exceed twice the monthly maximum tax. 
(Code 1969, § 6-10; Ord. of 9-25-2000; Ord. of 2-5-2001)  
Sec. 6-11. - Local natural gas utility consumer tax. 
A.  Imposition, levy of tax. In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of natural gas delivered to consumers by pipeline distribution companies and gas utilities classified by class of consumers as such term is defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814 J., as follows: 
1.  Residential consumers. Such tax on residential consumers of natural gas shall be $1.40 plus at the rate of $.18356 on CCF delivered monthly to residential consumers, not to exceed $3.00 per month. 
2.  Nonresidential consumers. Such tax on nonresidential consumers shall be at the rates per month shown for each CCF delivered by a pipeline distribution company or a gas utility for the classes as set forth below: 
(i)  Commercial consumers. Such tax shall be $1.27 plus the rate of $.10760 on each CCF up to 125 CCF delivered and $.09905 on each CCF delivered in excess of 125 CCF, not to exceed $45.00 monthly. 
(ii)  Industrial consumers. Such tax shall be $1.27 plus the rate of $.10760 on each CCF up to 125 CCF delivered and $.09905 on each CCF delivered in excess of 125 CCF, not to exceed $45.00 monthly. 
B.  Exemptions. The following consumers of natural gas shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section: 
1.  Any public safety agency as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3813. 
2.  The United States of America, the commonwealth and the political subdivisions thereof, including this jurisdiction. 
C.  Billing, collection and remittance of tax. 
1.  The service provider shall bill the natural gas consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers natural gas and shall remit the same to this jurisdiction on a monthly basis. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to this jurisdiction in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814(H) and (I), and Code of Virginia, § 58.1-2901. If any consumer receives and pays for natural gas billed but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify the Town of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and, upon collection of the bill or any part thereof, must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for electric service and the tax and remit the tax portion to the Town. 
2.  Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to the Town. 
3.  In the case of multiple-unit housing projects, including, but not limited to, apartments or condominiums, served by a master meter or by a central plant, the computation of tax shall be made as though each living unit in the project were separately billed or separately metered and billed. 
D.  Computation of bills not on monthly basis. Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this section if submitted 12 times per year of approximately one month each. Accordingly, the tax for a bi-monthly bill (approximately 60 days) shall be determined as follows: 
(i)  The CCF will be divided by two; 
(ii)  A monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth in this section; 
(iii)  The tax determined by subsection D(ii) of this section shall be multiplied by two; 
(iv)  The tax in subsection D(iii) of this section may not exceed twice the monthly maximum tax. 
(Code 1969, § 6-11; Ord. of 9-25-2000; Ord. of 2-5-2001)  
Sec. 6-12. - Penalties. 
Any consumer of electricity or natural gas failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the tax imposed and levied under sections 6-10 and 6-11, and any officer, agent or employee of any service provider violating the provisions of sections 6-10 and 6-11 shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Each such failure, refusal, neglect or violation shall constitute a separate offense. Such conviction shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection and remittance of the tax as provided in sections 6-10 and 6-11. 
(Code 1969, § 6-12; Ord. of 9-25-2000)  
Sec. 6-13. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in section 6-14, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Local telecommunication service, subject to the exclusions stated in this section and section 6-14, includes, without limitation, the two-way local transmission of messages through use of switched local telephone services; telegraph services; or teletypewriter. 
Local telephone service, subject to the exclusions stated in this section and section 6-14, includes any service subject to federal taxation as local telephone service as that term is defined in section 4252 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or any successor statute. 
Residential consumer shall not include any consumer of mobile local telecommunication service. 
Service address means the location of the telecommunication equipment from which the telecommunication is originated, or at which the telecommunication is received by a consumer. However, if the service address is not a defined location, as in the case of maritime systems, air-to-ground systems and the like, the term "service address" shall mean the location of the subscriber's primary use of the telecommunication equipment within the licensed service area. 
Service provider means every person engaged in the business of selling local telecommunication services to consumers. 
Utility service means local service and local telecommunication service, whether generally termed a utility service or not, furnished in the Town. 
(Code 1969, § 6-13; Ord. of 4-21-2003)  
Sec. 6-14. - Levy of tax; amount; computation of bill generally. 
A.  There is hereby imposed and levied by the Town, upon each and every purchaser of a utility service, a tax in the amount of 20 percent for residential users and 15 percent for commercial users of the charge (exclusive of any federal tax thereon), made by the seller against the purchaser with respect to each utility service, and shall be paid by the purchaser unto the seller for the use of the Town at the time the purchase price or such charge shall become due and payable under the agreement between the purchaser and seller; provided that in case any monthly bill submitted by a seller for telephone service shall exceed $15.00 for a residential user, there shall be no tax computed on so much of such bill as shall exceed $15.00. 
B.  In case any monthly bill submitted by any seller for a commercial or industrial user of telephone service shall exceed $300.00, there shall be no tax computed on so much of the bill as shall exceed $300.00. In case a bill is submitted by the seller for purchases made by the user during periods of greater than one month, then the amount of such bill subject to taxation hereunder shall be the amount in which a bill for the subject utility shall be taxed in a single month multiplied by the number of months for which the bill is submitted. Bills shall be considered monthly bills if submitted 12 times per year for periods of approximately one month each. 
(Code 1969, § 6-14; Ord. of 4-21-2003)  
Sec. 6-15. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 6-15, pertaining to local mobile telecommunication tax, has been deleted at the discretion of the Town.  
ARTICLE 3. - CIGARETTE TAX 
 
Sec. 6-16. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Board or NVCTB means the Northern Virginia Cigarette Tax Board. 
Carton means any container, regardless of material used in its construction, in which packages of cigarettes are placed. 
Cigarette means and includes any roll of any size or shape for smoking, whether filtered or unfiltered, with or without a mouthpiece, made wholly or partly of cut, shredded or crimped tobacco or other plant or substitute for tobacco, whether the same is flavored, adulterated or mixed with another ingredient, if the wrapper or cover is made of any material other than leaf tobacco or homogenized leaf tobacco, regardless of whether the roll is labeled or sold as a cigarette or by any other name. 
Cigarette machine operator means any individual, partnership or corporation engaged in the sale of packages of cigarettes from vending machines. 
Dealer means and includes every manufacturer's representative, wholesaler, retailer, cigarette machine operator, public warehouseman or other person who shall sell, receive, store, possess, distribute or transport cigarettes within or into the Town. 
Package means and includes any container, regardless of the material used in its construction, in which separate cigarettes are placed without such cigarettes being placed into any container within the package. Packages are those containers of cigarettes from which they are consumed by their ultimate user. Ordinarily a package contains 20 cigarettes; however, the term "package" includes those containers in which fewer or more than 20 cigarettes are placed. 
Person means and includes any individual, firm, unincorporated association, company, corporation, joint stock company, group, agency, syndicate, trust or trustee, receiver, fiduciary, partnership and conservator. The term "person" as applied to a partnership, unincorporated association or other joint venture means the partners or members thereof; and as applied to a corporation, includes all the officers and directors thereof. 
Place of business means and includes any place where cigarettes are sold, placed, stored, offered for sale or displayed for sale or where cigarettes are brought or kept for the purpose of sale, consumption or distribution, including vending machines, by a dealer within the Town. 
Registered agent means and includes every dealer and other person who shall be required to report and collect the tax on cigarettes under the provisions of this article. 
Retail dealer means and includes every person who, in the usual course of business, purchases or receives cigarettes from any source whatsoever for the purpose of sale within the Town to the ultimate consumer; or any person who, in the usual course of business owns, leases or otherwise operates within his own place of business, one or more cigarette vending machines for the purpose of sale within the Town of cigarettes to the ultimate consumer; or any person who, in any manner, buys, sells, stores, transfers or deals in cigarettes for the purpose of sale within the Town to the ultimate consumer, who is not licensed as a wholesaler or vending machine operator. 
Sale or sell means and includes every act or transaction, regardless of the method or means employed, including barter, exchange or the use of vending machines or other mechanical devices or a criminal or tortuous act whereby either ownership or possession, or both, of any cigarettes shall be transferred within the Town from a dealer to any other person for a consideration. 
Stamp means a small gummed piece of paper or decal used to evidence provision for payment of the tax as authorized by the Northern Virginia Cigarette Tax Board, required to be affixed to every package of cigarettes sold, distributed, or used within the Town. 
Store or storage means and includes the keeping or retention of cigarettes in the Town for any purpose except sale in the regular course of business. 
Use means and includes the exercise of any right or power over any cigarettes or packages of cigarettes incident to the ownership or possession of those cigarettes or packages of cigarettes including any transaction where possession is given or received or otherwise transferred, other than a sale. 
User means any person who exercises any right or power over any cigarettes or packages of cigarettes subject to the provisions of this article incident to the ownership or possession of those cigarettes or packages of cigarettes or any transaction where possession is given or received or otherwise transferred, other than a sale. 
Wholesale dealers means any individual, partnership or corporation engaged in the sale of packages of cigarettes for resale into or within the Town. 
(Code 1969, § 6-16; Ord. of 7-1978; Ord. of 6-1984; Ord. of 7-1984; Ord. of 11-2005)  
Sec. 6-17. - Levy and rate. 
In addition to all other taxes of every kind now or hereafter imposed by law, there is hereby levied and imposed by the Town upon every person who sells or uses cigarettes within the Town an excise tax at a rate of $0.85 for each package containing 20 cigarettes and $0.0425 for each cigarette contained in packages of fewer or more than 20 cigarettes sold or used within the Town. The tax shall be paid and collected in the manner and at the time hereinafter prescribed; provided that the tax payable for each cigarette or cigarette package sold or used within the Town shall be paid but once. 
(Code 1969, § 6-17; Ord. of 6-18-1970; Ord. of 7-1978; Ord. of 6-1979; Ord. of 6-1984; Ord. of 7-1984; Ord. of 6-1990; Ord. of 6-1993; Ord. of 6-2002; Ord. of 6-2003; Ord. of 11-2005; Ord. of 7-2007; Ord. of 6-5-17 , § 1)  
Sec. 6-18. - Methods of collection. 
A.  The tax imposed by this article shall be evidenced by the use of a tax stamp and shall be paid by each dealer or other person liable for the tax under a reporting method deemed by the board to carry out the provisions of this article. The stamps shall be affixed in such a manner that their removal will require continued application of water or steam. Each dealer or other person liable for the tax is hereby required, and it shall be his duty, to collect, pay the tax and report all packages of cigarettes on forms prescribed for this purpose by the board: 
(1)  The quantity of NVCTB stamped cigarettes sold or delivered to: 
(a)  Each registered agent appointed by the board for which no tax was collected; 
(b)  Each manufacturer's representative; and 
(c)  Each separate person and place of business during the preceding calendar or fiscal month; 
(2)  The quantity of NVCTB stamps on hand, both affixed and unaffixed on the first and the last day of the preceding calendar or fiscal month and the quantity of NVCTB stamps or NVCTB stamped cigarettes received during the preceding calendar or fiscal month; 
(3)  The quantity of cigarettes on hand to which the NVCTB stamp had not been affixed on the first and the last day of the preceding calendar or fiscal month and the quantity of cigarettes received during the preceding calendar or fiscal month to which the NVCTB stamp had not been affixed; and 
(4)  Such further information as the administrator for the board may require for the proper administration and enforcement of this article for the determination of the exact number of cigarettes in the possession of each dealer or user. 
B.  Each dealer or other person liable for the tax shall file such reports with the board and pay the tax due to the board prior to the due date, and shall furnish copies of all cigarette tax reports submitted to the state department of taxation. 
C.  When, upon examination and audit of any invoices, records, books, cancelled checks or other memoranda touching on the purchase, sale, receipt, storage or possession of tobacco products taxed herein, any dealer or other person liable for the tax is unable to furnish evidence to the board of sufficient tax payments and stamp purchases to cover cigarettes which were sold, used, stored, received, purchased or possessed by him, the prima facie presumption shall arise that such cigarettes were received, sold, used, stored, purchased or possessed by him without the proper tax having been paid. The board shall, from the results of such examination and audit based upon such direct or indirect information available, assess the tax due, impose a penalty of ten percent and may impose interest of 0.75 percent per month of the gross tax due. 
D.  When any dealer or other person liable for the tax files a false or fraudulent report or fails to file a report or fails to perform any act or performs any act to evade payment of the tax, the board shall administratively assess the tax due and impose a penalty not to exceed 50 percent of the tax due and interest of 0.75 percent per month of the gross tax due. 
E.  The dealer or other person liable for the tax shall be notified by certified mail of such deficiency and such tax, penalty and interest assessed shall be due and payable within ten days after notice of such deficiency has been issued. Every dealer or other person liable for the tax shall examine each package of cigarettes to ensure that the NVCTB stamp has been affixed thereto prior to offering them for sale. 
F.  Any dealer or other person liable for the tax who shall receive cigarettes not bearing the NVCTB stamp shall, within one hour of receipt of such cigarettes, commence and with all reasonable diligence continue to affix the NVCTB stamp to each and every package of cigarettes until all unstamped packages of cigarettes have been stamped and before offering such cigarettes for sale. Any dealer or other person liable for the tax who has notified the board that he is engaged in interstate or intrastate business shall be permitted to set aside such part of his stock as may be legally kept for the conduct of such interstate or intrastate business (that is, cigarettes held for sale outside the jurisdiction of the board) without affixing the stamps required by this article. Any such interstate or intrastate stock shall be kept entirely separate and apart from the NVCTB stamped stock, in such a manner as to prevent the co-mingling of the interstate or intrastate stock with the NVCTB stock. Any dealer or other person liable for the tax found to have had untaxed cigarettes which have been lost, whether by negligence, theft, or any other unaccountable loss, shall be liable for and shall pay the tax due thereon. 
G.  It shall also be the duty of each dealer or other person liable for the tax to maintain and keep for a period of three years, not including the current calendar year, records of all cigarettes received, sold, stored, possessed, transferred or handled by him in any manner whatsoever, whether the same were stamped or unstamped, to make all such records available for audit, inspection and examination at all reasonable times, as well as the means, facilities and opportunity for making such audit, inspection or examination upon demand of the board. 
(Code 1969, § 6-18; Ord. of 7-1978; Ord. of 11-2005)  
Sec. 6-19. - Registered agents. 
(a)  Any dealer or other person liable for the tax who shall sell, use, store, possess, distribute, or transport cigarettes within or into the Town, shall first make application to the board to qualify as a registered agent. Such application blank, which shall be supplied upon request, shall require such information relative to the nature of the business engaged in by said applicant as the board deems necessary for the administration and enforcement of this article. There is a yearly registration fee for all wholesale dealers and all cigarette machine operators. The applicant shall provide a surety bond to the board of 150 percent of his average monthly tax liability with a surety company authorized to do business in the commonwealth. Such bond shall be so written that, on timely payment of the premium thereon, it shall continue in force from year to year. Any applicant whose place of business is outside the Town shall automatically, by filing his application, submit himself to the board's legal jurisdiction and appoint the administrator for the board as his agent for any service of lawful process. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the properly completed required application forms, and the required surety bond executed, the board shall determine whether the said applicant qualifies to be a registered agent. The board will issue to said qualified applicant a yearly registered agent permit to qualify him to purchase, sell, use, store, possess, distribute or transport within or into the Town, NVCTB stamped cigarettes. 
(c)  Registered agents shall agree to the reporting and payment requirements placed upon him by this article and the rules and regulations as from time to time may be promulgated by the board. When any registered agent's monthly report and payment of the tax is not received within the dates prescribed, the board shall impose a late reporting penalty of ten percent of the gross tax due or $10.00, whichever is greater, but in no event more than $1,000.00. The board also may require such registered agent to provide proof that he has complied with all applicable laws of the commonwealth to legally conduct such business and to file financial statements showing all assets and liabilities. The board may revoke or suspend any registered agent's permit due to failure to file tax reports in a timely manner, nonpayment of taxes due, or if the cigarette tax surety bond should become impaired for any reason. 
(d)  All money collected as cigarette taxes under this article shall be deemed to be held in trust by the dealer collecting the same until remitted to the board. 
(e)  Registered agents must account for all NVCTB authorized tax stamps purchased. Periodic audits may be conducted to determine any unaccounted variance between the number of stamps purchased and the number of stamps reported, and an assessment will be made for all unaccounted for stamps. Any assessment of registered agents located outside the jurisdictions of the board will be based upon the average sales of packages of cigarettes by jurisdiction during the audit period. For registered agents located within the jurisdiction of the board, any assessment will be based upon the tax rate of the jurisdiction in which they are located. In addition, there will be a penalty for non-reporting of ten percent of the gross tax due. 
(Code 1969, § 6-19; Ord. of 7-1978; Ord. of 6-1984; Ord. of 7-1984; Ord. of 11-2005)  
Sec. 6-20. - Requirements for retail dealers. 
(a)  Retail dealers who shall sell, offer for sale, store, possess, distribute, purchase, receive or transport cigarettes for the purpose of sale within the Town shall purchase cigarettes only from registered agents giving or supplying the business trade name and business address of the location where the cigarettes will be placed for sale to the public. Cigarettes purchased for personal use cannot be brought into a business for resale. Only properly registered and licensed retail stores may sell cigarettes to the public. To be properly registered and licensed, a retail store must first have a valid state sales and use tax certificate and valid retail business license. Cigarettes must be purchased and stored separately for each business location. All copies of cigarette purchase invoices/receipts must be retained by the retailer for a period of three years and shall be made available to agents of the NVCTB upon request for use in conducting audits and investigations. All copies of cigarette purchase invoices/receipts must be stored at the business retail location for a period of one year from date of purchase. Failure to provide cigarette invoices/receipts may result in confiscation of cigarettes until receipts can be reviewed by the board to verify the proper tax has been paid. It is the responsibility of each retail location to ensure that all cigarettes placed for sale or stored at that location be properly taxed and stamped. Cigarettes found without the NVCTB stamp or the proper jurisdictional tax paid will be seized by the agents of the board. 
(b)  Retail dealers must make their place of business available for inspection by tobacco revenue agents to ensure that all cigarettes are properly tax-stamped and all cigarette taxes are properly paid. 
(Code 1969, § 6-20; Ord. of 7-1978; Ord. of 6-1984; Ord. of 7-1984; Ord. of 11-2005)  
Sec. 6-21. - Presumption of illegality; seizure of contraband goods, sealing/seizing of machines. 
(a)  If any cigarette machine operator or other person liable for the tax imposed by this article is found to possess any cigarettes without the jurisdictional tax paid or the proper tax stamp affixed, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that any such operator or other person shall be in possession of untaxed cigarettes in violation of this article. 
(b)  If any cigarettes are placed in any vending machines within the Town, then there shall be a rebuttable presumption that such cigarettes were placed in that machine for sale within the Town. If any vending machine located within the Town contains cigarettes upon which the NVCTB tax stamp has not been affixed or on which the jurisdictional tax has not been paid or containing cigarettes placed so as to not allow visual inspection of the NVCTB tax stamp through the viewing area as provided for by the vending machine manufacturer, then there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the machine contains untaxed cigarettes in violation of this article. 
(c)  Any cigarettes, vending machines, cigarette tax stamps, or other property found in violation of this article shall be declared contraband goods and may be seized by the board. In addition to any tax due, the dealer or other person liable for the tax possessing such untaxed cigarettes or tax stamps shall be subject to civil and criminal penalties herein provided. 
(d)  In lieu of seizure, the board may seal such vending machines to prevent continued illegal sale or removal of such cigarettes. The removal of such seal from a vending machine by any unauthorized person shall be a violation of this article. Nothing in this article shall prevent the seizure of any vending machine at any time after it is sealed. 
(e)  All cigarette vending machines shall be plainly marked with the name, address and telephone number of the owner of said machine. 
(Code 1969, § 6-21; Ord. of 7-1978; Ord. of 11-2005)  
Sec. 6-22. - Illegal acts. 
1.  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any dealer or other person liable for the tax: 
A.  To perform any act or fail to perform any act for the purpose of evading the payment of any tax imposed by this article or of any part thereof, or to fail or refuse to perform any of the duties imposed upon him under the provisions of this article or to fail or refuse to obey any lawful order which may be issued under this article; 
B.  To falsely or fraudulently make, or cause to be made, any invoices or reports, or to falsely or fraudulently forge, alter or counterfeit any stamp, or to procure or cause to be made, forged, altered or counterfeited any such stamp, or knowingly and willfully to alter, publish, pass or tender as true any false, altered, forged or counterfeited stamp or stamps; 
C.  To sell, offer for sale, or distribute any cigarettes upon which the NVCTB tax stamp has not been affixed or upon which the jurisdictional tax has not been paid; 
D.  To possess, store, use, authorize or approve the possession, storage or use of any cigarette packages upon which the NVCTB tax stamp has not been affixed or upon which the jurisdictional tax has not been paid; 
E.  To transport, authorize or approve the transportation of any cigarette packages in quantities of more than 60 packages into or within the Town upon which the NVCTB tax stamp has not been affixed or upon which the jurisdictional tax has not been paid, if they are: 
(1)  Not accompanied by a receipt/bill of lading or other document indicating the true name and address of the consignor or seller and the consignee or purchaser and the brands and quantity of cigarettes transported; 
(2)  Accompanied by a receipt/bill of lading or other document which is false or fraudulent in whole or part; 
(3)  Accompanied by a receipt/bill of lading or other document indicating: 
(i)  A consignee or purchaser in another state or the District of Columbia who is not authorized by the law of such other jurisdiction to receive or possess such tobacco products on which the taxes imposed by such other jurisdiction have not been paid unless the tax on the jurisdiction of destination has been paid and said cigarettes bear the tax stamps of that jurisdiction; 
(ii)  A consignee or purchaser in the commonwealth but outside the taxing jurisdiction who does not possess a state sales and use tax certificate and, where applicable, any licenses issued by the commonwealth or local jurisdiction of destination; 
F.  To reuse or refill with cigarettes any package from which cigarettes have been removed, for which the tax imposed has been theretofore paid; 
G.  To remove from any package any stamp with intent to use or cause the same to be used after the same has already been used or to buy, sell, or offer for sale or give away any used, removed, altered or restored stamps to any person, or to reuse any stamp which had theretofore been used for evidence of the payment of any tax prescribed by this article or to sell, or offer to sell, any stamp provided for herein; 
H.  To sell, offer for sale or distribute any loose or single cigarettes; or 
I.  To perform any act that violates the resolutions promulgated by the board. 
2.  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person or individual to transport, possess, store, use authorize or approve the possession, storage or use of any cigarettes in quantities of more than 60 packages upon which the NVCTB tax stamp has not been affixed or upon which the jurisdictional tax has not been paid. 
(Code 1969, § 6-22; Ord. of 7-1978; Ord. of 11-2005)  
Sec. 6-23. - Establishment of the Northern Virginia Cigarette Tax Board. 
(a)  The resolution adopted by the Town Council, dated June 15, 1970, pertaining to the establishment of the Northern Virginia Cigarette Tax Board, is hereby continued in effect and made a part of this article by reference. 
(b)  Any inconsistencies between the powers granted to the board in the resolution adopted by the Town Council, dated June 15, 1970, and herein incorporated by reference and the powers granted to the board in section 6-24 shall be resolved in favor of those provisions in section 6-24. 
(c)  The board's fiscal year shall be from July 1 through June 30. 
(Code 1969, § 6-23; Ord. of 7-1978; Ord. of 11-2005)  
Sec. 6-24. - Powers of the Northern Virginia Cigarette Tax Board. 
The board may delegate any of its powers to its administrator or employees and may adopt regulations regarding the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
A.  The board shall be granted the following powers: 
(1)  To assess, collect and disburse the cigarette tax for each participating jurisdiction; 
(2)  To audit sales of cigarettes for each participating jurisdiction; 
(3)  To provide information to commonwealth's attorneys or Town attorney for each participating jurisdiction; 
(4)  To designate an administrator; 
(5)  To manage the Northern Virginia Cigarette Tax Fund; 
(6)  To retain a certified public accountant to audit its books; 
(7)  To designate a depository bank or banks; 
(8)  To contract with member jurisdictions for administrative services; 
(9)  To hold and convey real and personal property; 
(10)  To enter into contracts; 
(11)  To hire, supervise and discharge its own employees; 
(12)  To sue and be sued in its own name; 
(13)  To prescribe the design of a stamp and to issue and sell said stamp to authorized dealers; 
(14)  To establish different classes of taxpayers; 
(15)  To promulgate resolutions for the assessment and collection of cigarette taxes and the enforcement of this article; and 
(16)  To conduct inspections of any place of business in order to enforce the provisions of this article and all resolutions of the board. 
B.  The board may employ legal counsel, bring appropriate court action in its own name to enforce payment of the cigarette tax or penalties owed and file tax liens against property of taxpayers hereunder. 
C.  The board is authorized to enter into an agreement with the state department of taxation under which a registered agent with the NVCTB who is also qualified to purchase Virginia Revenue Stamps may qualify to purchase dual Virginia-NVCTB stamps from the state department of taxation. Authority to purchase dual Virginia-NVCTB stamps is granted solely by the board and may be revoked or suspended for violations of this article or resolutions adopted by the board. 
D.  The board may appoint certain employees as tobacco revenue agents, who shall be required to carry proper identification while performing their duties. Tobacco revenue agents are further authorized to conduct inspections of any place of business and shall have the power to seize or seal any vending machines, seize any cigarettes, counterfeit stamps or other property found in violation of this article and shall have the power of arrest upon reasonable and probable cause that a violation of this article has been committed. The board is authorized to provide its tobacco revenue agents with: 
(1)  Firearms for their protection; 
(2)  Emergency-equipped vehicles while on duty; and 
(3)  Other equipment deemed necessary and proper. 
E.  The board may exchange information relative to the sale, use, transportation or shipment of cigarettes with an official of any other jurisdiction entrusted with the enforcement of the cigarette tax laws of said other jurisdiction. 
(Code 1969, § 6-24; Ord. of 7-1978; Ord. of 11-2005)  
Sec. 6-25. - Jeopardy assessment. 
If the administrator for the board determines that the collection of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid under this article will be jeopardized by the delay, he shall make an assessment of the tax or amount of tax required to be collected and shall mail or issue a notice of such assessment to the taxpayer together with a demand for immediate payment of the tax or of the deficiency in tax declared to be in jeopardy including penalties and interest. In the case of a current period, for which the tax is in jeopardy, the administrator may declare the taxable period of the taxpayer immediately terminated and shall cause notice of such finding and declaration to be mailed or issued to the taxpayer together with a demand for immediate payment of the tax based on the period declared terminated, and such tax shall be immediately due and payable, whether or not the terms otherwise allowed by this article for filing a return and paying the tax has expired. 
(Code 1969, § 6-25; Ord. of 7-1978; Ord. of 11-2005)  
Sec. 6-26. - Erroneous assessment: notices and hearings in the event of sealing of vending machines or seizure of contraband property. 
(a)  Any person assessed by the board with a cigarette tax, penalties and interest or any person whose cigarettes, vending machines and other property have been sealed or seized under processes of this article, who has been aggrieved by such assessment, seizure, or sealing may file a request for a hearing before the administrator for the board for a correction of such assessment and the return of such property seized or sealed. 
(b)  Where holders of property interest in cigarettes, vending machines or other property are known at time of seizure or sealing, notice of seizure or sealing shall be sent to them by certified mail within 24 hours. Where such holders of property interests are unknown at time of seizure or sealing, it shall be sufficient notice to such unknown interest holders to post such notice to a door or wall of the room or building which contained such seized or sealed property. Any such notice of seizure or sealing shall include procedures for an administrative hearing for return of such property seized or sealed, as well as affirmative defenses set forth in this section which may be asserted. 
(c)  Such hearing shall be requested within ten days of the notice of such assessment, seizure, or sealing and shall set forth the reasons why said tax, penalties and interest, cigarettes, vending machines or other property should be returned or released. Within five days after receipt of such hearing request, the administrator shall notify the petitioner by certified mail of a date and time for the informal presentation of evidence at a hearing to be held within 15 days of the date notification is mailed. Any such request for hearing shall be denied if the assessed tax, penalties and interest has not been paid as required or if the request is received more than ten days from first notice to the petitioner of such seizure or sealing. Within five days after the hearing, the administrator shall notify the petitioner, by registered mail, whether his request for a correction has been granted or refused. 
(d)  Appropriate relief shall be given by the administrator if he is convinced by the preponderance of the evidence that said seized cigarettes were in the possession of a person other than the petitioner without the petitioner's consent at the time said cigarettes, vending machines or other property were seized or sealed or that petitioner was authorized to possess such untaxed cigarettes. If the administrator is satisfied that the tax was erroneously assessed, he shall refund the amount erroneously assessed together with any interest and penalties paid thereon and shall return any cigarettes, vending machines or other property seized or sealed to the petitioner. Any petitioner who is dissatisfied with the written decision of the board may, within 30 days of the date of such decision, appeal such decision to the appropriate court in the jurisdiction where the seizure or sealing occurred. 
(Code 1969, § 6-26; Ord. of 7-1978; Ord. of 11-1995; Ord. of 11-2005)  
Sec. 6-27. - Disposal of seized property. 
Any seized and confiscated cigarettes, vending machines or other property used in the furtherance of any illegal evasion of the tax may be disposed of by sale or other method deemed appropriate by the board after any petitioner has exhausted all administrative appeal procedures. No credit from any sale of cigarettes, vending machines, or other property seized shall be allowed toward any tax and penalties assessed. 
(Code 1969, § 6-27; Ord. of 7-1978; Ord. of 11-2005)  
Sec. 6-28. - Extensions. 
The administrator, upon a finding of good cause, may grant an extension of time to file a tax report upon written application for a period not exceeding 30 days. Except as hereinafter provided, no interest or penalty shall be charged, assessed or collected by reason of the granting of such an extension. 
(Code 1969, § 6-28; Ord. of 7-1978; Ord. of 11-2005)  
Sec. 6-29. - Penalty for violations of article. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 12 months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such fine and/or imprisonment shall not relieve any such person from the payment of any tax, penalty or interest imposed by this article. 
(Code 1969, § 6-29; Ord. of 7-1978; Ord. of 11-2005)  
Sec. 6-30. - Each violation a separate offense. 
The sale of any quantity, the use, possession, storage or transportation of more than 60 packages of cigarettes upon which the NVCTB tax stamp has not been affixed or the proper jurisdictional tax has not been paid shall be and constitute a separate violation. Each continuing day of violation shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1969, § 6-30; Ord. of 7-1978; Ord. of 11-2005)  
Sec. 6-31. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 6-31, pertaining to severability of provisions, was derived from the Ordinance of 7-1978 and was deleted in November 2005.  
ARTICLE 4. - MEALS TAX 
 
Sec. 6-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cater means the furnishing of food, beverages, or both on the premises of another, for compensation. 
Collector means the director of finance, treasurer or designee. 
Director means the director of finance and any duly designated deputies, assistants, inspectors or other employees. 
Food means all food, beverages or both, including alcoholic beverages, purchased in or from a food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
Food establishment means any place in or from which food or food products are prepared, packaged, sold or distributed in the Town, including, but not limited to, any restaurant, dining room, grill, coffee shop, cafeteria, cafe, snack bar, lunch counter, convenience store, movie theater, delicatessen, confectionery, bakery, eating house, eatery, drugstore, ice cream/yogurt shops, lunch wagon or truck, pushcart or other mobile facility from which food is sold, public or private club, resort, bar, lounge, or other similar establishment, public or private, and shall include private property outside of and contiguous to a building or structure operated as a food establishment at which food or food products are sold for immediate consumption. 
Meal means any prepared food or drink offered or held out for sale by a food establishment for the purpose of being consumed by any person to satisfy the appetite and is ready for immediate consumption. All such food and beverage, unless otherwise specifically exempted or excluded herein shall be included, whether intended to be consumed on the seller's premises or elsewhere, whether designated as breakfast, lunch, snack, dinner, supper or by some other name, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
(Code 1969, § 6-32; Ord. of 11-6-1989; Ord. of 7-3-2000)  
Sec. 6-33. - Levy. 
There is hereby imposed and levied by the Town on each person a tax at the rate of three percent on the amount paid for meals purchased from any food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not. 
(Code 1969, § 6-33; Ord. of 11-6-1989; Ord. of 7-3-2000; Ord. of 11-19-2001; Ord. of 6-2008)  
Sec. 6-34. - Collection of tax by seller. 
(a)  Every person receiving any payment for food with respect to which a tax is levied hereunder shall collect and remit the amount of the tax imposed by this article from the person on whom the same is levied or from the person paying for such food at the time payment for such food is made; provided, however, no blind person operating a vending stand or other business enterprise under the jurisdiction of the department for the visually handicapped and located on property acquired and used by the United States for any military or naval purpose shall be required to collect or remit such taxes. 
(b)  All tax collections shall be deemed to be held in trust for the Town. 
(Code 1969, § 6-34; Ord. of 11-6-1989; Ord. of 7-3-2000)  
Sec. 6-35. - Exemptions; limits on application. 
A.  The tax imposed under this article shall not be levied on factory-prepackaged candy, gum, nuts and other items of essentially the same nature served for on- or off-premises consumption. 
B.  The tax imposed under this article shall not be levied on the following items when served exclusively for off-premises consumption: 
1.  Donuts, ice cream, crackers, nabs, chips, cookies and factory-prepackaged items of essentially the same nature. 
2.  Food sold in bulk. For the purposes of this provision, a bulk sale shall mean the sale of any item that would exceed the normal, customary and usual portion sold for on premises consumption (e.g., a whole, a gallon of ice cream); a bulk sale shall not include any food or beverage that is catered or delivered by a food establishment for off-premises consumption. 
3.  Alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages sold in factory sealed containers. 
4.  Any food or food product purchased with food coupons issued by the United States Department of Agriculture under the Food Stamp Program or drafts issued through the Virginia Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children. 
5.  Any food or food product purchased for home consumption as defined in the federal Food Stamp Act of 1977, 7 USC 2012, as amended except hot food or hot food products ready for immediate consumption. For the purposes of administering the tax levied hereunder, the following items whether or not purchased for immediate consumption are excluded from the said definition of food in the federal Food Stamp Act: sandwiches, salad bar items sold from a salad bar, prepackaged single-serving salads consisting primarily of an assortment of vegetables, and non-factory sealed beverages. This subsection shall not affect provisions set forth in subsections D.3, 4 and 5 of this section. 
C.  A grocery store, supermarket or convenience store shall not be subject to the tax except for any portion or section therein designated as a delicatessen or designated for the sale of prepared food and beverages. 
D.  The tax imposed hereunder shall not be levied on the following purchases of food and beverages: 
1.  Food and beverages furnished by food establishments to employees as part of their compensation when no charge is made to the employee. 
2.  Food and beverages sold by day care centers, public or private elementary or secondary schools or food sold by any college or university to its students or employees. 
3.  Food and beverages for use or consumption and which are paid for directly by the commonwealth, any political subdivision of the commonwealth or the United States. 
4.  Food and beverages furnished by a hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home, nursing home, home for the aged, infirm, handicapped, battered women, narcotic addicts or alcoholics, or other extended care facility to patients or residents thereof and the spouses and children of such persons. 
5.  Food and beverages furnished by a public or private nonprofit charitable organization or establishment or a private establishment that contracts with the appropriate agency of the commonwealth to offer meals at concession prices to elderly, infirm, blind, handicapped or needy persons in their homes or at central locations. 
6.  Food and beverages not prepared by a paid vendor and sold on an occasional basis by a nonprofit educational, charitable or benevolent organization, church or religious body as a fundraising activity, the gross proceeds of which are to be used by such organization exclusively for nonprofit educational, charitable, benevolent or religious purposes. 
(Code 1969, § 6-35; Ord. of 11-6-1989; Ord. of 7-3-2000)  
Sec. 6-36. - Gratuities and service charges. 
(a)  Where a purchaser provides a gratuity for an employee of a seller, and the amount of the gratuity is wholly in the discretion of the purchaser, the gratuity is not subject to the tax imposed by this article, whether paid in cash to the employee or added to the bill and charged to the purchaser's account, provided in the latter case, the full amount of the gratuity is turned over to the employee by the seller. 
(b)  An amount or percent, whether designated as a gratuity, tip or service charge, that is added to the price of the food and beverages by the seller, and required to be paid by the purchaser, as a part of the selling price of the food and beverages and is subject to the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1969, § 6-36; Ord. of 11-6-1989; Ord. of 7-3-2000)  
Sec. 6-37. - Report of taxes collected; remittance; preservation of records. 
It shall be the duty of every person required by this article to pay to the Town the taxes imposed by this article, to make a report thereof, setting forth such information as the director may prescribe and require, including all purchases taxable under this article, the amount charged the purchaser for each such purchase, the date thereof, the taxes collected thereon and the amount of tax required to be collected by this article. Such records shall be kept and preserved for a period of five years. The director or his duly authorized agents shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business of such person, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article, and to make transcripts of all or any parts thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 6-37; Ord. of 11-6-1989; Ord. of 7-3-2000)  
Sec. 6-38. - Penalty for violation. 
A.  Any person willfully failing or refusing to file a return as required under this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, except that any person failing to file such a return shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor if the amount of tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is $1,000.00 or less. Any person violating or failing to comply with any other provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
B.  Except as provided in subsection A of this section, any corporate or partnership officer, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3906, or any other person required to collect, account for, or pay over the meals tax imposed under this article, who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account for or pay over such tax, or who willfully evades or attempts to evade such tax or payment thereof, shall, in addition to any other penalties imposed by law, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
C.  Each violation of or failure to comply with this article shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction of any such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(Code 1969, § 6-38; Ord. of 11-6-1989; Ord. of 7-3-2000)  
Sec. 6-39. - Preservation of records. 
It shall be the duty of every person liable for collection and remittance of the taxes imposed by this article to preserve for a period of two years records showing all purchases taxable under this article, the amount charged the purchaser for each such purchase, the date thereof, the taxes collected thereon and the amount of tax required to be collected by this article. The director of finance shall be authorized to examine such records at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business of such person, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article and to make transcripts of all or any parts thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 6-39; Ord. of 11-6-1989; Ord. of 7-3-2000)  
Sec. 6-40. - Duty of person going out of business. 
Whenever any person required to collect and remit to the Town any tax imposed by this article shall cease to operate or otherwise dispose of his business, the tax shall immediately become due and payable, and the person shall immediately make the director of finance a report and remittance thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 6-40; Ord. of 11-6-1989; Ord. of 7-3-2000)  
Sec. 6-41. - Enforcement. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the director of finance to ascertain of every seller in the Town, liable for the collection of the tax imposed by this article, who fails, refuses or neglects to collect such tax or to make the reports and remittances required by this article. The director of finance may have issued a summons for such person, and the summons may be served upon such person by any Town police officer in the manner provided by law and the director of finance may seek a conviction or other civil remedy, including injunction, against such person. 
(b)  In the event the purchaser of any meal refuses to pay the tax imposed by this article, the seller may call upon the Police Department for assistance; and the investigating officer may, when probable cause exists, issue the purchaser a summons returnable to the general district court as provided by law. 
(Code 1969, § 6-41; Ord. of 11-6-1989; Ord. of 7-3-2000)  
Sec. 6-42. - Regulations. 
The director of finance may issue regulations for the administration and enforcement of this article not in conflict with this article. 
(Code 1969, § 6-42; Ord. of 11-6-1989; Ord. of 7-3-2000)  
Secs. 6-43—6-47. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 5. - TAX ON TRANSIENT ROOM RENTALS 
 
Sec. 6-48. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Director of finance means the director of finance of the Town and his duly designated deputies, assistants, inspectors, clerks or other employees. 
Hotel means any public or private hotel, inn, hostelry, tourist home or house, motel, roominghouse or other lodging place within the Town offering lodging for compensation to any transient. 
Lodging means room or space furnished any transient. 
Person means any individual, corporation, company, association, firm, co-partnership or any group of individuals acting as a unit. 
Transient means any person who, for a period of not more than 30 consecutive days, either at his own expense or at the expense of another, obtains lodging or the use of any space at any hotel, for which lodging or use of space a charge is made. 
(Code 1969, § 6-48; Ord. of 11-6-1989; Ord. of 12-3-1990)  
Sec. 6-49. - Levy of tax on transient room rentals; collection generally. 
There is hereby imposed and levied upon every transient obtaining or occupying lodging within the Town, a tax equivalent to three percent of the amount charged for such lodging. This tax shall be collected from transients in the manner and at the time provided in this article. 
(Code 1969, § 6-49; Ord. of 11-6-1989; Ord. of 12-3-1990; Ord. of 11-19-2001)  
Sec. 6-50. - Collection from transients; when payable. 
Every person receiving any payment for lodging or the use of space with respect to which a tax is levied under this article shall collect the amount of such tax so imposed from the transient on whom such tax is levied, or from the person paying for such lodging, at the time payment for such lodging is made. The taxes required to be collected under this article shall be deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect such taxes until the same shall have been remitted to the Town as provided by this article. 
(Code 1969, § 6-50; Ord. of 11-6-1989; Ord. of 12-3-1990)  
Sec. 6-51. - Report of collection and remittance of tax. 
The person collecting any tax as provided in this article shall make out a report thereof upon such forms setting forth such information as the director of finance may prescribe and require, showing the amount of lodging, charges collected and the tax required to be collected and shall sign and deliver such reports with the remittance of such tax to the director of finance. Such reports and remittances shall be made on or before the 20th day of each month covering the amount of tax due and collected during the preceding month. 
(Code 1969, § 6-51; Ord. of 11-6-1989; Ord. of 12-3-1990)  
Sec. 6-52. - Discount. 
For the purposes of compensating persons required to collect such taxes for the collection of the tax imposed by this article, every person required to collect such taxes shall be allowed three percent of the total amount of the tax due and accounted for in the form of a deduction on his monthly return; provided, however, the amount due is not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Code 1969, § 6-52; Ord. of 11-6-1989; Ord. of 12-3-1990)  
Sec. 6-53. - Penalty and interest for non-remittance. 
If any person whose duty it is to do so shall fail or refuse to report and remit to the director of finance the tax required to be collected and paid under this article within the time and in the amount as provided for in this article, there shall be added to such tax by the director of finance, a penalty in the amount of ten percent of the tax due or the sum of $10.00, whichever is greater; provided, however, that the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of the tax due. The director of finance shall also assess interest on the tax and penalty at the rate of ten percent per year from the day after the tax is due until paid. 
(Code 1969, § 6-53; Ord. of 11-6-1989; Ord. of 12-3-1990)  
Sec. 6-54. - Failure to collect and report tax. 
If any person whose duty it is to do so shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed under this article and to make within the time provided herein any report and remittance required, the director of finance shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the director of finance has secured whatever facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax due and payable by any person who has failed or refused to collect such tax and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person the tax and penalty and interest as provided for in this article and shall notify such person by certified mail sent to his last known address, the amount of such tax and penalty and interest. The total amount thereof shall be payable with ten days of mailing of such notice. The director of finance shall have the power to examine such records for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article as are provided by law. 
(Code 1969, § 6-54; Ord. of 11-6-1989; Ord. of 12-3-1990)  
Sec. 6-55. - Preservation of records. 
It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and remittance of the taxes imposed by this article to keep and preserve for a period of two years such suitable records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been responsible for collecting and paying to the Town. The director of finance shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business of such person, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article and to make transcripts of all or any parts thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 6-55; Ord. of 11-6-1989; Ord. of 12-3-1990)  
Sec. 6-56. - Cessation of business; tax due immediately. 
Whenever any person required to collect and pay to the Town a tax imposed by this article shall cease to operate, go out of business, or otherwise dispose of his business, any tax then payable to the Town shall become immediately due and payable, and such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due to the director of finance. 
(Code 1969, § 6-56; Ord. of 11-6-1989; Ord. of 12-3-1990)  
Sec. 6-57. - Exceptions for governmental employees on official business. 
No tax shall be payable hereunder with respect to any payment for lodging or the use of space paid by for any federal, state or Town official or employee when on official business. 
(Code 1969, § 6-57; Ord. of 11-6-1989; Ord. of 12-3-1990)  
Sec. 6-58. - Enforcement. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the director of finance to ascertain the name of every hotel offering lodging to a transient in the Town, liable for the collection of the tax imposed by this article, which fails, refuses or neglects to collect such tax or to make the reports and remittances required by this article. The director of finance may have issued a summons to such person responsible for the hotel offering lodging to a transient, and the summons may be served upon such person by any Town police officer in the manner provided by law. One return of the original summons shall be made to the general district court sitting in the Town. 
B.  In the event the purchaser of any transient room rental refuses to pay the tax imposed by this article, the hotel operator may call upon the Police Department for assistance; and the investigating officer may, when probable cause exists, issue the purchaser a summons returnable to the general district court as provided by law. 
(Code 1969, § 6-58; Ord. of 11-6-1989; Ord. of 12-3-1990)  
Sec. 6-59. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 6-59; Ord. of 11-6-1989; Ord. of 12-3-1990)  
ARTICLE 6. - PARTIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN REHABILITATED REAL PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 6-60. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial use means improved real property that is used for nonresidential commercial purposes and zoned C-1, C-1A, C-2, CM or CMP by the Town zoning laws, but that term does not include any property zoned C-1B or any hotel. 
Director means the director of finance for the Town or the designated agent for that director. 
Hotel means those structures which provide lodging for transients as defined by section 18-4. 
Multifamily residential real estate means improved real property zoned and used pursuant to chapter 18, article 9, but that term does not include any hotel. 
Qualifying property means an improvement to real property that is qualified to receive a tax credit pursuant to this article. 
Residential real estate means improved real property used for residential purposes and zoned RS-16, RS-12.5, RS-10, RTH, RM-2 in chapter 18. 
(Code 1969, § 6-60; Ord. of 3-1998)  
Sec. 6-61. - Partial property tax exemption for certain rehabilitated, renovated or replacement residential structures. 
A.  Authorization; qualification criteria. 
1.  This section authorizes a partial exemption for improved real property from the general real estate tax by providing tax credits for real property that is rehabilitated, renovated or replaced in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3220 and the provisions of this article. For purposes of this section, residential real estate shall be deemed to be substantially rehabilitated, renovated or replaced when a structure, which is no less than 25 years old, has been so improved or replaced so that the fair market value of the improved or replacement structure is increased by no less than 25 percent. Multifamily residential real estate shall be deemed to be substantially rehabilitated, renovated or replaced when a residential structure, which is no less than 25 years old, has been so improved or replaced so that the fair market value of the improvement to the property is increased by no less than 40 percent. 
2.  In addition to all other qualification criteria set forth in this article, the resultant dimensional footprint of residential real estate and multifamily residential real estate that is substantially rehabilitated, renovated or replaced may not exceed the total square footage of the footprint of the original, unimproved structure by more than 30 percent and be eligible for the tax credits authorized by this section and may not cause lot coverage of the site to exceed 25 percent or such other lawful percentage as otherwise provided by variance previously ordered by the board of zoning appeals. If residential real estate contains more than one residential structure, then each improved or replaced structure shall not exceed the total square footage of the footprint of each corresponding original, unimproved structure by more than 30 percent nor cause lot coverage of the site to exceed 25 percent or such other lawful percentage as otherwise provided by variance previously ordered by the board of zoning appeals. 
3.  For the purposes of this section, the term "footprint" shall mean that product obtained by multiplication of the dimensional length of the original structure by its dimensional width. 
4.  No improvements made to unimproved real property, or to any building lot created by a subdivision approved subsequent to March 2, 1998, on which lot no qualifying structure pre-exists the subdivision, shall be eligible for partial property tax exemption pursuant to this section. No property shall be eligible for a partial property tax exemption pursuant to this section unless all appropriate building permits have been acquired for the substantial rehabilitation, renovation or replacement of the structure on the property. No property shall be eligible for a partial property tax exemption pursuant to this section if that property is substantially rehabilitated by the demolition and replacement of the structure that: 
(i)  Is a registered state landmark; or 
(ii)  Is determined by the department of historic resources to contribute to the significance of a registered historic district. 
B.  The owner of any residential real estate or multifamily residential real estate who seeks to obtain the partial property tax exemption authorized by this section shall apply for such an exemption to the director at the same time that the owner applies for a building permit to rehabilitate, renovate, or replace a structure. Upon receipt of an application for partial property tax exemption, the director shall determine a base fair market value assessment (hereinafter "base value") for the structure prior to commencement of rehabilitation, renovation or replacement. The base fair market value assessment shall be determined by either an assessment for the purposes of the county taxation made at the time of the owner's application for exemption or, in the absence of same, by applying that most recent assessment previously made for the purposes of county taxation. That base value shall serve as the basis for determining whether the rehabilitation, renovation, or, replacement increases the fair market value of the structure by at least 25 percent in the case of residential real estate and 40 percent of multifamily residential real estate. The application to qualify for tax exemption shall be effective until December 31 of the third calendar year following the year in which application is submitted. If by such expiration date, rehabilitation, renovation, or replacement has not been progressed to such a point that the assessed fair market value of the improvement to the property is at least the minimum required percent greater than the base value of such structure, and if the applicant desires to proceed with the application, then a new application for partial tax exemption shall be filed with the director, and thereafter the director shall establish a new base value. All initial and subsequent applications for the partial exemption authorized by the section shall be accompanied by payment of a nonrefundable $50.00 fee for processing the application. During the period between the receipt of the application and the time when the director may ascertain that the fair market value of the structure has increased in value by at least the minimum percent specified in subsection A of this section, the owner of the property shall be subjected to real property taxation upon the full fair market value of the property. At any time prior to November 1 of any calendar year in which rehabilitation, renovation or replacement of a structure is complete, an owner may submit a written request to the director to inspect the structure to determine if it qualifies for a partial real property tax exemption. After the director has determined that the assessed fair market value of a substantially rehabilitated, renovated or replaced structure exceeds the base value by the percentage specified by subsection A of this section, the tax exemption shall become effective beginning on January 1 of the next calendar year. 
C.  Subject to the provisions of subsection D of this section and to section 6-64, the owner of any residential or multifamily residential structure qualifying for partial exemption from the real estate tax because of substantial rehabilitation, renovation or replacement shall be issued a credit for the general real property tax otherwise due on the fair market value of that property in an amount that is equal of the real property tax levy calculated on the difference in value between the base value and the initial fair market value of the substantially rehabilitated, renovated or replaced structure. That credit shall be applied for each year of the ten-year period following completion of the substantial rehabilitation, renovation or replacement. In each year of the four-year period following the initial ten-year period, owner of the qualifying property shall be issued a credit for the real estate tax otherwise due on the fair market value of that property in an amount equal to the value of the real property tax levy calculated on the difference in value between the base value and the initial fair market value of the substantially rehabilitated, renovated or replaced structure, less 20 percent for each year following the expiration of the initial ten-year period exemption. Credits against the real estate tax for any residential or multifamily real estate qualifying pursuant to this section shall not run with the land but shall apply only to owners on the date the tax exemption becomes effective and except as otherwise provided by subsection D of this section and by section 6-64, the owners of such property, so long as they remain the sole owners of said property during each of the 14 years of the exemption period, shall be entitled to receive a credit in the amount specified by this subsection. All exemptions and credits shall automatically cease and be void upon transfer of ownership whether by contract, testamentary disposition or descent and distribution. 
D.  In the event that the fair market value of a qualifying residential or multifamily residential structure increases after the first year of such substantial rehabilitation, renovation or replacement, the credit specified in subsection C of this section shall not be increased. In the event that the fair market value of a qualifying property decreases after the first year of substantial rehabilitation, renovation, or replacement, the credit specified in subsection C of this section shall be limited to the extent that the credit shall not reduce the real property tax on a qualifying property below an amount equal to the amount of the real property tax computed on the base value. If any tax credit computed in accordance with subsection C of this section is reduced in accordance with this subsection, that credit reduction shall not be applied to any other property or to real property taxes assessed in any other calendar year. If the fair market value of any qualifying property decreases below the base value, then that qualifying property shall be assessed at full market value, and no credit against the general real property tax shall be allowed. If no tax credit can be granted because the fair market value of a qualifying property is below the base value, that unused credit shall not be applied to any other property or to real property taxes assessed in any other calendar year. 
E.  In determining the base value of any structure, and in determining whether any structure has been substantially rehabilitated, renovated, or replaced to the extent that the fair market value of the improved or replaced structure exceeds the base value by the percent specified in this section, the director shall employ usual and customary methods of assessing real property and improvements thereon and shall be bound by the values established by assessment for the purpose of county taxation. 
F.  This section shall be applicable to assessments of qualifying residential and multifamily residential real estate made on and after January 1, 1998. However, no new application for partial property tax exemption shall be accepted after September 1, 2012. 
(Code 1969, § 6-61; Ord. of 3-1998; Ord. of 6-2002; Ord. of 7-2007; Ord. of 9-2007)  
Sec. 6-62. - Partial property tax exemption for certain rehabilitated, renovated or replacement commercial structures. 
A.  Authorization; qualification criteria. 
1.  This section authorizes a partial exemption for improved real property from the general real estate tax by providing tax credits for real property that is substantially rehabilitated, renovated or replaced in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3221 and the provisions of this article. For purposes of this section, any structure that is substantially rehabilitated, renovated or replaced for commercial use shall be deemed to be substantially rehabilitated, renovated or replaced when a structure, which is no less than 25 years old, has been so improved or replaced so that the fair market value of the improved or replaced structure to the property is increased by no less than 40 percent. 
2.  In addition to all other qualification criteria set forth in this article, no commercial structure on property that has been substantially rehabilitated, renovated or replaced may exceed the total square footage of the original unimproved structure by more than 100 percent and be eligible for the tax credits authorized by this section. If such commercial property contains more than one structure, then each improved or replacement structure may exceed the total square footage of each corresponding original, unimproved structure by no more than 100 percent. 
3.  No improvements made to unimproved real property, or to any building lot created by a subdivision approved subsequent to March 2, 1998, on which lot no qualifying structure pre-exists the subdivision, shall be eligible for a partial property tax exemption pursuant to this section. No property shall be eligible for a partial property tax exemption pursuant to this section unless all appropriate building permits have been acquired for substantial rehabilitation, renovation or replacement of the structure on the property. No property shall be eligible for a partial property tax exemption pursuant to this section if that property is substantially rehabilitated by the demolition and replacement that: 
(i)  Is a registered state landmark; or 
(ii)  Is determined by the department of historic resources to contribute to the significance of a registered historic district. 
B.  The owner of any property who seeks to obtain the partial property tax exemption authorized by this section shall apply for such an exemption to the director at the same time that the owner applies for a building permit to rehabilitate, renovate or replace a structure. Upon receipt of an application for partial property tax exemption, the director shall determine a base fair market value assessment (hereinafter "base value") for the structure prior to commencement of rehabilitation, renovation or replacement. The base fair market value assessment shall be determined by either an assessment for the purposes of county taxation made at the time of the owner's application for exemption or, in the absence of same, by applying that most recent assessment previously made for the purposes of county taxation. That base value shall serve as the basis for determining whether the rehabilitation, renovation or replacement increases the fair market value of the structure by at least 40 percent. The application to qualify for tax exemption shall be effective until December 31 of the third calendar year following the year in which application is submitted. If by such expiration date, rehabilitation, renovation or replacement has not progressed to such a point that the assessed fair market value of the improvement to the property is at least the minimum required percent greater than the base value of such structure, and if the applicant desires to proceed with the application, then a new application for partial tax exemption authorized by this section shall be filed by the director, and thereafter the director shall establish a new base value. All initial and subsequent applications for the partial exemption authorized by this section shall be accompanied by payment of a nonrefundable $50.00 fee for processing the application. During the period between the receipt of the application and the time when the director may ascertain that the fair market value of the structure has increased in value by at least the minimum percent specified in subsection A of this section, the owner of the property shall be subject to real property taxation upon the fair market value of the property. At any time prior to November 1 of any calendar year in which rehabilitation, renovation or replacement of a structure is complete, an owner may submit a written request to the director to inspect the structure to determine if it then qualifies for a partial real property tax exemption. After the director has determined that the assessed fair market value of a substantially rehabilitated, renovated or replaced commercial structure exceeds the base value by the percentage specified by subsection A of this section, the tax exemption shall become effective beginning on January 1 of the next calendar year. 
C.  Subject to the provisions of subsection D of this section and to section 6-64, the owner of any commercial structure qualifying for partial exemption from the real estate tax because of substantial rehabilitation, renovation or replacement shall be issued a credit for the general real property tax otherwise due on the fair market value of that structure in an amount that is equal to the value of the real property tax levy calculated on the difference in value between the base value and the initial fair market value of the substantially rehabilitated, renovated or replaced structure. That credit shall be applied for each year of a ten-year period following completion of the substantial rehabilitation, renovation or replacement. In each year of a four-year period following the initial ten-year period, the owner of the qualifying property shall be issued a credit for the real estate tax otherwise due on the fair market value of that property in an amount equal to the value of the real property tax levy calculated on the difference in value between the base value and the initial fair market value of the substantially rehabilitated, renovated or replaced structure, less 20 percent for each year following the expiration of the initial ten-year period exemption. Credits against the real estate tax for any structure qualifying pursuant to this section shall not run with the land, and except as otherwise provided by subsection D of this section and by section 6-64, the owner of such structure, so long as such owner remains the sole owner of said structure, during each of the 14 years of the exemption period, shall be entitled to receive a credit in the amount specified by this subsection. All exemptions and credits shall automatically cease and be void upon transfer of ownership whether by contract, testamentary disposition or descent and distribution. 
D.  In the event that the fair market value of a qualifying property increases after the first year of such substantial rehabilitation, renovation or replacement, the credit specified by subsection C of this section shall not be increased. In the event that the fair market value of a qualifying property decreases after the first year of substantial rehabilitation, renovation or replacement, the credit specified in subsection C of this section shall be limited to the extent that the credit shall not reduce the real property tax on a qualifying property below an amount equal to the amount of the real property tax computed on the base value. If any tax credit computed in accordance with subsection C of this section is reduced in accordance with this subsection, that credit reduction shall not be applied to any other property or to real property taxes assessed in any other calendar year. If the fair market value of any qualifying property decreases below the base value, then that qualifying property shall be assessed at full fair market value, and no credit against the general real property tax shall be allowed. If no tax credit can be granted because the fair market value of a qualifying property is below the base value, that unused credit shall not be applied to any other property or to real property taxes assessed in any other calendar year. 
E.  In determining the base value of any structure, and in determining whether any structure has been substantially rehabilitated, renovated or replaced to the extent that the fair market value of the improved or replaced structure exceeds the base value by the percent specified in this section, the director shall employ usual and customary methods of assessing real property and improvement thereon and shall be bound by the values established by assessment for the purposes of county taxation. 
F.  This section shall be applicable to assessments of qualifying commercial structures made on and after January 1, 1998. However, no new application for partial property tax exemption shall be accepted after September 1, 2012. 
(Code 1969, § 6-62; Ord. of 3-1998; Ord. of 6-2002; Ord. of 9-2007)  
Sec. 6-63. - Reserved.  
Sec. 6-64. - Failure to pay real estate taxes in a timely manner; forfeiture of partial exemption and tax credits; further qualification limitations. 
A.  No tax credit described in sections 6-61 and 6-62 shall be issued to any owner of any substantially rehabilitated, renovated or replaced structure if the real estate tax on that property has not been paid on or before July 28 and December 5 of any year, as required by section 6-3. Failure to pay the real estate tax on improved real property in any year on or before the date which the real estate tax is due shall result in the forfeiture of any partial tax exemption and tax credit that otherwise would have been applied to the real estate tax due in that year, and in such cases, the annual real estate tax shall be assessed on the full fair market value of the improved real property. Late payment of the real estate tax on real property and any substantially rehabilitated, renovated or replaced structure thereon shall be subject to late payment penalties and interest in accordance with section 6-3. However, the director may waive any penalty and reinstate any tax credit if the failure to pay the real estate tax was not in any way the fault of the taxpayer. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, except in instances in which an improved property has been substantially damaged by an action that is beyond the control of the owner or occupant, as those actions are defined herein, no improved property which has qualified for a tax credit in accordance with this article by means of substantial rehabilitation, renovation or replacement shall be eligible to submit any application for further tax credits based on subsequent improvements during the pendency of the initial tax credit period. If an improved property which has qualified for a tax credit in accordance with this article is damaged by an action that is beyond the control of the owner or occupant, and if the property may otherwise qualify for tax credits in accordance with this article, then the owner of the real estate may apply for tax credits based on the then present value of the damaged property, and the qualification for any new tax credits shall supersede and extinguish any tax credits that may have been available under the previous qualifications. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "action that is beyond the control of the owner or occupant" shall include fire, flood and windstorm that reduces the fair market value of the property by no less than 25 percent. 
(Code 1969, § 6-64; Ord. of 3-1998)  
Sec. 6-65. - Administration. 
The director shall prepare and distribute application forms for persons who apply for partial property tax exemption pursuant to sections 6-61 and 6-62, and the director may prescribe rules and procedures for the administration of this article that are not in conflict with this article. Copies of such application forms and any prescribed rules and procedures shall be available to the public during regular office hours at the office of the director. 
(Code 1969, § 6-65; Ord. of 3-1998)  
Secs. 6-66—6-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 7. - TELECOMMUNICATION USE FEES FOR PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 6-70. - Findings; fee established. 
(a)  It is provided by general law that: 
(1)  Every telegraph company and every telephone company incorporated by the commonwealth or any other state, or by the United States, shall have authority to occupy and use the public parks, roads, works, turnpikes, streets, avenues and alleys in any of the counties of the commonwealth, with the consent of the board of supervisors or other governing authority thereof, or in any incorporated city or town upon obtaining an appropriate franchise and with the consent of the council thereof, for the erection of poles and wires, or cables, or the laying of underground conduits, portions of which they may lease, rent, or hire to other like companies; 
(2)  No locality shall impose any fees on a certificated provider of telecommunications service for the use of public rights-of-way except in a manner prescribed in Code of Virginia, § 56-468.1, as amended; provided, however, the provisions of said section 56-468.1 shall not apply to providers of commercial mobile radio services; and 
(3)  No locality shall require any such provider of telecommunication service to provide in-kind services or physical assets as a condition of consent therefor; provided, however, that localities, their authorities or commissions which provide utility services may enter into voluntary pole attachment, conduit occupancy or conduit construction agreements with such providers of telecommunication services. 
(b)  Code of Virginia, § 56-468.1, as amended, sets forth in detail the manner in which the public rights-of-way use fee is to be calculated for the benefit of localities in the commonwealth, the extent of its application, the method and means of billing and collecting said fee and transmission of the appropriate amount thereof to the Town and other localities. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, including the Town Charter, or Code section, or any franchise granted by the Town, or any other ordinance, resolution or provision of law heretofore adopted or applicable to the Town in any way relating thereto, and in lieu of any other fee or charge therefor, the Town hereby adopts the public rights-of-way use fee, in order that collection of the said fee shall commence as provided in Code of Virginia, § 56-468.1(I), as amended. Terms herein shall have the same meaning as outlined in said section 56-468.1. 
(d)  The director of finance is directed to give notice in writing forthwith of the Town's adoption of the public rights-of-way use fee to be sent by certified mail to the registered agent of each certificated provider of local telephone exchange service within the Town. 
(Code 1969, § 6-70; Ord. of 9-1998)  
ARTICLE 8. - PROCUREMENT 
 
Sec. 6-71. - Purpose and scope. 
The purpose of this article is to ensure compliance with the Virginia Public Procurement Act and other applicable state law as amended. This article applies to the procurement of all goods, services, insurance, and construction by all Town departments, whether by purchase order, contract, or agreement and regardless of funding source except as otherwise specified herein or by state and federal law. 
(Code 1969, § 6-71; Ord. of 11-2-1998)  
Sec. 6-72. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the definitions in Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4301, as amended, shall apply. 
(Code 1969, § 6-72; Ord. of 11-2-1998; Ord. of 3-2005)  
Sec. 6-73. - Position of the purchasing agent. 
(a)  There is hereby created in the department of finance the position of purchasing agent. The purchasing agent shall be the public purchasing official of the Town. The purchasing agent shall work under the direction of the director of finance and shall enforce applicable state law and the provisions of this article. The purchasing agent shall purchase or supervise the purchasing of all goods, services, insurance, and construction except as otherwise provided for herein and shall maintain the Town's official bidders list. 
(b)  The purchasing agent shall be responsible for the sale, trade, or disposal of surplus property and shall, under the supervision of the director of finance, establish and maintain purchasing procedures and requirements that enforce compliance with applicable state law and the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1969, § 6-73; Ord. of 11-2-1998)  
Sec. 6-74. - Methods of procurement. 
For the purposes of this article, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4301 et seq., shall apply to the procurement of goods, services, insurance, and contracts in amounts greater than $30,000.00 except as otherwise provided for herein. The Town Council may also approve administrative regulations to implement the small purchase procedures that are not inconsistent with this article. 
(Code 1969, § 6-74; Ord. of 11-2-1998; Ord. of 3-2005; Ord. of 7-10-2017 ; Ord. of 12-10-2018 , § 1)  
Sec. 6-74.1. - Small purchase procedures. 
(a)  All contracts appended to purchase orders, including cooperative purchases that require special terms and conditions in addition to the Town's standard terms and conditions, shall be executed by the mayor and attested by the Town clerk. 
(b)  Transportation-related construction, if the aggregate or sum of all phases is not expected to exceed $25,000.00 is considered a small purchase for the purposes of this ordinance 
(c)  Professional services. 
(1)  Procurement of professional services in an amount not to exceed $30,000.00 shall be by competitive negotiation, and initiated by written request for written proposals to the maximum number of offerors that can be reasonably anticipated to submit responses. 
(2)  Upon receipt of written proposals, the selection shall be made as provided for under "Competitive Negotiation" at Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4303(B). 
(d)  $1,000.00 to $30,000.00. Purchases and contracts of at least $1,000.00 but not exceeding $30,000.00 shall be competitively procured by the affected department head or the purchasing agent by written request for quotation to the vendors on the Town's bidders list. Recordation and tabulation of the quotations shall be made by the affected department head and a purchase order shall be issued by the purchasing agent with the approval of the director of finance. 
(e)  $500.00 to $1,000.00. Purchases and contracts of less than $1,000.00 but more than $500.00 shall be awarded by the purchasing agent following the approval of the requisitioning department head and the director of finance. 
(Code 1969, § 6-74.1; Ord. of 11-2-1998; Ord. of 3-2005; Ord. of 7-10-2017 ; Ord. of 12-10-2018 , § 1)  
Sec. 6-74.2. - Cooperative procurement. 
For the purposes of this article, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4304, as amended, shall apply. Cooperative procurement of goods, services, insurance, and contracts in an amount exceeding $30,000.00 shall be approved by the Town Council. Cooperative procurement of goods, services, insurance, and contracts in an amount not exceeding $30,000.00 shall be executed by the purchasing agent following approval of the requisitioning department and the director of finance. 
(Code 1969, § 6-74.2; Ord. of 11-2-1998; Ord. of 3-2005; Ord. of 7-10-2017 ; Ord. of 12-10-2018 , § 1)  
Sec. 6-75. - Exception to competitive procurement. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, exceptions to competitive procurement of goods, services, insurance, and construction in amounts greater than $30,000.00 shall be those as provided for in title 2.2, chapter 43 of the Code of Virginia 1950, as amended, and shall be issued as prescribed therein. 
(b)  Exceptions to the competitive procurement of goods, services, insurance, and construction in amounts of $30,000.00 or less shall be justified in writing for the reasons as provided for in title 2.2, chapter 43 of the Code of Virginia 1950, as amended and approved by the Town Manager. 
(Code 1969, § 6-75; Ord. of 11-2-1998; Ord. of 3-2005; Ord. of 7-10-2017 ; Ord. of 12-10-2018 , § 1)  
Chapter 7 - FIRE PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Fire protection generally, Code of Virginia, § 27-1 et seq.; fire departments, Code of Virginia, § 27-6.1 et seq.; Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code, 13 VAC 5-51-11 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved waste burner means a burner or incinerator which shall be constructed of masonry, metal or other noncombustible material. The ventilator opening shall not be greater than one inch, greatest dimension, unless baffled so as to prevent the discharge of live sparks. 
Fire marshal means the Town fire marshal. 
Public building means any building or structure, permanent or temporary, which is used or occupied or to be used or occupied, by ten or more persons who are employed, lodged, housed, assembled, served, entertained or instructed therein, and, without limiting the foregoing, includes hotels, motels, schools and colleges, nursing or rest homes, hospitals of all kinds, asylums, mercantile establishments, office buildings, apartment houses, theaters, restaurants, auditoriums, stadiums, gymnasiums, armories, dance halls, factories, workshops, garages maintained for the purpose of servicing or repair of motor vehicles, lodges, meeting rooms, manufacturing and processing establishments and all other buildings and structures of same or similar character or of same or similar use, including buildings owned and occupied by the Town government, including any division or department of the government. 
(Code 1969, § 7-1; Ord. of 6-20-1977)  
Sec. 7-2. - Authority to enter premises. 
The fire marshal may, at all reasonable hours, enter any building or premises except one-family dwellings, for the purpose of making any inspection which under any provision of this chapter is necessary. 
(Code 1969, § 7-2; Ord. of 6-20-1977)  
Sec. 7-3. - Dangerous conditions to be remedied. 
Whenever and wherever inspection shall disclose in any public building or upon any premises, combustible material or explosive matter or accumulation of rubbish, waste paper, boxes or other highly flammable materials which are so situated as to endanger property or which create or tend to create an undue fire hazard; or shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, steps, passageways, exit ways, doors or windows, likely to interfere with the operation of the fire department or which would impede or interfere with the egress of occupants in case of fire, the fire marshal shall order such dangerous conditions to be remedied or removed. 
(Code 1969, § 7-3; Ord. of 6-20-1977)  
Sec. 7-4. - Inspection of manufacturing processes, sprinkler systems, etc. 
The fire marshal shall inspect, as often as may be deemed necessary, all hazardous manufacturing processes, storage, installation, and handling of gases, chemicals, oils and other flammable materials, all interior fire alarm systems, standpipes and automatic sprinkler systems for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions likely to cause fire, or any violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 7-4; Ord. of 6-20-1977)  
Sec. 7-5. - Inspection of public buildings. 
The fire marshal shall inspect, as often as may be deemed necessary, all public buildings and the premises of such buildings, except the interior of one-family dwellings, for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions likely to cause fire, or any violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 7-5; Ord. of 6-20-1977)  
Sec. 7-6. - Inspections upon complaints; correction of dangerous conditions. 
The fire marshal, upon complaint, shall inspect public buildings which, for want of repairs, lack of sufficient fire escapes or exits, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or from any other cause, are likely to be fire hazards, or to endanger occupants of such buildings, or which are so situated as to endanger other property or the occupants thereof. Whenever there shall be found in any such public buildings combustible or flammable materials or conditions dangerous to the safety of such public buildings or the occupants thereof, the fire marshal shall order such dangerous condition to be remedied or removed. 
(Code 1969, § 7-6; Ord. of 6-20-1977)  
Sec. 7-7. - Service of orders under chapter. 
The service of orders issued in pursuance of any provision of this chapter may be made by the fire marshal upon the owner or occupant of the premises by delivering a copy thereof to such owner or occupant personally, or by delivering such copy to any person in charge of the premises. In case no such person is found on the premises, service may be made by affixing a copy of such order upon a conspicuous part of the property and by depositing an additional copy in a post office, addressed to such owner or occupant by registered mail at his last known address. 
(Code 1969, § 7-7; Ord. of 6-20-1977)  
Sec. 7-8. - Compliance with orders issued under chapter. 
Any order issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant of such premises; provided that any such owner or occupant may within five days from the date of service of such order, request a hearing before the fire appeals board, which shall, within 30 days from the filing date of such appeal, hold a hearing thereon and make its determinations, and unless by its authority the order is revoked or modified, it shall remain in full force and be complied with within the time fixed in the order or within such period of time as may be allowed by the fire appeals board. 
(Code 1969, § 7-8; Ord. of 6-20-1977)  
Sec. 7-9. - Prohibiting smoking in certain buildings. 
The fire marshal may, by order, prohibit smoking in any building or establishment where, in his judgment, smoking is likely to endanger life or property. Any order so issued shall require the owner or occupant to post suitable signs or placards in each room, building, structure or place in which such prohibition of smoking shall be enforced. All such signs shall read "By Order of the Fire Marshal." 
(Code 1969, § 7-9; Ord. of 6-20-1977)  
Sec. 7-10. - Inspection of fire hydrants. 
The Town Manager shall establish a program for the annual inspection of fire hydrants. 
(Code 1969, § 7-10; Ord. of 6-20-1977)  
Sec. 7-11. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any of the sections of this chapter or any provisions of the fire prevention code of the Town adopted by section 7-19 or shall fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder or who shall fail to comply with such an order within the time fixed therein shall separately for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a violation of this chapter, and shall, upon conviction, be punishable by imprisonment not to exceed 12 months or by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. Each day that a violation continues after a service of notice as provided for in this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1969, § 7-11; Ord. of 6-20-1977; Ord. of 3-7-1988)  
Sec. 7-12. - Use of fire apparatus, equipment, etc., within Town. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated upon a public highway or street in the Town any vehicle or equipment used, intended to be used or designed to be used for the purpose of fighting fires, unless such vehicle or equipment is owned by a recognized firefighting company. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, a recognized firefighting company shall be construed to mean one that has been recognized as such by resolution of the Town Council. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to the operation of firefighting vehicles and equipment owned by any firefighting company outside the Town when such vehicle or equipment is traveling in or through the Town for parade or other non-firefighting purposes or in response to a call from the fire alarm headquarters. 
(Code 1969, § 7-12; Ord. of 6-20-1977)  
Sec. 7-13. - Damage or injury to fire department equipment or personnel. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt, or conspire to damage or deface any fire department vehicle at any time, or to injure, or attempt to injure or conspire to injure fire department personnel while such personnel are in the performance of departmental duties. 
(Code 1969, § 7-13; Ord. of 6-20-1977)  
Sec. 7-13.1. - Unlawful boarding or tampering with fire department vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, without proper authorization from the fire department officer in charge of said vehicle, to cling to, attach himself to, climb upon or into, board, or swing upon any fire department vehicle, whether such vehicle is in motion or at rest or to sound any warning device thereon or to manipulate, tamper with, or destroy or attempt to manipulate, tamper with, or destroy any lever, valve, switch, starting device, brake, pump or any equipment, protective clothing, or tool on or a part of such fire department vehicle. 
(Code 1969, § 7-13.1; Ord. of 6-20-1977)  
ARTICLE 2. - FIRE MARSHAL 
 
Sec. 7-14. - Office created; appointment; powers and duties generally; compensation. 
The office of the Town fire marshal is hereby created. The Town Council shall appoint a fire marshal whose powers and duties shall be set forth in this chapter. He shall receive such annual salary as the Town Council may allow. Until such time as a fire marshal is appointed hereunder, the fire marshal of the county shall have authority to enforce provisions of this chapter, such authority terminating upon the appointment of a fire marshal by the Town Council as provided herein. 
(Code 1969, § 7-14; Ord. of 6-20-1977)  
Sec. 7-15. - Oath of office. 
The fire marshal, before entering upon his duties, shall take an oath before any officer authorized to administer oaths, faithfully to discharge the duties of such office. The certificate of the oath, with the certificate of his appointment, shall be returned to and preserved by the Town clerk. 
(Code 1969, § 7-15; Ord. of 6-20-1977)  
Sec. 7-16. - Qualifications. 
The person chosen to fill the office of fire marshal shall be of good moral character, shall possess such executive ability as is required for the performance of his duties in administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter and shall have such other qualifications as the Town Council may require. 
(Code 1969, § 7-16; Ord. of 6-20-1977)  
Sec. 7-16.1. - Qualification to participate in activities of volunteer fire department. 
Any person 16 or 17 years of age, after first obtaining parental or guardian approval in writing, may participate fully in all activities of a volunteer fire department in the Town, provided such person has attained certification under National Fire Protection Association 1001, level one, firefighter standards, as administered by the department of fire programs. 
(Code 1969, § 7-16.1; Ord. of 3-7-1983) 
State Law reference— Local ordinance authorizing participation in volunteer fire company activities, Code of Virginia, § 40.1-79.1.  
Sec. 7-17. - Term of office; removal from office. 
The fire marshal shall not be appointed for a definite tenure, but shall be removable at the pleasure of the Town Council. In case the Town Council determines to remove the Town fire marshal, he shall be given, if he so demands, a written statement of the reasons alleged for the proposed removal and a right to a hearing thereon at a public meeting of the Town Council prior to the date on which his removal shall take effect, but pending and during such hearing, the Town Council may suspend him from office; provided that the period of suspension does not exceed 30 days. The action of the Town Council in suspending or removing the Town fire marshal shall not be subject to review. 
(Code 1969, § 7-17; Ord. of 6-20-1977)  
ARTICLE 3. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
 
Sec. 7-18. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of the fire prevention code adopted by section 7-19, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Bureau of fire prevention means the office of the Town fire marshal. 
Chief of the bureau of fire prevention means the Town fire marshal. 
Chief of the fire department means the fire marshal. Nothing in this definition shall be construed as extending authority or jurisdiction to the fire marshal in any respect whatsoever over the operation of the fire department. 
Corporation counsel means the attorney for the Town. 
Municipality means the Town of Vienna, Virginia. 
(Code 1969, § 7-18; Ord. of 6-20-1977)  
Sec. 7-19. - Enforcement of the Virginia Statewide and Town of Vienna fire prevention codes. 
The Town shall enforce the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code promulgated by the board of housing and community development of the commonwealth pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 27-98. The provisions of the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code and the Fire Prevention Code of the Town of Vienna, Virginia, shall be enforced by the Town fire marshal, the deputy Town fire marshal, and members of the fire marshal's staff. The fire marshal, the deputy fire marshal, and members of the fire marshal's staff shall have all of the powers of the local fire official and the local arson investigator and the local fire marshal and his assistants set forth in title 27 of the Code of Virginia, and all of the powers of the fire official and the enforcing agency set forth in the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code and the Fire Prevention Code of the Town of Vienna, Virginia. 
(Code 1969, § 7-19; Ord. of 6-20-1977; Ord. of 3-7-1988)  
Sec. 7-19.1. - Town of Vienna Fire Prevention Code. 
The regulations set forth herein shall be known as the Fire Prevention Code of the Town of Vienna, Virginia, and shall be herein referred to as such or as "this code." 
(Code 1969, § 7-19.1; Ord. of 3-7-1988)  
Sec. 7-20. - Adoption of codes and enforcement. 
The provisions of the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code and the Fire Prevention Code of the County of Fairfax are adopted by the Town and shall be enforced by the county fire marshal and under the authority of the fire marshal's staff. The fire marshal, the deputy fire marshal and the members of the fire marshal's staff shall have all the powers of the local fire official, the local arson investigator and the local fire marshal and his assistants as set forth in title 27 in the Code of Virginia, and all the powers of the fire official and the enforcing agency set forth in the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code and the Fire Prevention Code of the County of Fairfax. 
(Code 1969, § 7-20; Ord. of 6-20-1977; Ord. of 9-26-1977; Ord. of 3-7-1988; Ord. of 11-18-1991)  
Chapter 8 - LICENSES  
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Overriding conflicting ordinances. 
Except as may be otherwise provided by the laws of the commonwealth, and notwithstanding any other current ordinances or resolutions enacted by the Town Council, whether or not compiled in this Code, to the extent of any conflict, the following provisions shall be applicable to the levy, assessment, and collection of licenses required and taxes imposed on businesses, trades, professions and callings and upon the persons, firms and corporations engaged therein within the Town. 
(Code 1969, § 8-1)  
Sec. 8-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Affiliated group means: 
1.  One or more chains of includable corporations connected through stock ownership with a common parent corporation which is an includable corporation if: 
a.  Stock possessing at least 80 percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least 80 percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of each of the includable corporations, except the common parent corporation, is owned directly by one or more of the other includable corporations; and 
b.  The common parent corporation directly owns stock possessing at least 80 percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least 80 percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of at least one of the other includable corporations. As used in this subsection, the term "stock" does not include nonvoting stock which is limited and preferred as to dividends. The term "includable corporation" means any corporation within the affiliated group irrespective of the state or country of its incorporation; and the term "receipts" includes gross receipts and gross income. 
2.  Two or more corporations if five or fewer persons who are individuals, estates or trusts own stock possessing: 
a.  At least 80 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or at least 80 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of the stock of each corporation; and 
b.  More than 50 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or more than 50 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of each corporation, taking into account the stock ownership of each such person only to the extent such stock ownership is identical with respect to each such corporation. 
When one or more of the includible corporations, including the common parent corporation, is a non-stock corporation, the term "stock" as used in this subsection shall refer to the non-stock corporation membership or membership voting rights, as is appropriate to the context. 
Assessment means a determination as to the proper rate of tax, the measure to which the tax rate is applied, and ultimately the amount of tax, including additional or omitted tax, that is due. An assessment shall include a written assessment made pursuant to notice by the assessing official or a self-assessment made by a taxpayer upon the filing of a return or otherwise not pursuant to notice. Assessments shall be deemed made by an assessing official when a written notice of assessment is delivered to the taxpayer by the assessing official or an employee of the assessing official, or mailed to the taxpayer at his last known address. Self-assessments shall be deemed made when a return is filed, or if no return is required, when the tax is paid. A return filed or tax paid before the last day prescribed by ordinance for the filing or payment thereof shall be deemed to be filed or paid on the last day specified for the filing of a return or the payment of tax, as the case may be. 
Assessor or assessing official means the director of finance of the Town. 
Base year means the calendar year proceeding the license year, except for contractors subject to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715. 
Business means a course of dealing which requires the time, attention and labor of the person so engaged for the purpose of earning a livelihood or profit. It implies a continuous and regular course of dealing, rather than an irregular or isolated transaction. A person may be engaged in more than one business. The following acts shall create a rebuttable presumption that a person is engaged in a business: 
(1)  Advertising or otherwise holding oneself out to the public as being engaged in a particular business; or 
(2)  Filing tax returns, schedules and documents that are required only of persons engaged in a trade or business. 
Contractor. 
(1)  The term "contractor" means any person accepting or offering to accept orders or contracts for doing work on or in any building or structure requiring the use of paint, stone, brick, cement, wood, mortar, wallpaper, structural iron or steel, sheet iron, galvanized iron, metallic piping, tin, lead or other metal or any other building material; or accepting or offering to accept orders or contracts to do any electrical work on or in any building or structure; or accepting or offering to accept orders or contracts to do any paving or curbing on sidewalks or streets, public or private property requiring the use of asphalt, brick, stone, cement, wood or any composition; or accepting or offering to accept orders or contracts to excavate earth, rock or materials for foundations or any other purpose; or accepting or offering to accept orders or contracts to construct any sewer of stone, brick, concrete, terra cotta, or other material; or accepting or offering to accept orders or contracts to care for plots in cemeteries; or accepting or offering to accept orders or contracts for building, remodeling, repairing, wrecking, razing or demolishing any structure; or for moving any building; or for drilling, boring or digging a well; or for the installation, maintenance or repair of neon signs, air conditioning apparatus or equipment. 
(2)  Every contractor, whether a general contractor or subcontractor, is a contractor for purposes of local license taxation. The imposition of a license tax on the gross receipts of a general contractor and also a subcontractor is not double taxation. Each is engaged in business in his own right and licensable accordingly. 
(3)  The term "contractor" shall not include persons employed directly on a salary or wage basis by a contractor duly licensed as such under the terms of this chapter. 
Definite place of business means an office or a location at which occurs a regular and continuous course of dealing for 30 consecutive days or more. A definite place of business for a person engaged in business may include a location leased or otherwise obtained from another person on a temporary or seasonal basis; and real property leased to another. A person's residence shall be deemed to be a definite place of business if there is no definite place of business maintained elsewhere and the person is not licensable as a peddler or itinerant merchant. 
Financial services means the buying, selling, handling, managing, investing, and providing of advice regarding money, credit, securities and other investments and shall include the service for compensation by a credit agency, an investment company, a broker or dealer in securities and commodities or a security or commodity exchange, unless such service is otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
1.  Broker means an agent of a buyer or a seller who buys or sells stocks, bonds, commodities, or services, usually on a commission basis. 
2.  Commodity means staples such as wool, cotton, etc., which are traded on a commodity exchange and on which there is trading in futures. 
3.  Dealer means any person engaged in the business of buying and selling securities for his own account, but does not include a bank, or any person insofar as he buys or sells securities for his own account, either individually or in some fiduciary capacity, but not as part of a regular business. 
4.  Security shall have the same meaning as in the Securities Act (Code of Virginia, § 13.1-501 et seq.), or in similar laws of the United States regulating the sale of securities. 
Those engaged in rendering financial services include, but without limitation, the following: 
Buying installment receivables; 
Chattel mortgage financing; 
Consumer financing; 
Credit card services; 
Credit unions; 
Factors; 
Financing accounts receivable; 
Industrial loan companies; 
Installment financing; 
Inventory financing; 
Loan or mortgage brokers; 
Loan or mortgage companies; 
Safety deposit box companies; 
Security and commodity brokers and services; 
Stockbroker; 
Working capital financing. 
Gross receipts means the whole, entire, total receipts attributable to the licensed privilege, without deduction, except as may be limited by the provisions of chapter 37 of title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
License year means the calendar year for which a license is issued for the privilege of engaging in business. 
Personal services means rendering for compensation any repair, personal, business or other services not specifically classified as "financial, real estate or professional service" under this chapter, or rendered in any other business or occupation not specifically classified in this chapter unless exempted from local license tax by Code of Virginia, title 58.1. 
Professional services means services performed by architects, attorneys-at-law, certified public accountants, dentists, engineers, land surveyors, surgeons, veterinarians, and practitioners of the healing arts (the arts and sciences dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, treatment and cure or alleviation of human physical or mental ailments, conditions, diseases, pain or infirmities) and such occupations, and no others, as the state department of taxation may list in the BPOL guidelines promulgated pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3701. The department shall identify and list each occupation or vocation in which a professed knowledge of some department of science or learning, gained by a prolonged course of specialized instruction and study is used by its practical application to the affairs of others, either advising, guiding, or teaching them, and in serving their interests or welfare in the practice of an art or science founded on it. The term "profession" implies attainments in professional knowledge as distinguished from mere skill, and the application of knowledge to uses for others rather than for personal profit. 
Purchases means all goods, wares and merchandise received for sale at each definite place of business of a wholesale merchant. The term "purchases" also includes the cost of manufacture of all goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by a wholesaler or wholesale merchant and sold or offered for sale. Such merchant may elect to report the gross receipts from the sale of manufactured goods, wares and merchandise if it cannot determine or chooses not to disclose the cost of manufacture. 
Real estate services means rendering a service for compensation as lessor, buyer, seller, agent, or broker and providing a real estate service, unless the service is otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, and such services include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Appraisers of real estate; 
Escrow agents, real estate; 
Fiduciaries, real estate; 
Lessors of real property; 
Real estate agents, brokers and managers; 
Real estate selling agents; 
Rental agents for real estate. 
Retailer or retail merchant means any person or merchant who sells goods, wares and merchandise for use or consumption by the purchaser or for any purpose other than resale by the purchaser, but does not include sales at wholesale to institutional, commercial and industrial users. 
Services means things purchased by a customer which do not have physical characteristics, or which are not goods, wares, or merchandise. 
Wholesaler or wholesale merchant means any person or merchant who sells wares and merchandise for resale by the purchaser, including sales when the goods, wares and merchandise will be incorporated into goods and services for sale, and also includes sales to institutional, commercial and industrial users which because of the quantity, price, or other terms indicate that they are consistent with sales at wholesale. 
(Code 1969, § 8-2; Ord. of 10-28-1996)  
Sec. 8-3. - License requirement. 
A.  Every person engaging in the Town in any business, trade, profession, occupation or calling (collectively hereinafter "a business"), unless otherwise exempted by law, shall apply for a license for each such business if such person maintains a definite place of business in the Town, such person does not maintain a definite office anywhere but does maintain an abode in the Town, which abode for the purposes of this chapter shall be deemed a definite place of business; or there is no definite place of business but such person operates amusement machines, is engaged as a peddler or itinerant merchant, carnival or circus as specified in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3717, 58.1-3718, or 58.1-3728, respectively, or is a contractor subject to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715, or is a public service corporation subject to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3731. A separate license shall be required for each definite place of business. A person engaged in two or more businesses or professions carried on at the same place of business may elect to obtain one license for all such businesses and professions if all of the following criteria are satisfied: 
(1)  Each business or profession is licensable at the location and has satisfied any requirements imposed by state law or other provisions of the ordinances of the Town; 
(2)  All of the businesses or professions are subject to the same tax rate, or, if subject to different tax rates, the licensee agrees to be taxed on all businesses and professions at the highest rate; and 
(3)  The taxpayer agrees to supply such information as the assessor may require concerning the nature of the several businesses and their gross receipts. 
B.  Each person subject to a license tax shall apply for a license prior to beginning business, if he was not subject to licensing in the Town on or before January 1 of the license year, or no later than March 1 of the current license year if he had been issued a license for the preceding license year. The application shall be on forms prescribed by the assessing official. 
C.  The tax shall be paid with the application in the case of any license not based on gross receipts or purchases. If the tax is measured by the gross receipts or purchases of the business, the tax shall be paid on or before April 30 of each year. 
D.  The assessing official may grant an extension of time, not to exceed 90 days, in which to file an application for a license for reasonable cause. The extension shall be conditioned upon the timely payment of a reasonable estimate of the appropriate tax, subject to adjustment to the correct tax at the end of the extension together with interest from the due date until the date paid and, if the estimate submitted with the extension is found to be unreasonable under the circumstances, a penalty of ten percent of the portion paid after the due date. 
E.  A penalty of ten percent of the tax may be imposed upon the failure to file an application or the failure to pay the tax by the appropriate due date. Only the late filing penalty shall be imposed by the assessing official if both the application and payment are late; however, both penalties may be assessed if the assessing official determines that the taxpayer has a history of noncompliance. In the case of an assessment of additional tax made by the assessing official, if the application and, if applicable, the return were made in good faith and the understatement of the tax was not due to any fraud, reckless or intentional disregard of the law by the taxpayer, there shall be no late payment penalty assessed with the additional tax. If any assessment of tax by the assessing official is not paid within 30 days, the director of finance may impose a ten percent late payment penalty. The penalties shall not be imposed, or, if imposed, shall be abated by the official who assessed them if the failure to file or pay was not the fault of the taxpayer. In order to demonstrate lack of fault, the taxpayer must show that he acted responsibly and that the failure was due to events beyond his control. 
1.  The term "acted responsibly" means that: 
(1)  The taxpayer exercised the level of reasonable care that a prudent person would exercise under the circumstances in determining the filing obligations for the business; and 
(2)  The taxpayer undertook significant steps to avoid or mitigate the failure, such as requesting appropriate extensions (where applicable), attempting to prevent a foreseeable impediment, acting to remove an impediment once it occurred, and promptly rectifying a failure once the impediment was removed or the failure discovered. 
2.  The term "events beyond the taxpayer's control" includes, but is not limited to, the unavailability of records due to fire or other casualty; the unavoidable absence (e.g., due to death or serious illness) of the person with the sole responsibility for tax compliance; or the taxpayer's reasonable reliance in good faith upon erroneous written information from the assessing official, who was aware of the relevant facts relating to the taxpayer's business when he provided the erroneous information. 
F.  Interest shall be charged on the late payment of the tax from the due date until the date paid without regard to fault or other reason for the late payment. Whenever an assessment of additional or omitted tax by the assessing official is found to be erroneous, all interest and penalty charged and collected on the amount of the assessment found to be erroneous shall be refunded together with interest on the refund from the date of payment or the due date, whichever is later. Interest shall be paid on the refund of any tax paid under this chapter from the date of payment or due date, whichever is later, whether attributable to an amended return or other reason. Interest on any refund shall be paid at the same rate charged under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. No interest shall accrue on an adjustment of estimated tax liability to actual liability at the conclusion of a base year. No interest shall be paid on a refund or charged on a late payment, in event of such adjustment, provided the refund or the late payment is made not more than 30 days from the date of the payment that created the refund, or the due date of the tax, whichever is later. 
(Code 1969, § 8-3; Ord. of 10-28-1996; Ord. of 2-5-2001)  
Sec. 8-4. - Situs of gross receipts. 
A.  General rule. Whenever the tax imposed by this chapter is measured by gross receipts, the gross receipts included in the taxable measure shall be only those gross receipts attributed to the exercise of a licensable privilege at a definite place of business within the Town. In the case of activities conducted outside of a definite place of business, such as during a visit to a customer location, the gross receipts shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which such activities are initiated, directed, or controlled. The situs of gross receipts for different classifications of business shall be attributed to one or more definite places of business or offices as follows: 
1.  The gross receipts of a contractor shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which his services are performed; or if his services are not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which his services are directed or controlled, unless the contractor is subject to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715. 
2.  The gross receipts of a retailer or wholesaler shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which sales solicitation activities occur, or if sale solicitation activities do not occur at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which sales solicitation activities are directed or controlled; however, a wholesaler or distribution house subject to a license tax measured by purchases shall determine the situs of its purchases by the definite place of business at which or from which deliveries of the purchased goods, wares and merchandise are made to customers. Any wholesaler who is subject to license tax in two or more localities and who is subject to multiple taxation because the localities use different measures, may apply to the department of taxation for a determination as to the proper measure of purchases and gross receipts subject to license tax in each locality. 
3.  The gross receipts of a business renting tangible personal property shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which the tangible personal property is rented or, if the property is not rented, from any definite place of business, then the definite place of business at which the rental of such property is managed. 
4.  The gross receipts from the performance of services shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which services are performed or, if not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which the services are directed or controlled. 
B.  Apportionment. If the licensee has more than one definite place of business and it is impractical or impossible to determine to which definite place of business gross receipts should be attributed under the general rule and the affected jurisdictions are unable to reach an apportionment agreement, except as to circumstances set forth in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3709, the gross receipts of the business shall be apportioned between the definite places of businesses on the basis of payroll. Gross receipts shall not be apportioned to a definite place of business unless some activities under the applicable general rule occurred at, or were controlled from, such definite place of business. Gross receipts attributable to a definite place of business in another jurisdiction shall not be attributed to this Town solely because the other jurisdiction does not impose a tax on the gross receipts attributable to the definite place of business in such other jurisdiction. 
C.  Agreements. The assessor may enter into agreements with any other political subdivision of the commonwealth concerning the manner in which gross receipts shall be apportioned among definite places of business. However, the sum of the gross receipts apportioned by the agreement shall not exceed the total gross receipts attributable to all of the definite places of business affected by the agreement. Upon being notified by a taxpayer that its method of attributing gross receipts is fundamentally inconsistent with the method of one or more political subdivisions in which the taxpayer is licensed to engage in business and that the difference has, or is likely to, result in taxes on more than 100 percent of its gross receipts from all locations in the affected jurisdictions, the assessor shall make a good faith effort to reach an apportionment agreement with the other political subdivisions involved. 
(Code 1969, § 8-4; Ord. of 10-28-1996)  
Sec. 8-5. - Limitations and extensions. 
A.  Where, before the expiration of the time prescribed for the assessment of any license tax imposed pursuant to this chapter, both the assessing official and the taxpayer have consented in writing to its assessment after such time, the tax may be assessed at any time prior to the expiration of the period agreed upon. The period so agreed upon may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing made before the expiration of the period previously agreed upon. 
B.  Notwithstanding Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3903, the assessing official shall access the local license tax omitted because of fraud or failure to apply for a license for the current license year and the six preceding years. 
C.  The period for collecting any local license tax shall not expire prior to the period specified in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3940, two years after the date of assessment if the period of assessment has been extended pursuant to this section, two years after final determination of an appeal for which collection has been stayed pursuant to section 8-5.1.B or D, or two years after the final decision in a court application pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3984, or similar law for which collection has been stayed, whichever is later. 
(Code 1969, § 8-5; Ord. of 10-28-1996)  
Sec. 8-5.1. - Appeals and rules. 
A.  Any person assessed with a licensing tax under this chapter as the result of an audit may apply within 90 days from the date of the assessment to the assessing official for a correction of the assessment. The application must be filed in good faith and sufficiently identify the taxpayer, audit period, remedy sought, each alleged error in the assessment, the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies and any other facts relevant to the taxpayer's contention. The assessor may hold a conference with the taxpayer if requested by the taxpayer, or require submission of additional information and documents, further audit, or other evidence deemed necessary for a proper and equitable determination of the applications. The assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct. The assessor shall undertake a full review of the taxpayer's claims and issue a determination to the taxpayer setting forth its position. Every assessment pursuant to an audit shall be accompanied by a written explanation of the taxpayer's right to seek correction and the specific procedure to be followed in the Town (e.g., the name and address to which an application should be directed). 
B.  Provided an application is made within 90 days of an assessment, collection activity shall be suspended until a final determination is issued by the assessor, unless the assessor determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions section 8-3.F, but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The term "jeopardized by delay" includes a finding that the application is frivolous, or that a taxpayer desires: 
(1)  To depart quickly from the locality; 
(2)  To remove his property therefrom; 
(3)  To conceal himself or his property therein; or 
(4)  To do any other act tending to prejudice, or to render wholly or partially ineffectual, proceedings to collect the tax for the period in question. 
C.  Any person assessed with a license tax under this chapter as a result of an audit may apply within 90 days of the determination by the assessing official on an application pursuant to subsection A of this section to the director of finance for a correction of such assessment. The director of finance shall issue a determination to the taxpayer within 90 days of receipt of the taxpayer's application, unless the taxpayer and the assessing official are notified that a longer period will be required. The application shall be treated as an application pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1821, and the director of finance may issue an order correcting such assessment pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1822. Following such an order, either the taxpayer or the assessing official may apply to the appropriate circuit court pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3984. However, the burden shall be on the party making the application to show that the ruling of the director of finance is erroneous. Neither the director of finance nor the department of taxation shall be made a party to an application to correct an assessment merely because the director of finance has ruled on it. 
D.  On receipt of a notice of intent to file an appeal to the director of finance under subsection A of this section, the assessing official shall further suspend collection activity until a final determination is issued by the director of finance, unless the assessor determines that collection would be jeopardized by the delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of subsection A of this section, but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The term "jeopardized by delay" shall have the same meaning as set forth in subsection A of this section. 
E.  Any taxpayer may request a written ruling regarding the application of the tax to a specific situation from the assessor. Any person requesting such a ruling must provide all the relevant facts for the situation and may present a rationale for the basis of an interpretation of the law most favorable to the taxpayer. Any misrepresentation or change in the applicable law or the factual situation as presented in the ruling request shall invalidate any such ruling issued. A written ruling may be revoked or amended prospectively if: 
(1)  There is a change in the law, a court decision; or 
(2)  The assessor notifies the taxpayer of a change in the policy or interpretation upon which the ruling was based. 
However, any person who acts on a written ruling which later becomes invalid shall be deemed to have acted in good faith during the period in which such ruling was in effect. 
(Code 1969, § 8-5.1; Ord. of 10-28-1996)  
Sec. 8-6. - Recordkeeping and audits. 
Every person who is assessable with a license tax shall keep sufficient records to enable the assessor to verify the correctness of the tax paid for the license years assessable and to enable the assessor to ascertain the correct amount of tax that was assessable for each of those years. All such records, books of accounts and other information shall be open to inspection and examination by the assessor in order to allow the assessor to establish whether a particular receipt is directly attributable to the taxable privilege exercised within the Town. The assessor shall provide the taxpayer with the option to conduct the audit in the taxpayer's local business office, if the records are maintained there. In the event the records are maintained outside the Town, copies of the appropriate books and records shall be sent to the assessor's office upon demand. 
(Code 1969, § 8-6)  
Sec. 8-7. - Exclusions and deductions from gross receipts. 
A.  General rule. Gross receipts for license tax purposes shall not include any amount not derived from the exercise of the licensed privilege to engage in a business or profession in the ordinary course of business or profession. 
B.  Items excluded from gross receipts. The following items shall be excluded from gross receipts: 
1.  Amounts received and paid to the United States, the commonwealth or any county, city or Town for the state retail sales or use tax, or for any local sales tax or any local excise tax on cigarettes, for any federal or state excise taxes on motor fuels. 
2.  Any amount representing the liquidation of a debt or conversion of another asset to the extent that the amount is attributable to a transaction previously taxed (e.g., the factoring of accounts receivable created by sales which have been included in taxable receipts even though the creation of such debt and factoring are a regular part of its business). 
3.  Any amount representing returns and allowances granted by the business to its customers. 
4.  Receipts which are the proceeds of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the obligor. 
5.  Receipts representing the return of principal of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the creditor, or the return of principal or basis upon the sale of a capital asset. 
6.  Rebates and discounts taken or received on account of purchases by the licensee. A rebate or other incentive offered to induce the recipient to purchase certain goods or services from a person other than the offeror, and which the recipient assigns to the licensee in consideration of the sale of goods and services shall not be considered a rebate or discount to the licensee, but shall be included in the licensee's gross receipts together with any handling or other fees related to the incentive. 
7.  Withdrawals from inventory for purposes other than sale or distribution and for which no consideration is received and the occasional sale or exchange of assets other than inventory, whether or not a gain or loss is recognized for federal income tax purposes. 
8.  Investment income; certain business expenses. 
a.  Investment income not directly related to the privilege exercised by a licensable business not classified as rendering financial services. This exclusion shall apply to interest on bank accounts of the business, and to interest, dividends and other income derived from the investment of its own funds in securities and other types of investments unrelated to the licensed privilege. This exclusion shall not apply to interest, late fees and similar income attributable to an installment sale or other transaction that occurred in the regular course of business. 
b.  The following shall be deducted from gross receipts or gross purchases that would otherwise be taxable: 
(1)  Any amount paid for computer hardware and software that are sold to a United States federal or state government entity, provided that such property was purchased within two years of the sale to said entity by the original purchaser who shall have been contractually obligated at the time of purchase to resell such property to a state or federal government entity. This deduction shall not occur until the time of resale and shall apply to only the original cost of the property and not to its resale price, and the deduction shall not apply to any of the tangible personal property which was the subject of the original resale contract if it is not resold to s state or federal government entity in accordance with the original contract obligation. 
(2)  Any receipts attributable to business conducted in another state or foreign country in which the taxpayer is liable for an income or other tax based upon income. 
(Code 1969, § 8-7; Ord. of 10-28-1996)  
Sec. 8-8. - Lessor of real property. 
A.  Every person who, as principal, shall engage in the business of renting houses, apartments or commercial property in the Town shall pay for the privilege of doing business an annual license tax of $0.17 on each $100.00 of gross receipts from the rental of all commercial establishments, apartment units or dwelling units during the preceding fiscal or calendar year. Persons engaged in the business of renting houses or apartments, or both, shall not be affected by, or come within the provisions of this section unless such person is engaged in the business of renting in excess of two separate dwelling units. The minimum annual license tax shall be $30.00. 
B.  The business of renting houses and apartments as used in this section shall be construed to mean the rental of a building or portion thereof designed exclusively for residential occupancy, including one-family, two-family and multiple-family dwellings, but not including hotels, boardinghouses and roominghouses. 
C.  The term "dwelling unit" means one or more rooms in a dwelling house or apartment designed for occupancy by one family for living purposes and having cooking facilities. 
(Code 1962, § 4-52; Code 1969, § 8-8; Ord. of 6-23-1981)  
Sec. 8-9. - Public service corporations (utilities). 
A.  Motor vehicle carriers. All motor vehicle carriers, except such carriers whose annual gross receipts do not exceed $5,000.00, operating on or through the streets of the Town shall pay for the privilege of using the streets, roads and routes, including bridges, excluding toll bridges, an annual license tax as follows: one-fifth cent per mile for each mile operated within the Town by any vehicle weighing 5,000 pounds or less; two-fifths cent per mile for each mile operated within the Town by any vehicle weighing more than 5,000 pounds and less than 15,000 pounds; and three-fifths cent per mile for each mile operated within the Town by any vehicle weighing more than 15,000 pounds. 
B.  Telephone companies. All persons engaged in the business of providing telephone communications in the Town shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax equal to one-half of one percent of the gross receipts from rentals, subscriptions and stations within the Town during the preceding fiscal or calendar year, excluding, however, business done between the Town and points outside the state or messages sent by the government of the United States or the state and their officers or agents. 
C.  Telegraph companies. All persons engaged in the business of sending telegraphic communications from the Town to any point within the state shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax of one-half of one percent of the gross receipts derived from the sending of such telegrams and telegraphic communications of any kind during the preceding fiscal or calendar year, excluding, however, business done between the Town and points outside the state and receipts from the government of the United States, the state or the Town, and their officers and agents. 
D.  Heat, light and power and gas companies. All persons furnishing heat, light or power by means of electric current or gas in the Town shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax of one-half of one percent of the gross receipts of such enterprise derived from the Town during the preceding fiscal or calendar year, excluding, however, such services furnished to federal, state and local authorities and sales for resale to other electric companies. 
(Code 1962, § 4-48; Code 1969, § 8-9)  
Sec. 8-10. - Wholesale merchants. 
Every person having a definite place of business or store within the Town conducting or engaging in any of the following wholesale merchant occupations, businesses or trades, including but not limited to the following, shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax of $0.10 for each $100.00 of gross receipts from the business during the preceding fiscal or calendar year; provided that any person commencing his occupation after the beginning of the license tax year shall pay for the privilege a license tax of $0.10 for each $100.00 of anticipated gross receipts for the remaining portion of the license tax year: 
Automotive; 
Chemicals; 
Clothing, furnishings; 
Coal, coke; 
Coins and precious metals; 
Commission merchants (who take title, others classed as brokers); 
Drugs; 
Dry goods; 
Electrical, plumbing goods; 
Farm equipment; 
Furniture and house furnishings; 
Groceries and foods; 
Hardware; 
Jewelry; 
Lumber, paint and construction materials; 
Machinery, equipment and supplies; 
Metals and metal work; 
Paper and paper products; 
Seafood; 
Soft drinks; 
Sporting goods; 
Tobacco and tobacco products (except leaf tobacco); 
Waste materials; 
Other wholesale merchants. 
(Code 1962, § 4-42; Code 1969, § 8-10)  
Sec. 8-11. - Rates of license taxes. 
Except as may be specifically otherwise provided by ordinance or other law, the minimum annual license tax imposed hereunder shall be $30.00. For any business with annual gross receipts of $50,000.00 or more, the annual license tax imposed on such business shall be at the rate set forth below for the class of enterprise listed: 
1.  For contractors and persons constructing for their own account for sale, $0.12 per $100.00 of gross receipts; 
2.  For retailers, $0.17 per $100.00 of gross receipts; 
3.  For financial, real estate and professional services, $0.52 per $100.00 of gross receipts; 
4.  For repair, personal and business services and all other businesses and occupations not specifically listed or exempted in this chapter or otherwise by law, $0.22 per $100.00 of gross receipts; 
5.  For wholesalers, $0.10 per $100.00 of purchases (see Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3716 for limitations); 
6.  For massage parlors, $5,000.00 per year; 
7.  For permanent coliseums, arenas or auditoriums having a maximum capacity in excess of 10,000 persons, open to the public, $1,000.00 per year (see limitation in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3729); 
8.  For savings and loan associations and credit unions, $50.00 per year; and 
9.  For direct sellers as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3719.1 with total annual sales in excess of $4,000.00, $0.17 per $100.00 of total annual retail sales or $0.10 per $100.00 of total annual wholesale sales, whichever is applicable. 
(Code 1969, § 8-11)  
Sec. 8-12. - Compliance with zoning regulations. 
A.  The Town treasurer shall not issue a license for conducting any business, profession, trade or occupation at a location where the conduct of such business, profession, trade or occupation is prohibited by the zoning regulations of the Town. 
B.  All such licenses shall be subject to verification to ascertain compliance with the zoning regulations. Failure to comply shall be just cause for immediate revocation by the Town treasurer. 
(Code 1962, § 4-23; Code 1969, § 8-12)  
Secs. 8-13—8-24. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 8-13 through 8-24 were repealed on January 8, 1996.  
ARTICLE 2. - SPECIAL LICENSE TAX PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 8-25. - Alcoholic beverages. 
A.  Every person who shall engage in the businesses of manufacturing, bottling, wholesaling or retailing alcoholic beverages shall obtain a license therefor and shall pay therefor the license tax hereinafter provided: 
1.  Distiller's license. For each distiller's license, $500.00 per annum; provided that no license shall be required of any distiller manufacturing not more than 5,000 gallons of alcohol or spirits or both during such license year. 
2.  Winery license. For each winery license, $500.00 per annum. 
3.  Brewery license. For each brewery license, $500.00 per annum. 
4.  Bottler's license. For each bottler's license, $200.00 per annum. 
5.  Wholesale beer license. For each wholesale beer license, $25.00 per annum. 
6.  Wholesale wine distributor's license. For each wholesale wine distributor's license, $25.00 per annum. 
7.  Retail on-premises wine and beer license for hotel, motel, restaurant or club. For each retail on-premises wine and beer license for a hotel, motel, restaurant, or club, $37.50 per annum. 
8.  Retail off-premises wine and beer license. For each retail off-premises wine and beer license, $37.50 per annum. 
9.  Retail on-premises beer license for hotel, motel, restaurant or club. For each retail on-premises beer license for a hotel, motel, restaurant or club, $25.00 per annum. 
10.  Banquet license. For each banquet license, $5.00 per day. 
11.  Fruit distiller's license. For each fruit distiller's license, $100.00 per annum. 
12.  Mixed beverage license tax. Any person in the Town who holds a mixed beverage restaurant license from the state shall obtain from the Town a mixed beverage license as follows: 
(a.)  Persons operating restaurants, including restaurants located on premises of and operated by hotels or motels: 
(1)  $200.00 per annum for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for 50 to 100 persons. 
(2)  $350.00 per annum for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for more than 100, but not more than 150 persons. 
(3)  $500.00 per annum for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for more than 150 persons. 
(b.)  A private, nonprofit club operating a restaurant located on the premises of such club, $350.00 per annum. 
B.  The aforesaid licenses shall be as respectively defined by the act of the General Assembly as herebefore and hereafter amended, known as the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act and the terms "alcoholic beverages," "alcohol," "spirits," "beer" and "wine" wherever used in this chapter shall have the meanings respectively prescribed to them by such Act. 
C.  No license shall be issued under this section to any person unless such person shall hold or secure simultaneously therewith the proper state license required by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, which state license shall be exhibited to the Town treasurer, and all dining rooms, restaurants, lunchrooms and club rooms wherein the beverages herein defined are sold for consumption on the premises shall at all times be open to inspection to the state police and the police authorities of the Town. Any violation of the terms of this provision shall be sufficient grounds for the revocation of the license issued in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1962, § 4-25; Code 1969, § 8-25)  
Sec. 8-26. - Carnivals, circuses and exhibitions. 
A.  Every person exhibiting performances in a side show, dog and pony show, trained animal show, carnival, circus, menagerie or any other show, exhibition or performance similar thereto, shall procure a license therefor. 
B.  The Town license tax on side shows, dog and pony shows, trained animal shows, circuses, menageries or similar shows, exhibitions or performances shall be $100.00 per day. 
C.  The Town license tax on carnivals shall be $100.00 per day. For the purpose of this section, the term "carnival" means an aggregation of shows, amusements, concessions, eating places and riding devices, or any of them, operated together on one parcel of ground or streets or on contiguous parcels of ground or streets or moving from place to place, whether the same are owned and actually operated by separate persons or not. 
D.  This section shall not be construed to prohibit a resident mechanic or artist from exhibiting any production of his own art or invention without compensation, nor shall any license be required on any industrial art exhibit nor any agricultural fair or the shows exhibited within such grounds of such fair during the period of such fair, whether any admission is charged or not, nor of any resident persons performing in a show or exhibition for charity or other benevolent purposes, nor of exhibitions of volunteer fire companies, whether an admission is charged or not. Whenever any such show, exhibition or performance is given, whether exempted by the terms hereof or licensed, those engaged therein and operating under either such license or exemption, shall be exempted from a license tax for performing or acting thereat. 
E.  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to allow, without payment of the tax herein imposed, any performance for charitable or benevolent purposes by a company, association of persons or a corporation, which makes it its business to give exhibitions, no matter what terms of contract may be entered into or under what auspices such exhibition is given by such company, association of persons or corporation for benevolent or charitable purposes, it being the intent and meaning of this section that every company, association of persons or corporation the business of which is giving exhibitions for compensation, whether a part of the proceeds are for charitable or benevolent purposes or not, shall pay the license tax prescribed herein. 
F.  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to impose a license tax on a bona fide local association, company or corporation organized for the principal purpose of holding, and which holds, legitimate agricultural exhibitions or industrial arts exhibits. 
(Code 1962, § 4-28; Code 1969, § 8-26)  
Sec. 8-27. - Fortunetellers. 
Every person engaged in work as a fortuneteller, clairvoyant, phrenologist, spirit medium, astrologist, hypnotist or palmist, for which compensation is received, shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax of $500.00. This license shall not be transferred or prorated. 
(Code 1962, § 4-29; Code 1969, § 8-27)  
Sec. 8-28. - Itinerant vendors. 
An itinerant vendor, within the meaning of this section, is a person who shall engage in, do or transact any temporary or transient business in the Town, either in one locality or in traveling from place to place in the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, and who for the purpose of carrying on such business shall hire, lease, use or occupy any building or structure, motor vehicle, tent, car, boat or public room or any part thereof, including rooms in hotels, lodginghouses, or houses of private entertainment, or in any street, alley or other public place in the Town, for a period of less than one year, for the exhibition of or sale of such goods, wares or merchandise. All itinerant vendors doing business in the Town shall pay for the privilege a license tax of $50.00 per annum. 
(Code 1962, § 4-30; Code 1969, § 8-28; Ord. of 5-9-1983)  
Sec. 8-29. - Junk and secondhand dealers. 
Every person trading in any kind of secondhand articles, junk, old metal, rags or other like commodities shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax of $125.00; and for each canvasser or agent canvassing the Town for the purpose of buying junk or other secondhand materials for a principal or for himself, an annual license tax of $25.00 shall be paid for the privilege; and the person doing business under this section shall give bond in the amount of $1,000.00 for his faithful compliance with the law. The bond shall be delivered to the Town treasurer upon issuance of the license. 
(Code 1962, § 4-31; Code 1969, § 8-29)  
Sec. 8-30. - Peddlers generally. 
(1)  Any person who shall carry from place to place any goods, wares or merchandise and offer to sell or barter the same, or actually sell or barter the same shall be deemed to be a peddler. 
(2)  All persons who do not keep a regular place of business, whether it is a house or a vacant lot or elsewhere, open at all times in regular business hours and at the same place, who shall offer for sale goods, wares and merchandise, shall be deemed peddlers under this section. All persons who keep a regular place of business, open at all times in regular business hours and at the same place, who shall, elsewhere than at such regular place of business, personally or through agents offer for sale or sell and, at the time of such offering for sale, deliver goods, wares and merchandise, shall also be deemed peddlers as in subsection (1) of this section, but this section shall not apply to those who sell or offer for sale in person or by other employees ice, wood, charcoal, meats, milk, butter, eggs, poultry, fish, oysters, game, vegetables, fruits or other family supplies of a perishable nature, farm products grown or produced by them and not purchased by them for sale. However, a dairyman who uses upon the streets of the Town one or more wagons may sell and deliver from his wagons, milk, butter, cream and eggs without procuring a peddler's license. 
(3)  The license taxes imposed by this section shall not apply to any peddler who is covered by section 8-31 and who sells to licensed dealers or retailers only. 
(4)  For the privilege or peddling or bartering in the Town, there shall be paid $50.00 annual license tax for each person so engaged or employed in the Town when he travels on foot and when he peddles otherwise than on foot, the annual license tax paid shall be $25.00 except that: 
A.  The annual license tax on peddlers of ice, wood, or coal, not produced by them but purchased for resale, shall be $25.00 for each vehicle used in such peddling in the Town; provided that such dealers paying a retail merchant's license tax under this chapter may peddle the same from their vehicles without paying additional tax. 
B.  The annual license tax on peddlers of meat, milk, butter, eggs, poultry, fish, oysters, game, vegetables, fruits or other family supplies of a perishable nature not grown or produced by them shall be $25.00 for such peddling in the Town. 
C.  The annual license tax of peddlers of seafood who buy the seafood they peddle directly from persons who catch or take the same be $10.00 for each vehicle used in such peddling in the Town. 
D.  No license issued under this section shall be prorated or transferred. 
E.  The license taxes imposed by this section shall not apply to unpaid agents or members of a nonprofit organization conducting a sale for the purpose of raising money to be used solely for charitable, community service, nonprofit recreational or religious purposes, consistent with the organization's charter or organizational purpose. 
(5)  Exemption as herein provided may be granted by the Town Manager or his designate upon receipt of written request setting forth the use to which proceeds so derived will be applied, together with proof as may be required of the nonprofit status of the organization so applying. 
(Code 1962, § 4-33; Code 1969, § 8-30; Ord. of 11-3-1969; Ord. of 1-1975)  
Sec. 8-30.1. - Use of streets by peddlers. 
A.  No peddler shall conduct business from a stationary location in the public streets or rights-of-way, nor shall any have an exclusive right to any location in the public streets or rights-of-way, nor shall he be permitted to operate in any congested area where his operations might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purposes of this section, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced. 
B.  Locations at which parades, fairs, carnivals, circuses, shows, public entertainment, public exhibitions and events of any kind open to the public are conducted all or in part in a public street, park, or right-of-way are declared congested areas at which the act of peddling might impede or inconvenience the public. 
(Code 1969, § 8-30.1; Ord. of 1-6-1975; Ord. of 3-15-1999)  
Sec. 8-31. - Peddlers of goods, wares and merchandise to dealers or retailers. 
A.  Every person other than a distributor or vendor of motor vehicle fuels and petroleum products, tobacco or seafood, a farmer, a farmer's cooperative association, a producer, a manufacturer taxable on capital by the state or a distributor of manufactured goods paying a state license tax on his purchases, who shall peddle goods, wares or merchandise by selling and delivering the same at the same time to licensed dealers or retailers at other than a definite place of business operated by the seller, shall pay an annual license tax of $25.00 per annum for each vehicle used in such business, which tax shall not be prorated and shall not be transferable. 
B.  Every vehicle used by any licensee hereunder shall have conspicuously displayed thereon the name of the person using the same, with the post office address of the licensee. The license hereby required shall be conspicuously displayed on each vehicle while used in such business. 
C.  Every person claiming to be a distributor or vendor of motor vehicle fuels and petroleum products, a farmer, a dealer in forest products, tobacco or seafood, a producer, a wholesale dealer, a manufacturer taxable on capital by the state or a distributor of manufactured goods paying a Town tax on his purchases and selling and delivering at the same time, or offering to sell and deliver at the same time, to licensed dealers or retailers, such goods, wares or merchandise, shall upon the request of any police, tax or revenue officer, furnish evidence of his claim other than his mere statement that he is exempt from the provisions of this section. Failure to furnish such evidence shall be sufficient grounds for charging the person operating the vehicle with a violation of this section. In any prosecution for a violation of this section, the claim aforesaid shall be corroborated by satisfactory evidence. The exemption hereby accorded a distributor or vendor of motor vehicle fuels and petroleum products and forest products, and tobacco, and in the case of a farmer, a producer or a manufacturer taxable on capital by this state, the exemption is restricted to such peddling of goods, wares or merchandise actually manufactured, produced or grown by the seller. 
D.  The term "farmer," within the meaning of this section, means any person chiefly engaged in producing agricultural products on whose farm the volume or character of the agricultural products produced is in keeping with the size of the farm, but does not mean any person engaged in producing agricultural products who actively engages, directly or indirectly, in buying or trading in agricultural products not grown or produced by him; or actively engages, directly or indirectly, in conducting a business that includes buying or selling agricultural products not grown or produced by him. The term "peddler," within the meaning of this section, is any person, who, at other than a definite place of business operated by the seller, shall sell or offer to sell goods, wares or merchandise to licensed dealers, or offer to deliver the goods, wares or merchandise to the buyer, and any delivery made on the day of sale shall be considered an equivalent to delivery at the time of sale. 
E.  Every person claiming exemption from the provisions of this section on the grounds that he is delivering goods, wares or merchandise previously sold to the customer, shall, upon request of any police, tax or revenue officer, furnish evidence of his claim other than his mere statement, which evidence may be an invoice or signed order describing the goods, wares or merchandise involved, and the amount and price thereof, and failure to furnish such evidence shall be sufficient grounds for charging the person operating the vehicle with a violation of this section, and in any prosecution for a violation of this section, the claim aforesaid shall be corroborated by satisfactory evidence. 
F.  This section shall not apply to wholesale peddlers who do not have a definite place of business within the Town. 
(Code 1962, § 4-34; Code 1969, § 8-31)  
Sec. 8-32. - Taxicabs. 
Every person operating taxicabs or other motor vehicles for hire over the streets of the Town or using the Town as a basis for operation, shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax of $10.00 for each vehicle. 
(Code 1962, § 4-35; Code 1969, § 8-32)  
Sec. 8-33. - Vending and slot machines. 
A.  Any operator of a coin-operated machine or device operated on the coin-in-the-slot principle shall pay a license tax of $200.00 for the operation of ten or more coin-operated machines; a tax of $175.00 for the operation of nine machines; a tax of $150.00 for the operation of eight machines; a tax of $125.00 for the operation of seven machines; a tax of $100.00 for the operation of six machines; a tax of $75.00 for the operation of five machines; a tax of $50.00 for the operation of four machines; and a tax of $25.00 for the operation of three machines. 
B.  The term "operator" means any person selling, leasing, renting or otherwise furnishing or providing a coin-operated machine or device operated on the coin-in-the-slot principle; provided, however, the term "operator" shall not include a person owning less that three coin machines and operating such machines on property owned or leased by such person. 
(Code 1969, § 8-33; Ord. of 12-1979; Ord. of 5-1980; Ord. of 11-1980)  
Sec. 8-33.1. - Gross receipts tax. 
In addition to that tax imposed pursuant to section 8-33, each operator shall pay for the privilege of operating such devices an annual license tax of $0.15 for each $100.00 of gross receipts for such operation from the preceding fiscal or calendar year; provided that any operator who commences operation after the beginning of the license year shall pay for the privilege a license tax of $0.15 for each $100.00 of anticipated gross receipts for the remaining portion of the license year. 
(Code 1969, § 8-33.1; Ord. of 5-1980)  
ARTICLE 3. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 8-34—8-46. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 8-34 through 8-46 were repealed on January 8, 1996.  
ARTICLE 4. - DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND JEWELS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Precious metals dealers, Code of Virginia, 54.1-4100 et seq.; local ordinance must parallel or be stricter than state law, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4111. 
 
Sec. 8-46.1. - License required. 
No itinerant dealer may purchase gold, silver, platinum, gems or semi-precious stones without a license as provided herein. 
(Code 1969, § 8-46.1; Ord. of 10-1980)  
Sec. 8-46.2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Itinerant dealer means a person who shall engage in any temporary or transient business in the Town for the purchase of gold, silver, platinum, gems, or semi-precious stones. 
(Code 1969, § 8-46.2; Ord. of 10-1980)  
Sec. 8-46.3. - Issuance of license. 
Licenses for dealers in precious metals and jewels shall be issued by the commissioner of the revenue to any person able to produce satisfactory evidence of good character, which license shall designate the premises on which the licensee shall conduct his business and specify the dates upon which the business may be conducted. A fee of $500.00 per day may be charged. 
(Code 1969, § 8-46.3; Ord. of 10-1980)  
Sec. 8-46.4. - License not transferable. 
The license issued hereunder shall be a personal privilege and shall not be transferable, nor shall there be any abatement of the tax upon such license by reason of the fact that the licensee shall have exercised the privilege for any period of less than for which it was granted. The license shall at all times be kept publicly exposed by the licensee on his business premises. 
(Code 1969, § 8-46.4; Ord. of 10-1980)  
Sec. 8-46.5. - Voiding of license. 
Any false statement made on the application form voids the license ab initio. 
(Code 1969, § 8-46.5; Ord. of 10-1980)  
Sec. 8-46.6. - Identification of sellers. 
Licensees shall ascertain the name, address, and age of sellers by requiring an identifier issued by a governmental agency with a picture of the subject and one other corroborating means of identification. Licensees shall record the items purchased, the price paid, and the seller's identity. Such records shall be delivered to the chief of police on the day of purchase. 
(Code 1969, § 8-46.6; Ord. of 10-1980)  
Sec. 8-46.7. - Majority requirement. 
No purchases may be made from anyone under 18 years of age. 
(Code 1969, § 8-46.7; Ord. of 10-1980)  
Sec. 8-46.8. - Bond required. 
Every person so licensed shall at the time of license and before the same shall be operative, enter with either one corporate or two personal sufficient sureties into a joint and several recognizance to the Town in the penal sum of $5,000.00 conditioned upon due observance of the terms of this article. 
(Code 1969, § 8-46.8; Ord. of 10-1980)  
Sec. 8-46.9. - Actions. 
If any person shall be aggrieved by the misconduct of any licensee and shall recover against him therefor, such person may, after the return unsatisfied, either in whole or in part, of any exception upon such judgment, maintain actions in his own name upon the bond. 
(Code 1969, § 8-46.9; Ord. of 10-1980)  
Sec. 8-46.10. - Violations. 
Violation of the terms of this article shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 8-46.10; Ord. of 10-1980)  
Chapter 9 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— State law as to motor vehicles and traffic, Code of Virginia, § 46.2 et seq.; powers of local authorities, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1300—46.2-1313; regulation by localities to require pedestrians to obey traffic signs, signals and directions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-935. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used and contained in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, except where the context clearly requires a different meaning. 
(Code 1969, § 9-1)  
Sec. 9-2. - Chapter applicable to drivers of all vehicles, regardless of ownership. 
The provisions of this chapter applicable to the drivers of vehicles shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles, regardless of ownership, subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 9-2) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-801.  
Sec. 9-3. - Adoption of state law. 
Pursuant to the provisions of the Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1313, as amended, all of the provisions and requirements of the laws of the State relative to the operation of vehicles contained in title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, and of article 2 (§ 18.2-266 et seq.) of chapter 7 of title 18.2 and in effect on July 1, 2015, except those which by their very nature can have no application within the Town, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as fully as though set out herein, and are hereby made applicable within the Town. References therein to highway shall be deemed to refer to those ways or places defined as "Highway" in Code of Virginia 1950, § 46.2-100, as amended, whenever such ways or places are located in the Town. It shall be unlawful for any person within the Town to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any section of the Code of Virginia which is adopted by this section. 
(Code 1969, § 9-3; Ord. of 9-1983; Ord. of 9-1984; Ord. of 9-1985; Ord. of 6-1986; Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 10-1990; Ord. of 9-1991; Ord. of 6-1992; Ord. of 9-1993; Ord. of 9-1994; Ord. of 4-1995; Ord. of 6-1995; Ord. of 10-1995; Ord. of 9-1996; Ord. of 9-1998; Ord. of 7-1999; Ord. of 6-2000, Ord. of 12-2000, Ord. of 9-2001; Ord. of 6-2002; Ord. of 6-2003; Ord. of 5-2004; Ord. of 6-2005; Ord. of 7-2007; Ord. of 9-2008; Ord. of 6-2009; Ord. of 6-2010; Ord. of 5-23-2011, § 1; Ord. of 11-5-2012(2), § 1; Ord. No. 2013-008, § 1, 9-23-2013; Ord. of 7-6-2015(1) ) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-300.  
Sec. 9-3.1. - Right-of-way—Stop signs. 
Except where directed to proceed by a police officer or a traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection at which an approved "Stop" sign has been posted shall come to a complete stop and, after having stopped, shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely on said highway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time that such vehicle is moving across or within the intersection. 
(Code 1969, § 9-3.1; Ord. of 8-1971)  
Sec. 9-3.2. - Same—Four-way stop signs. 
Except as provided by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-920, when two or more vehicles approach or enter an intersection, which is controlled by four-way "Stop" signs, at approximately the same time, all such vehicles shall come to a complete stop and thereafter, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. 
(Code 1969, § 9-3.2; Ord. of 8-1971)  
Sec. 9-4. - Enforcement by officers; officers to be uniformed; officers to be paid fixed and determined salaries. 
Every police officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter, provided that such officer shall be uniformed at the time of such enforcement or shall display his badge or other sign of authority; and provided further that all officers making arrests incident to the enforcement of this chapter shall be paid fixed and determined salaries for their services and shall have no interest in, nor be permitted by law to accept the benefit of, any fine or fee resulting from the arrest or conviction of an offender against any provision of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 9-4) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-102.  
Sec. 9-5. - Stopping vehicles for inspection or to secure information. 
Any police officer who shall be in uniform or who shall exhibit his badge or other sign of authority shall have the right to stop any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, upon request or signal, for the purpose of inspecting the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer as to its equipment and operation, its manufacturer's serial or engine number or its contents or load, if such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is a property carrying vehicle or for the purpose of securing such other information as may be necessary. 
(Code 1969, § 9-5) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-103.  
Sec. 9-6. - Maximum and minimum speed limits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle upon a highway in the Town at a speed in excess of 25 miles per hour unless such highways are otherwise posted. 
(b)  No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour upon a parking lot open to the public and designed to accommodate 50 or more vehicles. 
(Code 1962, § 8-33; Code 1969, § 9-6; Ord. of 4-1967; Ord. of 12-1974) 
State Law reference— State law as to maximum and minimum speed limits, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-875, 46.2-877 and 46.2-878.  
Sec. 9-6.1. - Speed in residential zones. 
Any person who shall operate any vehicle at a speed of 20 miles an hour or more in excess of the applicable maximum speed limit in a residential district shall, upon conviction of the same, be subject to a mandatory civil penalty of $100.00, not subject to suspension. 
(Code 1969, § 9-6.1; Ord. of 7-1999) 
State Law reference— Maximum speed in business and residence districts, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-874.  
Sec. 9-7. - Full time and attention to be given to operation. 
Every person who shall operate any vehicle shall at all times while operating such vehicle devote his full time and attention to the operation of the vehicle. 
(Code 1962, § 8-45; Code 1969, § 9-7; Ord. of 4-3-1967)  
Sec. 9-8. - Authority of fire department officials to direct traffic. 
Officers of a fire department may direct or assist the police in directing traffic at or in the immediate vicinity of a fire, and while so acting, shall have all the authority of peace officers. 
(Code 1969, § 9-8)  
Sec. 9-9. - Permits for parades and processions; drivers in parades, funeral processions, etc., to keep to right-hand edge of roadway; identification of funeral processions. 
(a)  Findings; permit required. While recognizing that the right to assemble is protected by the constitutional rights of freedom of speech and assembly, the Town Council nevertheless feels obligated to regulate the use of the Town lands, parks and recreational areas for funeral processions and parades in order to protect the correlative constitutional rights of the citizens of the Town to sanitary health conditions, safety and general public welfare and in the interest of promoting the free flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. No funeral procession or parade, excepting the forces of the United States Army or Navy, the military forces of the state and the forces of the police and fire departments of the Town, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street, except in accordance with a permit issued by the Town Manager, and such other regulations as are set forth in this chapter which may apply. 
(b)  Permit issuance standards. In order to achieve the purposes listed in subsection (a) of this section, the standards which shall be considered in determining whether written authorization should be given shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Whether the proposed public meeting or parade will conflict with one already scheduled. 
(2)  Whether the proposed public meeting or parade will seriously obstruct the free flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(3)  Whether the potential damage to public property and facilities will be excessive because of the unusual or extraordinary character and/or circumstances of the proposed public meeting or parade. 
(4)  The reasonableness of the hour of day or night the proposed public meeting or parade will take place. 
(5)  Whether the proposed public meeting or parade will put undue hardship upon available public sanitary facilities and trash disposal facilities. 
(6)  It is intended that the parks be open to the general public at all times; therefore, should the proposed public meeting or parade seriously hamper or interfere with the general use, it may be denied. 
(7)  Where there is a reasonable threat of violence and/or public damage resulting from the proposed public meeting or parade, the party requesting such authorization shall provide the Town with a written plan which reasonably sets forth measures to adequately control and ensure against the anticipated violence and/or property damage. The Town may also request a surety bond to pay for repairs caused by any damage. If the foregoing plans and/or bond is found to be satisfactory to the Town Council or Town Manager, the proposed authorization may be granted. 
(8)  Whether the proposed meeting or parade will be conducted in conformity with all applicable provisions of the state code, state law and Town ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(c)  Form of request; approval or disapproval. All authorization requests shall be made in writing to the Town Manager at least 72 hours before the date on which the meeting or parade is to be held or to the Town Council at least 72 hours prior to its next regularly scheduled public meeting and at least 72 hours prior to the proposed date of the meeting or parade. The Town Manager or his duly authorized agent shall send to the applicant a written approval or disapproval of the applicant's request within three business days from the receipt of such application. 
(d)  Appeal of denial. Should any person be aggrieved because of the denial of a meeting or parade authorization from the Town Manager, such person shall have the right to appeal the denial to the Town Council. The appeal shall be made in writing to the clerk of the Town Council within 72 hours from the receipt of the written denial from the Town Manager. The appeal shall be heard by the Town Council at its next regularly scheduled public meeting, provided that the notice of the appeal is given to the clerk of the Town Council at least 24 hours prior to such public meeting. 
(e)  Driving regulations for funeral and other processions. Each driver in a funeral procession, parade or other procession shall drive as near to the right hand edge of the roadway as is practicable and safe, except when the entire roadway has been closed to general traffic and is reserved solely for such parade or processional use. 
(f)  Identification of funeral processions. A funeral procession shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia, or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the chief of police. 
(Code 1962, § 8-69; Code 1969, § 9-9; Ord. of 4-3-1967)  
Sec. 9-10. - Driving or walking through parades or procession prohibited; exception. 
Driving or walking between vehicles in a funeral or other authorized procession or parade while such vehicles are in motion is prohibited. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or a police officer. 
(Code 1962, § 8-70; Code 1969, § 9-10; Ord. of 4-3-1967)  
Sec. 9-10.1. - Distribution of material, solicitation of contributions and sale of merchandise on Town secondary and urban highways. 
(a)  Notwithstanding other provisions of chapter 15, distribution of handbills, solicitation of contributions and sale of merchandise on secondary and urban highways within the Town is hereby prohibited. Such prohibitions shall include the following activities: 
(1)  The distribution of handbills, leaflets, bulletins, literature advertisements, or similar material to the occupants of motor vehicles on secondary and urban highways located within the Town; 
(2)  The solicitation of contributions of any nature from the occupants of motor vehicles on secondary and urban highways located within the Town; and 
(3)  The sale of merchandise or the attempted sale of merchandise to the occupants of motor vehicles on secondary and urban highways located within the Town. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a traffic infraction. 
(c)  This section is subject to regulations promulgated by the commonwealth transportation board. Nothing in this section shall be construed to allow the Town to permit activities within any highway under the maintenance and operational jurisdiction of the state department of transportation. 
(Code 1969, § 9-10.1; Ord. of 10-2005)  
Sec. 9-11. - Unlawful riding. 
No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1969, § 9-11)  
Sec. 9-11.1. - Unlicensed vehicles prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicles on any public land owned by or otherwise under the control of the Town or any public land within the corporate limits of the Town owned by, or under the control of the commonwealth or the county, without prior written authority; provided, however, that licensed vehicles may be operated on designated highways or designated parking areas within such public lands. 
(Code 1969, § 9-11.1; Ord. of 7-12-1971)  
Sec. 9-11.2. - Operation of vehicles on privately owned land. 
Vehicles, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall not be operated or otherwise transported on or across privately owned land within the corporate limits of the Town without the express permission of the owner, lessee, principal occupant or other person having care, custody and control of such private land. 
(Code 1969, § 9-11.2; Ord. of 7-12-1971)  
Sec. 9-11.3. - Operation of vehicle on Town highways by minor. 
It shall be unlawful for any parent to suffer or allow any minor under the age of 18 years, living with such parent, to operate any vehicle on the highways of the Town when such vehicle has not been registered and inspected in compliance with the laws of the commonwealth. 
(Code 1969, § 9-11.3; Ord. of 7-12-1971)  
Sec. 9-12. - Parking regulations generally. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided, parking of motor vehicles upon the public streets and upon parking lots open to the public and designed to accommodate 50 or more vehicles shall be governed by this section and the rules and regulations promulgated under the terms of this section. 
(b)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to promulgate and enforce rules and regulations governing the parking of motor vehicles on public streets and public property and all parking lots public or private which are open to the public and designed to accommodate 50 or more vehicles within the Town, based on considerations of public safety, the elimination of hazardous conditions and the safe and orderly flow of traffic and to promulgate and enforce such additional rules and regulations in the future as changing conditions may require. 
(c)  The authority herein granted shall specifically include, without the exclusion of any other power, the power to promulgate and enforce rules and regulations covering the stopping or bringing to a temporary standstill of vehicles. 
(d)  Any areas other than those covered by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1239, as adopted by section 9-3, shall be clearly marked with appropriate signs to give notice to the public of the regulations affecting such area. 
(e)  In any prosecution charging a violation of a parking rules or regulation promulgated hereunder, proof that the vehicle described in the complaint, summons or warrant was parked in violation of such rule or regulation, together with proof that the defendant was at the time of such parking the registered owner of the vehicle, as required by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-600 et seq., shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that such registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked the vehicle at the place where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(f)  Violations of parking rules or regulations promulgated hereunder shall be charged as a violation of this section and the particular rule or regulation violated shall be set out in the summons, warrant or complaint which is issued. 
(Code 1969, § 9-12; Ord. of 12-1974; Ord. of 6-16-1980; Ord. of 10-1984) 
State Law reference— State law authorizing local parking regulations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220.  
Sec. 9-12.1. - Method of parking. 
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a street other than parallel with the edge of the street, headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the curb or edge of the street, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No person shall park a vehicle upon a street in such a manner or under such conditions so as to impede the normal flow of traffic. 
(Code 1969, § 9-12.1; Ord. of 10-1984)  
Sec. 9-12.2. - Requirements for parking. 
No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall allow such vehicle to stand on any street unattended without first effectively setting the emergency brake, stopping the motor and turning the front wheels into the curb or side of the street. 
(Code 1969, § 9-12.2; Ord. of 10-1984)  
Sec. 9-12.3. - Where stopping, standing or parking prohibited. 
1.  Stopping, standing or parking is prohibited: 
A.  In front of a public or private driveway. 
B.  Within 15 feet, in either direction, of the entrance to a fire station or building housing rescue equipment or ambulances, provided such buildings are plainly designated. 
C.  Within 15 feet, in either direction, of a fire hydrant located on private or public property, or within a fire lane. 
D.  Within 20 feet of the intersection of curblines, or if none, within 15 feet of the intersection of property lines at an intersection of streets. 
E.1.  On a sidewalk or crosswalk. 
E.2.  On any street for a continuous period of 48 hours. 
F.  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control device. 
G.  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
H.  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of or curb of a street. 
I.  Any place where official signs prohibit parking. 
J.  Spaces reserved for handicapped persons. 
2.  No person, other than a police officer, shall move a vehicle into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful, or start or cause to be started the motor of any motor vehicle or shift, change or move the levers, brake, starting device, gears or other mechanism of a parked motor vehicle to a position other than that in which it was left by the owner or driver, or attempt to do so. 
3.  Snow emergency. For snow emergencies, see chapter 16, article 3. 
(Code 1969, § 9-12.3; Ord. of 10-1984; Ord. of 1-6-1986)  
Sec. 9-12.3.1. - Parking prohibited on certain residential streets. 
1.  Town Council discretion. 
A.  Whenever the Town Council shall determine that any street or streets, or portions thereof located in one or more residential (RS) zones are being used for the parking of vehicles while the operators of such vehicles are elsewhere, so that the average number of such vehicles so parked occupies more than 25 percent of the total parking spaces on such street or streets or portions thereof, while the total number of parking spaces then occupied by all vehicles parked on such streets or portions thereof exceeds 65 percent of the total parking spaces on such streets or portions thereof on a significant number of weekdays, except holidays, of any month between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:30 p.m., as disclosed by a Police Department survey, the Town Council may prohibit parking during such hours on any or all of any such streets or portions thereof and on streets in proximity thereto as the council determines necessary to effectuate the purpose of this section. 
B.  In addition to the provisions of subsection 1.A. of this section, the Town Council may prohibit parking on streets, or portions thereof, at such time or times and during such hours as it deems necessary to effectuate the purpose of this section upon a finding that all of the following exist: 
(a)  Such streets or portions thereof are located in one or more single-family detached residential (RS) zones, which zones are adjacent to, or abut upon, one or more multifamily (RM-2) zones wherein which are located one or more multifamily structures which do not comply with the parking space requirements of section 18-130. 
(b)  Such streets are being used for the parking of vehicles owned, or in the care, custody, or control of residents, or guests of residents, of said RM-2 zones. 
(c)  On-site parking facilities for multifamily residential dwelling units located in such RM-2 zone, or zones, existed prior to the December 3, 1990, amendment of the parking regulations pertaining thereto as contained in section 18-130. 
(d)  The average number of such vehicles so parked occupies more than 25 percent of the total parking spaces on such street, or streets or portions thereof, while the total number of parking spaces then occupied by all vehicles parked on such street, or streets or portions thereof, exceeds 65 percent of the total parking spaces on such street, or streets or portions thereof, on a significant number of days per week including Sundays and holidays. 
2.  The prohibition of parking on certain streets as set forth in subsections 1.A and B of this section shall not apply to holders of parking permits provided for in sections 9-12.3.2 and 9-12.3.3; to police, fire, rescue, or utility service vehicles parked or stopped in the performance of emergency service to public utility facilities or vehicles bearing public use license plates issued by the commonwealth, or to service or delivery vehicles while in use to provide service or make deliveries to nearby dwellings. 
3.  All parking permits issued pursuant to sections 9-12.3.2 and 9-12.3.3 shall be displayed at such location on vehicles as specified by the Town Manager or his designee and indicated on the permit. Such permits shall be issued by the Town Manager or his designee, and are not transferable. No such permit shall be construed to authorize the parking in any residential (RS) zoned area of any vehicle prohibited from such parking by any other section of this Code. 
(Code 1969, § 9-12.3.1; Ord. of 1-1986; Ord. of 6-1986; Ord. of 9-1992; Ord. of 1-1995)  
Sec. 9-12.3.2. - Permits to be issued to residents. 
There shall be issued to each person who is a resident of property abutting streets or portions thereof on which parking is restricted pursuant to section 9-12.3.1, one parking permit for each vehicle owned by such person and registered in the Town. Any permit issued hereunder shall be valid only for so long as the vehicle for which it is issued and upon which it is affixed shall be registered at the address indicated on the permit application therefor. No such permit shall be valid for more than three years, but may be renewed upon expiration, provided the conditions for issuance exist. 
(Code 1969, § 9-12.3.2; Ord. of 1-1986; Ord. of 2-1993)  
Sec. 9-12.3.3. - Visitor parking permits. 
1.  To accommodate guests and visitors of persons resident in properties which abut portions of streets on which parking is restricted pursuant to section 9-12.3.1, additional parking permits shall be issued as follows: 
A.  To persons who are overnight guests of any such resident, such permits to be valid for a specified period not to exceed two weeks, and for not more than one vehicle per residence. Such permit may be renewed for an additional period of two weeks upon application. 
B.  To persons who are social guests of or conduct business at the home of any such resident during the day or evening hours of a single 24-hour period, such permits to be valid for not more than 12 hours and to be limited to not more than five vehicles per residence. 
C.  To any such resident, upon written request, one visitor parking permit. Such permit shall be valid for not more than three months and may be renewed for an additional three-month period by written application of the resident. 
D.  Upon application of any such resident, the Town Manager or his designee shall have discretion to issue one or more parking permits to such resident to be valid for not more than 48 hours upon a finding by the Town Manager or his designee that special extraordinary circumstances, which are not likely to reoccur or be experienced by other such residents similarly situated, will cause strict application of this section to impose on such resident an unusual undue hardship. The Town Manager or his designee may limit the number, duration, and streets or portions of streets on which any such permits shall be valid. 
2.  Whenever the conditions under which any parking permit is issued no longer exist, the person holding such a permit shall surrender it to the Town Manager or his designee. It shall be unlawful for any person to represent that he is entitled to such a permit when he is not so entitled, to fail to surrender a permit to which he is no longer entitled, or to park a vehicle displaying such a permit at any time when the holder of such permit is not entitled to hold it. 
(Code 1969, § 9-12.3.3; Ord. of 1-1986; Ord. of 1-2003)  
Sec. 9-12.3.4. - Residential parking designation. 
In order to determine whether a particular neighborhood or street or portions thereof shall be designated for permit parking, or a designation once established withdrawn, the Town Council shall conduct, prior to such designation or withdrawal, a public hearing at which time any interested person shall be entitled to appear and be heard. The hearing shall be advertised in accordance with requirements applicable to zoning amendments. In addition to such advertisement, notices shall be prominently posted on the streets or portions thereof being considered for permit parking designation, or for withdrawal of such designation. Following any such designation, the Town Manager or his designee shall issue appropriate parking permits and shall cause appropriate signs to be posted, indicating the times, locations and conditions under which parking shall be restricted. Such signs shall be of such character as to give notice to a reasonably observant person of the provisions of sections 9-12.3.1 through 9-12.3.6. In the case of a withdrawal of a designation once established, such parking signs shall be removed. 
(Code 1969, § 9-12.3.4; Ord. of 1-1986)  
Sec. 9-12.3.5. - Penalty for violation. 
1.  The parking of any vehicle or the use of any parking permit in a manner contrary to the provisions of sections 9-12.3.1 through 9-12.3.6 is prohibited and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a misdemeanor. Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction thereof by a court of competent jurisdiction, be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $200.00 for each violation. Any person being so convicted of violating this section for a second time within a period of 12 months shall, for the second and all subsequent convictions within said period, be fined not less than $200.00. 
2.  Immobilization of vehicles. 
a.  Whenever there is found a vehicle parked in violation of sections 9-12.3.1 through 9-12.3.6 against which there are three or more outstanding unpaid or otherwise unsettled parking violation notices for violation of sections 9-12.3.1 through 9-12.3.6, such vehicle may be immobilized by or under direction of a police officer of the Town in such manner as to prevent its removal or operation except by authorized officers, or members of the Town Police Department. 
b.  The officer under whose direction such vehicle is immobilized shall place on such vehicle in a conspicuous manner, a notice warning that such vehicle has been immobilized, and that any attempt to move such vehicle might result in damage thereto and shall inform, as soon as practicable, the owner of the immobilized vehicle of the nature and circumstances of the prior unsettled parking violation notices. 
3.  The owner of an immobilized vehicle, or other duly authorized person, shall be allowed not less than 24 hours from the time of immobilization to repossess or secure the release of the vehicle. Failure to repossess or secure the release of the vehicle within this time period may result in the removal of such vehicle to a storage area for safekeeping under the direction of a police officer or members of the Police Department. 
4.  The owner of such removed or immobilized motor vehicle, or other duly authorized person, shall be permitted to repossess or to secure the release of the vehicle by payment of the outstanding parking violation notices for which the vehicle was removed or immobilized and by payment of all reasonable costs incidental to the immobilization, removal and storage of the vehicle, and the efforts to locate the owner of the vehicle. Should such owner fail or refuse to pay such fines and costs, or should the identity or whereabouts of such owner be unknown and unascertainable, such vehicle may be sold by the Town as an abandoned vehicle as otherwise provided by law. 
(Code 1969, § 9-12.3.5; Ord. of 1-1986)  
Sec. 9-12.3.6. - Procedural implementation. 
The Town Manager is authorized to develop and publish such procedural rules as are required to implement sections 9-12.3.1 through 9-12.3.6 in an orderly manner. 
(Code 1969, § 9-12.3.6; Ord. of 1-1986)  
Sec. 9-12.4. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or place any motor vehicle upon any street or upon any parking lot open to the public and designed to accommodate 50 or more vehicles for the principal purpose of: 
A.  Greasing, servicing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
B.  Displaying such vehicle for sale or rent. 
C.  Selling merchandise from same. 
D.  Soliciting for sale of goods, wares and merchandise or personal property for future delivery or for services to be furnished or performed in the future or requesting directly or indirectly money, credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of value on the plea or representation that such will be used for a charitable or religious purpose. 
(Code 1969, § 9-12.4; Ord. of 10-1984; Ord. of 9-1992)  
Sec. 9-12.5. - Parking vehicles without state or Town license. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on any street in the Town when such vehicle does not display a valid state license plate. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on any parking lot that is capable of parking 50 vehicles when such vehicle does not display a valid state license plate. 
(Code 1969, § 9-12.5; Ord. of 6-19-1995)  
Sec. 9-12.6. - Fines and penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be required to pay the following fines: 
Violation of official sign 	$ 25.00 
Parked left side of curb 	  25.00 
Parked on sidewalk or crosswalk 	  25.00 
Vehicle running unattended 	  25.00 
Parked beyond designated time on official sign 	  25.00 
Interfering with right to driveway or parking space 	  25.00 
Parked more than 48 hours 	  25.00 
Parked within 20 feet of a corner 	  25.00 
Parked within 30 feet of a stop sign or signal 	  25.00 
Parked within 15 feet of fire hydrant 	  25.00 
Parked within 15 feet of fire station entrance 	  25.00 
Parked in fire lane 	  25.00 
Fail to display valid state license plates 	  25.00 
Parked in handicapped parking zone 	 100.00 
Other 	  25.00 
 
Failure to pay or make notification to contest parking citation within 14 days will result in additional penalty of $10.00. 
(Code 1969, § 9-12.6; Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 8-1994)  
Sec. 9-12.7. - Electronic summons system fee; imposition; amount; administration. 
In addition to any other fee or cost prescribed by law, as part of the costs assessed in each criminal or traffic case in the Fairfax County General District Court, Town of Vienna Division, in which the defendant is convicted of a violation of any statute or ordinance, there is hereby imposed a fee of $5.00 as authorized by Code of Virginia § 17.1-279.1. Such fee shall be assessed and collected by the clerk of the Town Court as other fees are taxed in criminal or traffic cases, and the clerk shall remit those fees to the Town of Vienna Director of Finance to be held for appropriation by the Town Council in accordance with Code of Virginia § 17.1-279.1. 
( Ord. of 7-6-2015(2) )  
Sec. 9-13. - Parking in public place in excess of 48 hours prohibited. 
No person shall park or permit to be parked or left standing in any public street, alley or other public place, any vehicle, wagon, automobile or any part thereof, unattended, for a longer continuous period of time than 48 hours. 
(Code 1962, § 8-3; Code 1969, § 9-13; Ord. of 4-3-1967)  
Sec. 9-13.1. - Parking of commercial vehicles in residential zones prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park or, to permit to be parked, or to be left standing on any street or highway in areas zoned for residential use, any commercial vehicle except when such commercial vehicle is being used to pick up or discharge passengers or when temporarily parked pursuant to the performance of work or service at a particular location. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the term "commercial vehicle" shall include the following: 
1.  Any solid waste collection vehicle, tractor truck or tractor truck/semitrailer, or tractor truck/trailer combination, dump truck, concrete mixer truck, towing and recovery vehicle with a registered gross weight of 12,000 pounds or more, and any heavy construction equipment, whether located on the highway or on a truck, trailer, or semitrailer; 
2.  Any trailer, semitrailer or other vehicle in which food or beverages are stored or sold; 
3.  Any trailer, semitrailer or other vehicle used for transporting landscaping or lawn-care equipment whether or not such trailer or semitrailer is attached to another vehicle; 
4.  Any vehicle licensed by the commonwealth for use as a common or contract carrier or as a limousine. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, one resident of each single-family dwelling unit zoned residential may be permitted to park one vehicle licensed as a taxicab or limousine on such street or highway, provided other vehicles are permitted to park thereon. 
(d)  Violation hereof shall be a traffic infraction. 
(Code 1969, § 9-13.1; Ord. of 7-6-1998)  
Sec. 9-13.2. - Parking of watercraft, boat trailers, motor homes and camping trailers and other devices prohibited on public streets. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Boat trailer means any trailer that is designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle on a public highway and to carry one or more watercraft. 
Camping trailer has the meaning set forth in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100. 
Motor homes has the meaning set forth in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100. 
Restricted vehicle means watercraft, boat trailer, motor home, camping trailer, or any other trailer or semitrailer, regardless of whether such trailer or semitrailer is attached to another vehicle; any vehicle with three or more axles; any vehicle that has a gross vehicle weight of 12,000 or more pounds except school buses used on a current and regular basis to transport students; any vehicle designed to transport 16 or more passengers including the driver, except school buses used on a current and regular basis to transport students; and any vehicle of any size that is being used in the transportation of hazardous materials as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-341.4. 
Watercraft means any vessel used or capable of being used for navigation or floatation on or through the water, but the term "watercraft" does not include any vessel that has been licensed to operate on public highways as a motor vehicle. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a restricted vehicle on any public street or highway in the Town, provided that a restricted vehicle may be parked on such street for the purpose of actively loading or unloading or for performing emergency repairs. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 9-12.3.5. Vehicles parked in violation of these provisions may be towed at the owner's expense. 
(c)  The director of the department of finance shall collect and account for all uncontested payments of parking citation penalties under this section and any contest by any person of any parking citation shall be certified by said director in writing, on an appropriate form, to the Town general district court. The director of the department of finance shall cause complaints, summons, or warrants to be issued for delinquent parking citations. 
(Ord. of 10-18-2010, § 1)  
Sec. 9-14. - Display of current state inspection sticker required; exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle on the streets of the Town or for any person to knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by him to be operated by another on the streets of the Town unless there is displayed on such vehicle in a location approved by the department of state police a current and valid approval inspection sticker furnished by the department of state police to the owner of the vehicle for that particular vehicle as provided in article 10, chapter 4, title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle used for transporting well drilling machinery licensed under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-700. 
(Code 1962, § 8-135; Code 1969, § 9-14; Ord. of 4-3-1967) 
State Law reference— State law as to inspection of vehicles, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1157—46.2-1187.  
Sec. 9-15. - Arrest for violations of chapter; release on summons and promise to appear; admitting to bail; violations. 
(a)  Whenever any person is arrested for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the arresting officer shall, except as otherwise provided in section 9-16, take the name and address of such person and the license number of his motor vehicle and issue a summons or otherwise notify him in writing to appear at a time and place to be specified in such summons or notice, such time to be at least five days after such arrest, unless the person arrested shall demand an earlier hearing, and such person shall, if he so desires, have a right to an immediate hearing or a hearing within 24 hours at a convenient hour, and before a court having jurisdiction within the Town. Such officer shall thereupon and upon the giving by such person of his written promise to appear at such time and place forthwith release him from custody. 
(b)  Any person refusing to give such written promise to appear shall be taken immediately by the arresting or other police officer before the nearest or most accessible judicial officer or other person qualified to admit to bail having jurisdiction under this chapter. 
(c)  Any person who willfully violates his written promise to appear, given in accordance with this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of, and in addition to, the charge upon which he was originally arrested. 
(d)  Any officer violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of misconduct in office and subject to removal therefrom upon complaint filed by any person in a court of competent jurisdiction. This section shall not be construed to limit the removal of a police officer for other misconduct in office. 
(Code 1969, § 9-15) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-936.  
Sec. 9-16. - When arresting officer shall take person before judicial officer in lieu of issuing summons. 
If any person is: 
(1)  Arrested and charged with an offense causing or contributing to an accident resulting in injury or death to any person; 
(2)  Believed by the arresting officer to have committed a felony; 
(3)  Believed by the arresting officer to be likely to disregard a summons issued under section 9-15; 
(4)  Charged with reckless driving; 
the arresting officer, unless he issues a summons, shall take such person forthwith before the nearest or most accessible judicial officer or other person qualified to admit to bail in lieu of issuing the summons required by section 9-15 who shall determine whether or not probable cause exists that such person is likely to disregard a summons, and may issue either a summons or warrant as he shall determine proper. 
(Code 1969, § 9-16) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-940.  
Sec. 9-17. - Conditions precedent to issuance of warrant for violation of parking regulations. 
(a)  If any person fails to comply with any written notice of violation of any provisions of this chapter or any regulation regulating parking, such person shall be notified in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, at his last known address or the address shown for the violation on the records of the division of motor vehicles, that he may pay the fine provided by law for such violation within ten days of receipt of such notice. 
(b)  If any person fails to pay such fine within the ten days of receipt of such notice, the police officer having issued the original written notice of violation shall be notified that the violator has failed to pay such fine within such time. The police officer shall thereupon issue a summons for the prosecution of that person so notified for that violation first noticed. 
(c)  Whenever the summons is for the violation of a Town parking ordinance, it shall be executed by mailing by first-class mail a copy thereof to the last known address of the owner of the vehicles or as shown on the records of the division of motor vehicles. If the person fails to appear on the date of return set out in the summons, the summons shall be executed in the manner set in Code of Virginia, § 19.2-76.3. 
(Code 1969, § 9-17; Ord. of 11-4-1974; Ord. of 12-16-1974; Ord. of 4-7-1980; Ord. of 9-1983; Ord. of 10-1987) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-941.  
Sec. 9-18. - Compliance with chapter; penalty for violation of chapter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, fail or neglect to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto. 
(b)  Every person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, for which no other penalty is provided, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $250.00. 
(c)  Whenever a specific penalty is provided in the Code of Virginia for the violation of any section of the Code of Virginia adopted by reference by section 9-3, the penalty for a violation of such section, charged on a Town warrant, shall be the same as provided by state statute. 
(d)  The maximum penalty for violation of traffic infractions shall be $250.00. 
(Code 1969, § 9-18; Ord. of 9-1991; Ord. of 6-1992; Ord. of 6-21-1993) 
State Law reference— State law prohibiting Town from imposing a greater penalty than that imposed by state statute for a similar offense, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300; penalty for violation of state traffic laws generally, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-113; suspension of operator's license upon certain convictions for reckless driving, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-392, 46.2-393 and 46.2-387.  
Sec. 9-19. - Penalties for four convictions of certain offenses within ten years. 
(a)  If any person, having been convicted three times of any offense set forth below, within a period of ten years, be again convicted of any one of such offenses within such ten-year period, he shall, in addition to the penalty otherwise prescribed by law for such offense, be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and confined in jail not less than three months nor more than 12 months. The offenses for a fourth conviction of which such penalties may be imposed are the following: violations within the state of Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-266, 46.2-894, 46.2-865 and 46.2-301; within the Town of section 9-21 or of Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-894 and 46.2-865, when charged on a Town warrant, or of any similar ordinance of any county, city or Town in the state, and manslaughter involving the operation of a motor vehicle, voluntary or involuntary; provided that for the purposes of this section where more than one manslaughter conviction results from a single act or omission, then only the first such conviction shall constitute an offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties set forth in subsection (a) of this section, if any person is convicted of a fourth offense as therein provided, the court in which such conviction is had shall revoke the operator's or chauffeur's license of such person for a period of five years. 
(Code 1969, § 9-19; Ord. of 12-1974; Ord. of 10-1979; Ord. of 10-1987) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-394.  
Sec. 9-19.1. - Vehicular and pedestrian traffic in parking lots. 
All of the provisions of this chapter relating to the flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, the parking of vehicles, and speed limits shall apply to parking lots open to the public and designed to accommodate 50 or more vehicles. 
(Code 1969, § 9-19.1; Ord. of 8-17-1970)  
Sec. 9-19.2. - Movement of traffic in parking lots. 
On all parking lots open to the public and designed to accommodate 50 or more vehicles, the chief of police may designate lanes of travel for the movement of traffic and shall erect signs or paint appropriate markings on the lot surface in the lanes so designated and traffic thereon shall move only in the direction designated. 
(Code 1969, § 9-19.2; Ord. of 12-2-1974)  
Sec. 9-19.3. - Handicapped parking. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any non-handicapped person to park any motor vehicle in a parking space reserved for the handicapped at privately owned shopping centers and business offices or in any public parking space so reserved. 
(b)  Town police officers are authorized to issue a summons for any such offense without the necessity of a warrant being obtained by the owner of any such shopping center or business office. 
(c)  Any motor vehicle parked in any such parking space reserved for the handicapped and not displaying thereon either the special license plates or parking permit provided for in Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-731 and 46.2-1238, shall be presumed to have been parked by a non-handicapped person. 
(Code 1969, § 9-19.3; Ord. of 10-1-1979)  
Sec. 9-19.4. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 2. - OPERATORS' LICENSES AND VEHICLE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— State law as to registration and licensing of vehicles, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-600—46.2-710. 
 
Sec. 9-20. - Driving without license prohibited; penalty. 
No person, except those expressly exempted in Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-303 through 46.2-309 shall drive any motor vehicle on any street in this Town until such person shall have made application for a driver's license, as hereinafter provided, and satisfactorily passed the examination required by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-325 and obtained a driver's license, nor unless such license issued to such person is valid. A conviction of a violation of this section shall constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 9-20; Ord. of 9-1985; Ord. of 9-10-1991) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-300.  
Sec. 9-21. - Driving while license, permit or privilege to drive suspended or revoked. 
(a)  Except as provided in Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-304 and 46.2-357, no resident or nonresident: 
(i)  Whose driver's license, learner's permit, or privilege to drive a motor vehicle has been suspended or revoked; 
(ii)  Who has been directed not to drive by any court, by the commissioner, or by operation of law pursuant to this chapter or Code of Virginia, title 46.2; or 
(iii)  Who has been forbidden, as prescribed by law, by the commissioner, the state corporation commission, the commonwealth transportation commissioner, any court, or the superintendent of state police, to operate a motor vehicle in the commonwealth; 
shall thereafter drive any motor vehicle or any self-propelled machinery or equipment on any street in the Town until the period of such suspension or revocation has terminated. 
(b)  A first offense of violating this section shall constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor. A second or subsequent offense shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. In addition, the court shall suspend the person's license, permit, or privilege to drive for the same period for which it had been previously suspended or revoked when the person violated this section. 
(c)  In the event the person has violated this section by driving during a period of suspension or revocation which was not for a definite period of time, the court shall suspend the person's license, permit or privilege to drive for an additional period not to exceed 90 days. Any additional suspension ordered under the provisions of this section shall commence upon the expiration of the previous suspension or revocation unless the previous suspension or revocation has expired prior to the ordering of an additional suspension or revocation. 
(Code 1969, § 9-21; Ord. of 9-1985; Ord. of 9-10-1991) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-301.  
Sec. 9-22. - Driving while restoration of license is contingent upon furnishing proof of financial responsibility. 
(a)  No resident or nonresident: 
(i)  Whose driver's license or learner's permit has been suspended or revoked by any court or by the commissioner or by operation of law, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or Code of Virginia, title 46.2, or of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-271, or who has been disqualified pursuant to the provisions of the Virginia Commercial Driver's License Act (Code of Virginia, § 46.2-341.1 et seq.); or 
(ii)  Who has been forbidden as prescribed by law by the commissioner, the state corporation commission, the commonwealth transportation commissioner, or the superintendent of state police, to drive a motor vehicle in the commonwealth; 
shall drive any motor vehicle in this Town during any period wherein the restoration of license or privilege is contingent upon the furnishing of proof of financial responsibility, unless he has given proof of financial responsibility in the manner provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-435 et seq. Any person who drives a motor vehicle on the streets of this Town and has furnished proof of financial responsibility but who has failed to pay a reinstatement fee, shall be tried under section 9-20. 
(b)  A first offense violation of this section shall constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor. A second or subsequent violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 9-22; Ord. of 9-1985; Ord. of 9-10-1991) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-302.  
Sec. 9-23. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 9-23 was repealed on March 18, 1985.  
Sec. 9-24. - Prohibited acts regarding operators' licenses. 
No person shall: 
(a)  Display or cause or permit to be displayed or to have in his possession any operator's license knowing the same to be fictitious or to have been canceled, revoked, suspended or altered, or photographed for the purpose of evading the intent of this chapter. 
(b)  Lend to, or knowingly permit the use of by one not entitled thereto, any operator's license issued to the person so lending or permitting the use thereof. 
(c)  Display or represent as his own any operator's license not issued to the person so displaying the same. 
(d)  Reproduce by photograph or otherwise, any operator's license or temporary permit or instruction permit issued by the division of motor vehicles without obtaining prior written consent of the division. 
(e)  Fail or refuse to surrender to the division of motor vehicles, upon demand, any operator's license issued in this state or any other state which has been suspended, canceled or revoked by proper authority in this state or any other state as provided by law or to fail or refuse to surrender such suspended, canceled or revoked license to any court in which an operator has been tried and convicted for the violation of any law of the state or ordinance of the Town regulating or affecting the operation of a motor vehicle. 
(Code 1969, § 9-24; Ord. of 10-1987) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-346.  
Sec. 9-25. - Disposition of surrendered licenses upon conviction requiring revocation or suspension. 
In any case in which the accused is convicted of an offense, upon the conviction of which the law requires revocation or suspension of the operator's license or instruction permit of the person so convicted, the court shall order the surrender of such license or permit which shall remain in the custody of the court until: 
(a)  The time allowed by law for appeal has elapsed, when it shall be forwarded to the commissioner; or 
(b)  An appeal is effected and proper bond posted, at which time it shall be returned to the accused; provided that when the time of suspension or revocation coincides or approximately coincides with the appeal time, the court may retain the license or permit and return the same to the accused upon the expiration of the suspension or revocation. 
(Code 1962, § 8-6; Code 1969, § 9-25; Ord. of 4-1967)  
Sec. 9-26. - Signing and possession of registration cards; exhibiting of registration card and operator's, etc., licenses; failure to carry license or registration card. 
(a)  Every owner of a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer upon receiving a registration card issued by the division of motor vehicles shall write his usual signature with pen and ink in the space or spaces provided for that purpose and such registration card shall not be valid unless so signed; provided that the commissioner may, if in his opinion it is equitable, accept a stamped or facsimile signature of an owner if such owner files with the commissioner an acknowledgement that such stamped or facsimile signature can be relied upon the same as though the owner has personally signed any such registration card or application for license. 
(b)  The operator of a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, while such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is operated upon the streets of this Town, shall have in his possession the registration card issued by the division of motor vehicles or the registration card issued by the state or county in which the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is registered and his operator's license or temporary instruction or driver's permit. 
(c)  The owner or operator of any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer shall stop upon the signal of any peace or police officer who shall be in uniform or who shall show his badge or other sign of authority and shall upon request exhibit his registration card, operator's license or temporary instruction or driver's permit and shall write his name in the presence of such peace or police officer if so required for the purpose of establishing his identity. 
(d)  Every person licensed by the division of motor vehicles as an operator and every person issued a temporary instruction or driver's permit who fails to carry his license or permit and the registration card for the vehicle which he operates shall be guilty of a traffic infraction, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1.00 nor more than $10.00; provided that if any person, when summoned to appear before a court for failure to display his license, permit or the registration card, upon such demand being made of him, shall present to the officer making such demand before the return date of the summons a proper license or permit duly issued to him prior to the time of such demand or a proper registration card, as the case may be, or shall appear pursuant to such summons and produce before the court a proper license or permit duly issued to him prior to the time of such demand or a proper registration card, as the case may be, he shall be deemed to have complied with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1969, § 9-26; Ord. of 10-1987) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-104.  
Sec. 9-27. - Display of license plates. 
(a)  License plates assigned to a motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, trailer or semitrailer, or to persons licensed as motor vehicle dealers or transporters of unladen vehicles, shall be attached to such motor vehicle, one in the front and the other in the rear. The license plate assigned to a motorcycle, trailer or semitrailer shall be attached to the rear thereof. The license plates issued to licensed motor vehicle dealers and to persons licensed as transporters of unladen vehicles shall consist of one plate for each set issued and shall be attached to the rear of the vehicle to which it is assigned. 
(b)  Decals shall be attached to license plates in such manner as may be prescribed by the commissioner. 
(Code 1969, § 9-27; Ord. of 10-1973) 
State Law reference— State law as to display of license plates generally, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-715.  
Sec. 9-28. - How license plates fastened to vehicle. 
Every license plate shall at all times be securely fastened to the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer to which it is assigned so as to prevent the plate from swinging, in a position to be clearly visible and in a condition to be clearly legible. Insignia, emblems or trailer hitches or couplings shall not be mounted in any such way that any portion of the license is illegible. 
(Code 1962, § 8-9; Code 1969, § 9-28; Ord. of 4-3-1967) 
State Law reference— State law as to manner of fastening license plates to vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-716.  
Sec. 9-29. - Display of fictitious, suspended, etc., registration card, license plate or certificate of title. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to display, cause to permit to be displayed or to have in possession any registration card, certificate of title or registration license plate, knowing the same to be fictitious or to have been canceled, revoked, suspended or altered. 
(Code 1969, § 9-29) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-613.  
Sec. 9-30. - Use of plates and decals before beginning of registration period. 
Registration and license plates or a license plate and decals issued under the laws of the state for a succeeding registration period may be used without penalty on and after the first day of the last month prior to the day such new registration begins. 
(Code 1969, § 9-30; Ord. of 10-1-1973)  
ARTICLE 3. - DRIVING MOTOR VEHICLES, ETC., WHILE INTOXICATED 
 
Secs. 9-31—9-38. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 4. - ACCIDENTS 
 
Sec. 9-39. - Driver to give immediate notice of certain accidents. 
The driver of any vehicle involved in any accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or some person acting for him shall immediately by the quickest means of communication give notice of the accident to the Police Department when the accident occurs within the Town. A willful failure to make a report required in this section shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 9-39) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-371.  
Sec. 9-40. - Report of driver of vehicle involved in accident; supplemental reports. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or total property damage to an apparent extent of $500.00 or more shall, within five days after the accident, make a written report of it to the Police Department. 
(b)  The chief of police may require any driver of a vehicle involved in any accident of which a report must be made to file a supplemental report whenever any report is insufficient in his opinion. He may also require witnesses of the accident to render reports to the Police Department. 
(c)  A willful failure to file the report required by this section shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 9-40; Ord. of 10-1987) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-372; authority of Town to require accident reports, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-381.  
Sec. 9-41. - Report by officer investigating accident. 
Every law enforcement officer who in the course of duty investigates a motor vehicle accident of which a report must be made, either at the time of and at the scene of the accident or thereafter and elsewhere, by interviewing participants or witnesses shall, within 24 hours after completing the investigation, forward a written report of the accident to the division of motor vehicles. 
(Code 1969, § 9-41) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-373.  
Sec. 9-42. - Occupants to report when driver incapable. 
Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of making an immediate or a written report of an accident of which a report is required, each other occupant of the vehicle at the time of the accident, if any, who is capable of so doing, shall make the report required by this article to be made primarily by the driver. A willful failure to file the report required by this section shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 9-42)  
Sec. 9-43. - Failure to report accident or to give correct information. 
Conviction of a failure to report an accident as required or conviction of a failure to give correctly the information required of him in connection with any requisite report shall be a violation of this chapter and shall constitute a ground for suspension of the operator's license and all certificates of registration of all motor vehicles, or of both, of the persons failing to make the report as required. Such suspension shall continue until such time as the person has filed the accident report as required or has given correctly the information requested. 
(Code 1969, § 9-43)  
Sec. 9-44. - Report required of person in charge of garage or repair shop. 
The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any motor vehicle that shows evidence of having been involved in a serious motor vehicle accident or with evidence of blood stains shall report to the Police Department within 24 hours after the motor vehicle is received, giving the engine number, registration number and the name and address of the owner or operator of the vehicle, if known. Reports required by this section shall be made upon forms furnished by the superintendent of state police. 
(Code 1969, § 9-44) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-376.  
Sec. 9-45. - Reports made by persons involved in accidents or by garages without prejudice and confidential; exceptions. 
All accident reports made by garages shall be without prejudice to the individual so reporting and shall be for the confidential use of the Town, or other state agencies having use for the records for accident prevention purposes. 
(Code 1969, § 9-45; Ord. of 10-1987) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-377.  
Sec. 9-46. - Extent to which reports may be used as evidence. 
No report required by this article shall be used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an accident except that the Police Department shall furnish, upon demand of any person who has or claims to have made such a report or upon demand of any court, a certificate showing that a specified accident report has or has not been made to the Police Department or the division of motor vehicles, solely to prove compliance or noncompliance with the requirement that the report be made. 
(Code 1969, § 9-46) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-378.  
Sec. 9-47. - Use of accident reports made by investigating officers. 
Subject to the provisions of section 9-45, all accident reports made by investigating officers shall be for the confidential use of the Police Department, the division of motor vehicles and of other state agencies for accident prevention purposes and shall not be used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of any accident. The division of motor vehicles shall disclose from the reports, upon request of any person, the date, time and location of the accident and the names and addresses of the drivers, the owners of the vehicles involved, the injured persons, the witnesses and one investigating officer. 
(Code 1969, § 9-47) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-379.  
ARTICLE 5. - USE OF STREETS BY TRUCKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Ordinances concerning weight limits on certain roads, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1138.2. 
 
Sec. 9-48. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Deviating truck means a truck which leaves and departs from a truck route while traveling inside the Town. 
Truck means any motor vehicle designed to transport property on its own structure independent of any other vehicle and having a registered gross weight in excess of 7,500 pounds. 
Truck route means a way over certain streets as designated in this article over and along which trucks located in, coming into and going out of the Town shall operate. 
(Code 1962, § 8-138; Code 1969, § 9-48; Ord. of 4-3-1967; Ord. of 2-19-1968; Ord. of 10-1987)  
Sec. 9-49. - Operation only over truck routes required; exceptions. 
(1)  All trucks within the Town shall be operated only over and along the truck routes established in this article and on the other designated streets over which truck travel is permitted. 
(2)  This article shall not prohibit: 
(a)  Operation on street of destination. The operation of trucks upon any street where necessary to the conduct of business at a destination point, provided that streets upon which such traffic is permitted are used until reaching the intersection nearest the destination point. 
(b)  Emergency vehicles. The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the Town. 
(c)  Public utilities. The operation of trucks owned or operated by the Town, public utilities, any contractor or material man, while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements or street utilities within the Town. 
(d)  Detoured trucks. The operation of trucks upon any officially established detour in any case where such truck could lawfully be operated upon the street for which such detour is established. 
(e)  Heating fuel delivery trucks. The operation of heating fuel trucks while actually engaged in the delivery of heating fuel to residential dwellings. 
(Code 1962, § 8-139; Code 1969, § 9-49; Ord. of 4-3-1967; Ord. of 2-19-1968)  
Sec. 9-50. - Truck routes established. 
All trucks entering the Town for destination points outside the Town shall operate only over the following designated routes: 
(a)  Westbound. When entering the Town from the east on State Highway 123 and traveling in a westbound direction through the Town west on Maple Avenue to the Town limits. 
(b)  Eastbound. When entering the Town from the west on State Highway 123 and traveling in an eastbound direction through the Town east on Maple Avenue to the Town limits. 
(c)  Northbound. 
(1)  When entering the Town from the south on State Route 698 (Cedar Lane) and traveling in a northbound direction on Park Street to its intersection with Maple Avenue and then east or west on Maple Avenue to the Town limits. 
(2)  When entering the Town on State Route 243 (Nutley Street) traveling in a northerly direction on Nutley Street to its intersection with Maple Avenue and then eastbound or westbound on Maple Avenue to the Town limits. 
(d)  Southbound. 
(1)  When entering the Town on Beulah Road and driving in a southerly direction on Beulah Road to its intersection with Maple Avenue and then eastbound or westbound on Maple Avenue to the Town limits. 
(2)  When entering the Town from the north on State Route 673 (Lawyers Road) traveling in a southerly direction on Lawyers Road to its intersection with Maple Avenue and then eastbound or westbound on Maple Avenue to the Town limits. 
(Code 1962, § 8-140; Ord. of 4-3-1967; Ord. of 2-19-1968; Ord. of 10-1987)  
Sec. 9-51. - Designated streets for truck use. 
In addition to those streets in the Town constituting a part of a truck route as established in this article, the following streets and not others shall be used for truck traffic: 
(a)  Church Street, between Lawyers Road and Park Street. 
(b)  Center Street, between Maple Avenue and Church Street. 
(c)  Mill Street, between Maple Avenue and its north terminus. 
(d)  Glyndon Street, between Maple Avenue and Locust Street. 
(e)  Branch Road, between Maple Avenue and Locust Street. 
(f)  Dominion Road, from Church Street to its north terminus. 
(g)  Follin Lane from Maple Avenue to Electric Avenue to Town limits. 
(h)  Park Street between Church Street and Maple Avenue. 
(Code 1962, § 8-141; Code 1969, § 9-51; Ord. of 4-3-1967; Ord. of 2-19-1968; Ord. of 5-1968; Ord. of 11-1973; Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 11-1996)  
Sec. 9-52. - Truck traffic in Town. 
(a)  Outside origin. 
(1)  One inside destination point. All trucks entering the Town for a destination point in the Town shall proceed only over an established truck route and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street upon which such traffic is permitted nearest to the destination point. Upon leaving the destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest permissible route. 
(2)  Multiple inside destination points. All trucks entering the Town for multiple destination points shall proceed only over established truck routes and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street upon which such traffic is permitted nearest to the first destination point. Upon leaving the first destination point, a deviating truck shall proceed to other destination points by the shortest direction. Upon leaving the last destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest permissible route. 
(b)  Inside origin. 
(1)  Outside destination point. All trucks on a trip originating in the Town and traveling in Town for a destination point outside the Town shall proceed by the shortest direction over the streets on which such traffic is permitted to a truck route as herein established. 
(2)  Inside destination points. All trucks on a trip originating in the Town and traveling in the Town for destination points in the Town shall proceed only over the streets upon which such traffic is permitted. 
(Code 1962, § 8-142; Code 1969, § 9-52; Ord. of 4-3-1967; Ord. of 2-19-1968)  
Sec. 9-53. - Maps of truck routes. 
The Town shall keep and maintain accurate maps setting out truck routes and streets upon which truck traffic is permitted. The maps shall be kept on file in the office of the Town clerk and shall be available to the public. 
(Code 1962, § 8-143; Code 1969, § 9-53; Ord. of 4-3-1967; Ord. of 2-19-1968)  
Sec. 9-54. - Chief of police to maintain signs. 
(a)  The chief of police of the Town shall cause all truck routes and those streets upon which truck traffic is prohibited to be clearly sign posted to give notice that this article is in effect. 
(b)  No person shall be charged with violating the provisions of this article by reason of operating a truck upon a street wherein truck travel is prohibited unless appropriate signs are posted on such street. 
(Code 1962, § 8-143; Code 1969, § 9-54; Ord. of 4-3-1967; Ord. of 2-19-1968)  
ARTICLE 6. - ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— The provisions of state law concerning definitions, applicability, and disposition of abandoned motor vehicles, as set forth in Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1200—46.2-1218, as amended, have been incorporated by reference in Code section 9-3. 
 
Secs. 9-55—9-63. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 7. - TOWN VEHICLE LICENSES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— State law authorizing Town to require vehicle licenses, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-752, 46.2-755. 
 
Sec. 9-64. - License fee imposed. 
There is hereby imposed a Town license fee upon the owner of any motor vehicle owned or regularly used by persons residing within the Town, regularly housed or stored in the Town, used or operated upon the streets and highways of the Town; and upon nonresident owners of motor vehicles when used in the conduct of any business or occupations within the Town. This Code section is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by article 11, section 46.2-752 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Code 1962, § 8-11; Code 1969, § 9-64; Ord. of 4-3-1967; Ord. of 2-8-1971; Ord. of 4-7-2008; Ord. of 5-10-2010; Ord. of 6-17-2013, § 1; Ord. No. 2013-005, § 1, 6-17-2013)  
Sec. 9-65. - License required; exceptions. 
Except where exempted under state law, every person owning a motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer, regularly housed or stored in the Town, used or intended to be used or operated upon the streets and highways in the Town, shall make application for and procure a Town motor vehicle license; except, the non-domiciliary members of the armed forces of the United States temporarily residing in the Town as a result of military or naval assignment while on active duty shall not be required to pay the license fee. The provisions of this section shall not apply to tractors, road rollers and road machinery used for highway purposes; tractor engines, locomotive engines, electric cars running on rails; motor vehicles, trailers or semi-trailers owned by the Commonwealth or by any political subdivision thereof, or by the United States Government; vehicles held or used for sale by any manufacturer or dealer in such vehicles. 
(Code 1962, § 8-12; Code 1969, § 9-65; Ord. of 4-3-1967; Ord. of 4-7-2008; Ord. of 5-10-2010; Ord. of 6-17-2013, § 1; Ord. No. 2013-005, § 1, 6-17-2013)  
Sec. 9-66. - Amount of fee; proration of fee. 
On each vehicle to which this article is applicable, there shall be a fee of $33.00 per annum collected whenever any Town licenses are issued during the period beginning as of July 1, 2010. On each motorcycle, with or without a sidecar, there shall be a fee of $18.00. Vehicles and motorcycles with situs in the Town of Vienna shall be liable for the Town license fee under article 7 for the full fiscal year 2010-2011, and shall be subject to monthly proration beginning in fiscal year 2011-2012. 
Any person holding such Town license for any such vehicle who disposes of the vehicle or removes the vehicle from the corporate limits of the Town of Vienna and obtains a local vehicle license from the county, city or town to which the vehicle is removed may, upon submitting proof of disposal or removal to the director of finance during the license year for which such license is valid and request a prorated refund from the director. 
(Code 1962, § 8-15; Code 1969, § 9-66; Ord. of 4-1967; Ord. of 2-1971; Ord. of 7-1972; Ord. of 12-1974; Ord. of 8-1975; Ord. of 3-15-1976(eff.); Ord. of 12-1984; Ord. of 6-1990; Ord. of 4-7-2008; Ord. of 5-10-2010; Ord. No. 2013-005, § 1, 6-17-2013)  
Sec. 9-67. - Assessment of fee, payment of fee; issuance of license. 
Obligation to obtain a Town of Vienna vehicle license is established upon purchasing or moving a vehicle into the corporate limits of the Town of Vienna. The vehicle license fee shall be assessed annually pursuant to the conditions established under article 17.1 of the Fairfax County Code. The due date shall be October 5 of each year for vehicles located in the Town on or after January 1. The due date for vehicles brought or located in the Town on or after July 1 shall be February of the following year. 
(Code 1969, § 9-67; Ord. of 5-1972; Ord. of 11-1982; Ord. of 9-1984; Ord. of 10-1987; Ord. of 4-7-2008; Ord. of 5-10-2010; Ord. of 6-17-2013, § 1; Ord. No. 2013-005, § 1, 6-17-2013)  
Sec. 9-68. - Penalty for late payment. 
Any person who fails to apply for and procure a Town vehicle license by the due date specified in section 9-67, shall be fined not more than $25.00. 
(Code 1969, § 9-68; Ord. of 4-3-1995; Ord. of 4-7-2008; Ord. of 5-10-2010; Ord. of 6-17-2013, § 1; Ord. No. 2013-005, § 1, 6-17-2013)  
Sec. 9-69. - Relief from Town vehicle license fee to low income elderly or permanently and totally disabled residents. 
(a)  The council finds that persons who are 65 years of age or older or permanently and totally disabled who receive low incomes as defined by section 6-4.2 of the Code of Vienna who are the owners of automobiles are in need of public relief from the payment of Town automobile license fees for such automobiles. 
Any person who is on January 1 of any year 65 years of age or older or permanently and totally disabled and is the registered owner or co-owner of an automobile subject to charge for Town licenses may apply for relief from the payment of such licenses provided that: 
The person applying for the relief has qualified for real estate property tax relief or rental relief or personal property tax relief under the provisions of the applicable Fairfax County and Town of Vienna ordinances. 
If the automobile for which relief is sought is co-owned, all owners must be 65 years of age or older or permanently and totally disabled as set forth in section 6-4.2(a) of the Code of Vienna, except that the applicant's spouse need not have attained the age of 65 or be permanently or totally disabled. 
(b)  Within any given household, this relief shall apply to one and only one vehicle. 
(c)  The application for relief from the payment of such automobile license is to be filed on forms to be furnished [to] such person(s) by the director of finance upon request. Any such application for relief shall be made at the office of the director of finance in writing and shall be filed on or before April 1 of the year preceding the fiscal year for which such relief is sought; provided, that application for relief for the fiscal year 2010-2011 by persons permanently and totally disabled shall be accepted until July 31, 2010. 
(d)  The director of finance is authorized to accept late filing of applications hereunder when filed by first time applicants and in any case where the director finds that the late filing was the result of a hardship case. 
(e)  Any change in respect to eligibility for real estate tax relief or rental relief, ownership of the automobile, or other applicable factors, which occurs during the year for which the application is filed, and which has the effect of exceeding or violating the limitations and conditions of this article, shall nullify any exemption for the current taxable year and the taxable year immediately following. 
(Code 1969, § 9-69; Ord. of 9-11-1972; Ord. of 2-3-1975; Ord. of 1-23-1978; Ord. of 4-2-1979; Ord. of 4-7-2008; Ord. of 5-10-2010; Ord. of 6-17-2013, § 1; Ord. No. 2013-005, § 1, 6-17-2013)  
Sec. 9-70. - Exemption of certain disabled veterans. 
No annual license fee prescribed in this article shall be required for any one motor vehicle owned and used personally by any disabled veteran who has qualified for exemption from state annual automobile registration fees pursuant to § 46.2-739 of the Code of Virginia, 1950 as amended. 
Any exemption applied for under this section shall not be granted until the applicant first provides to the director of finance, or his designate, proof satisfactory to the director that the said applicant has first qualified for exemption from state annual registration fees pursuant to § 46.2-739 of the Code of Virginia, 1950 as amended. 
The adopting and reinstatement of article 7, chapter 9 of the Town Code, shall become effective on July 1, 2010, and following notice of adoption by the Town Council. 
(Code 1969, § 9-70; Ord. of 1-7-1974; Ord. of 4-7-2008; Ord. of 5-10-2010; Ord. No. of 6-17-2013, § 1)  
Chapter 10 - OFFENSES, MISCELLANEOUS  
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adultery means persons being married, voluntarily having sexual intercourse with any person not his spouse. 
Animal includes birds and fowl. 
Automatic dialing device means a device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by prerecorded voice message or code signal the existence of criminal, fire, rescue or emergency medical activity at the protected premises or on a specific individual. 
Bawdy place means any place within or without any structure or building which is used or is to be used for lewdness, assignation, or prostitution, and the term shall include, but not be limited to, every house of prostitution, house of ill fame, bawdy house, house of assignation and brothel. 
Obscene means that which considered as a whole has as its dominant theme or purpose an appeal to prurient interest; that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex or excretion, and goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in description or representation of such matters. 
Place open to the public means any privately owned place of business carried on for profit, or any place of amusement or entertainment, to which the public is invited. 
Prostitution means any person who, for money or its equivalent, commits adultery or fornication or offers to commit adultery or fornication and thereafter does any substantial act in furtherance thereof, shall be guilty of being a prostitute or of prostitution. 
Public place means any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground, dock, public building, public facilities, publicly-owned parking lot, storage area or other publicly-owned places. 
(Code 1962, § 5-1; Code 1969, § 10-1; Ord. of 3-1966; Ord. of 1-4-1982)  
Sec. 10-2. - Attempts to commit violations of chapter. 
Every person who attempts to commit an offense which is a violation of any of the sections of this chapter shall be confined in jail for a term not exceeding six months or fined an amount not exceeding $250.00, either or both; but in no event shall the punishment for such an attempt exceed the maximum punishment had the violation been committed. 
(Code 1962, § 5-3; Code 1969, § 10-2; Ord. of 3-1966) 
State Law reference— Similar state law as to statutes, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-27, 18.2-28.  
Sec. 10-3. - Causing or encouraging children under 18 years to commit misdemeanors, etc. 
(a)  Any person 18 years of age or older, including the parent of any child, who willfully contributes to, encourages, or causes any act, omission, or condition which renders a child delinquent, in need of services, in need of supervision, or abused or neglected as defined in Code of Virginia, § 16.1-228; or engages in consensual sexual intercourse with a child age 15 years or older not his spouse, child, or grandchild, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. This section shall not be construed as repealing, modifying, or in any way affecting Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-18. 18.2-19, 18.2-61, 18.2-63, and 18.2-347. 
(b)  If the prosecution under this section is based solely on the accused parent having left the child at a hospital or rescue squad, it shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution of a parent under this section that such parent safely delivered the child to a hospital that provides 24-hour emergency services or to an attended rescue squad that employs emergency medical technicians, within the first 14 days of the child's life. In order for the affirmative defense to apply, the child shall be delivered in a manner reasonably calculated to ensure the child's safety. 
(Code 1962, § 5-4; Code 1969, § 10-3; Ord. of 3-1966) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-371.  
ARTICLE 2. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 
 
Sec. 10-4. - Assault and battery. 
(a)  No person shall attempt or offer with unlawful force or violence to do bodily harm to another person, whether or not the attempt or offer is consummated. 
(b)  No person shall unlawfully and intentionally, or with culpable negligence, apply force to the person of another by a material agency, used directly or indirectly. 
(Code 1962, § 5-24; Code 1969, § 10-4; Ord. of 3-1966)  
ARTICLE 3. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 10-5. - Advertising matter; attaching to poles or trees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tack or otherwise attach any advertising matter or other substance to any telephone, telegraph, or electric transmission pole or to any tree within the Town. 
(Code 1962, § 5-23; Code 1969, § 10-5; Ord. of 3-1966)  
Sec. 10-6. - Animal, aircraft, vehicle or boat; unauthorized use. 
No person shall take, drive or use any animal, aircraft, vehicle, boat or vessel, not his own, without the consent of the owner thereof and in the absence of the owner, and with intent temporarily to deprive the owner thereof of his possession thereof, without intent to steal the same. The consent of the owner of an animal, aircraft, vehicle, boat or vessel to its taking, driving or using shall not in any case be presumed or implied because of such owner's consent on a previous occasion to the taking, driving or using of such animal, aircraft, vehicle, boat or vessel by the same or a different person. Any person who assists in, or is a party or accessory to, or an accomplice in, any such unauthorized taking, driving or using shall be subject to the same punishment as if he were the principal offender. 
(Code 1962, § 5-38; Code 1969, § 10-6; Ord. of 3-1966) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-102.  
Sec. 10-7. - Concealment of merchandise on premises of store—Generally. 
Whoever, without authority, with the intention of converting goods or merchandise to his own or another's use without having paid the full purchase price thereof, or of defrauding the owner of the value of the goods or merchandise, willfully conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or other mercantile establishment, or alters the price tag or other price marking on such goods or merchandise, or transfers the goods from one container to another, or counsels, assists, aids or abets another in the performance of any of the above acts, when the value of the goods or merchandise involved in the offense is less than $200.00, shall be guilty of petit larceny and, when the value of the goods or merchandise involved in the offense is $200.00 or more, shall be guilty of grand larceny. The willful concealment of goods or merchandise of any store or other mercantile establishment, while still on the premises thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to convert and defraud the owner thereof out of the value of the goods or merchandise. 
(Code 1962, § 5-26; Code 1969, § 10-7; Ord. of 3-1966) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-103.  
Sec. 10-8. - Same—Exemption from civil liability in connection with arrest of suspected person. 
A merchant, agent or employee of the merchant, who causes the arrest or detention of any person pursuant to the provisions of section 10-7 not be held civilly liable for unlawful detention, if such detention does not exceed one hour, slander, malicious prosecution, false imprisonment, false arrest, or assault and battery of the person so arrested or detained, whether such arrest or detention takes place on the premises of the merchant, or after close pursuit from such premises by such merchant, his agent or employee, provided that, in causing the arrest or detention of such person, the merchant, agent or employee of the merchant, had at the time of such arrest or detention probable cause to believe that the person had shoplifted or committed willful concealment of goods or merchandise. The activation of an electronic article surveillance device as a result of a person exiting the premises or an area within the premises of a merchant where an electronic article surveillance device is located shall constitute probable cause for the detention of such person by such merchant, his agent or employee, provided such person is detained only in a reasonable manner and only for such time as is necessary for an inquiry into the circumstances surrounding the activation of the device, and provided that clear and visible notice is posted at each exit and location within the premises where such a device is located indicating the presence of an antishoplifting or inventory control device. For purposes of this section, the term "electronic article surveillance device" means an electronic device designed and operated for the purpose of detecting the removal from the premises, or a protected area within such premises, of specially marked or tagged merchandise. 
(Code 1962, § 5-27; Code 1969, § 10-8; Ord. of 3-1966) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 8.01-226.9.  
Sec. 10-9. - Fences and gates; pulling down or leaving open. 
No person, without the permission of the owner, shall pull down the fences of another and leave the same down, or without permission, open and leave open the gate of another, or any gate across a public road established by order of court. No person other than the owner of the lands through which a line of railroad runs shall open and leave open a gate at any public or private crossing of the right-of-way of a railroad. Violation of this section is a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1962, § 5-39; Code 1969, § 10-9; Ord. of 3-1966) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-143.  
Sec. 10-10. - Fill material; use of certain items prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be prohibited to use materials such as tree stumps, brush, prunings, lumber or other undecomposed organic matter or scrap metal or scrap paper or other materials definable as trash, garbage or undecomposed waste material, for fill material any place other than officially designated fills. 
(b)  It is the intent of this section to prevent the use of such materials in fills, other than officially designated fills, as may subsequently rot, decay, rust, or otherwise decompose and result in abnormal settling or cave-ins or may prevent the timely use of lands thus filled or may result in eventual hazard to health, life, limb or property. 
(c)  Any person who violates this section shall, in addition to any other penalty imposed under this Code, be liable for the removal and disposal of the prohibited fill material and proper refilling, or the cost thereof. 
(Code 1962, § 5-41; Code 1969, § 10-10; Ord. of 3-1966)  
Sec. 10-11. - Fire apparatus; interfering or tampering with prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere or tamper with firefighting equipment owned and maintained by any person. 
(Code 1962, § 5-32; Code 1969, § 10-11; Ord. of 3-1966)  
Sec. 10-12. - Garage keeper; defrauding. 
A person shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor if he: 
1.  Stores a motor vehicle, boat or other watercraft with any person engaged in the business of conducting a garage, marina, watercraft dealership or other facility for the storage of motor vehicles, boats or other watercraft, furnishing of supplies to motor vehicles, boats or other watercraft, or alteration or repair of motor vehicles, boats or other watercraft, and obtains storage, supplies, alterations or repairs for such motor vehicle, boat or other watercraft, without having an express agreement for credit, or procures storage, supplies, alterations or repairs on account of such motor vehicle, boat or other watercraft so stored, without paying therefor, and with the intent to cheat or defraud the owner or keeper of the garage, marina or boat repair facility; 
2.  With such intent, obtains credit at the garage, marina, watercraft dealership or boat repair facility for such storage, supplies, alterations or repairs through any misrepresentation or false statement; or 
3.  With such intent, removes or causes to be removed any such motor vehicle, boat or other watercraft from any such garage, marina, watercraft dealership or boat repair facility while there is a lien existing thereon for the proper charges due from him for storage, supplies, alterations or repairs furnished thereon, in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 43-32, 43-33, 46.2-644.01, or 46.2-644.02. 
(Code 1962, § 5-28; Code 1969, § 10-12; Ord. of 3-1966) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-189.  
Sec. 10-13. - Goods delivered for selection or approval; failure to pay for or return. 
No person shall solicit and obtain from any licensed merchant any goods, wares or merchandise for examination or approval, and shall thereafter, upon written demand, refuse or fail to return the same to such merchant in unused condition, or to pay for the same. The provisions of this section shall not apply unless such written demand is made within five days after delivery, and unless the goods, wares or merchandise shall have attached to them or to the package in which they are contained a label, card or tag containing the words "Delivered for selection or approval." 
(Code 1969, § 10-13) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-116.  
Sec. 10-14. - Hired animals, vehicles, or other property or equipment; injuring; procuring with intent to defraud. 
(a)  No person, after having rented or leased from any other person an animal, vehicle, boat or vessel, shall willfully injure or damage the same by hard or reckless driving or using, or by using the same in violation of any state statute, or allow or permit any other person so to do, or hire the same to any other person without the consent of the bailor. Violation of this subsection constitutes a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(b)  No person shall procure any such animal, aircraft, vehicle, boat or vessel by fraud or by misrepresenting himself as some other person or with intent to cheat or defraud such other person. The failure to pay the rental for or damage to such property or absconding without paying such rental or damage, shall be prima facie evidence of the intent to defraud at the time of renting or leasing such property. Violation of this subsection constitutes a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1962, § 5-31; Code 1969, § 10-14; Ord. of 3-1966) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-149, 18.2-206.  
Sec. 10-15. - Hotels, motels, boardinghouses, etc.; defrauding. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without paying therefor, and with the intent to cheat or defraud the owner or keeper to: 
1.  Put up at a hotel, motel, campground or boardinghouse; 
2.  Obtain food from a restaurant or other eating house; 
3.  Gain entrance to an amusement park; or 
4.  Without having an express agreement for credit, procure food, entertainment or accommodation from any hotel, motel, campground, boardinghouse, restaurant, eating house or amusement park. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat or defraud the owner or keeper out of the pay therefor to obtain credit at a hotel, motel, campground, boardinghouse, restaurant or eating house for food, entertainment or accommodation by means of any false show of baggage or effects brought thereto. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat or defraud, to obtain credit at a hotel, motel, campground, boardinghouse, restaurant, eating house or amusement park for food, entertainment or accommodation through any misrepresentation or false statement. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat or defraud, to remove or cause to be removed any baggage or effects from a hotel, motel, campground, boardinghouse, restaurant or eating house while there is a lien existing thereon for the proper charges due from him for fare and board furnished. 
(e)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, if the value of service, credit or benefit procured or obtained is the value is less than $200.00, it is a Class 1 misdemeanor. This section applies only to a violation of this section concerning a value of less than $200.00. 
(Code 1962, § 5-29; Code 1969, § 10-15; Ord. of 3-1966) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-188.  
Secs. 10-16—10-18. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-19. - Money or signature, etc.; obtaining by false pretense. 
No person shall obtain, by any false pretense or token from any person with intent to defraud, money or other property which may be the subject of larceny; or by any false pretense or token with such intent, the signature of any person to a writing. 
(Code 1969, § 10-19)  
Sec. 10-20. - Nuisances—Maintaining prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to create or maintain within the Town anything which is deemed a nuisance under common law or state law. The court may, in addition to any other penalty under this Code, order the nuisance to be abated or removed, prescribing the time within which such order shall be executed. Should the nuisance not be abated or removed in accordance with the court's order, the offending person shall be fined for each day that such nuisance shall thereafter continue, and the court may cause such nuisance to be abated or removed at the cost of the offending person. 
(Code 1962, § 5-34; Code 1969, § 10-20; Ord. of 3-1966)  
Sec. 10-20.1. - Same—Noise. 
(a)  It is declared as a matter of legislative determination and public policy that the making, creation or maintenance of excessive, unnecessary or unusual loud noises, unusual and unnatural in their time and place and which disturb the usual peace, quietude, tranquility and normal enjoyable use of any residential area are detrimental to the public health, safety, convenience, welfare and prosperity of the residents of the Town of Vienna and constitute a public nuisance. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation which permits, allows or suffers any such excessive, unnecessary, loud or unusual noise or noises as referred to in subsection 10-20.1(a) above, to emanate from his property or place of business so as to disturb the usual peace, quietude, tranquility and normal enjoyable use of any residence or residences in the Town shall be guilty of a civil offense with a penalty of $250.00 for the first offense and $500.00 for each subsequent offense. This section shall not apply to noise generated in connection with a business conducted on property zoned CM or CMP. 
(c)  In addition to any other excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noises as referred to in subsection 10-20.1(a) above, and not to the exclusion of such, the following acts are specifically declared to be excessive, unnecessary and unusually loud noises, unusual and unnatural in their time and place and disturbing to the usual peace, quietude, tranquility and normal enjoyable use of residential area; are detrimental to public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Town of Vienna, and constitute a public nuisance: 
(1)  The loading or unloading of commercial vehicles within 300 feet of any residence between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday, or between 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Sunday, New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, and Christmas Day; 
(2)  The repair, collection from, or servicing of any trash or garbage compaction, processing, or disposal equipment located on the exterior of any building between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within 300 feet of any residence, or between 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Sunday, New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, and Christmas Day; 
(3)  The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair, and any and all activity necessary or incidental thereto, of any building between 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., Monday through Friday or between 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Saturday, Sunday, New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, and Christmas Day; and except during any emergency caused necessity to protect the public health and safety as determined by the director of public works, chief of police, Town Manager or his/her designee, Fairfax County Building Inspector, or Fairfax County Fire Marshal or his/her designee. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no contractor or person performing the activities listed above for remuneration shall be permitted to engage in such activity on Sunday; 
(4)  The operation between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or between 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Saturday, Sunday, New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, and Christmas Day of any pile driver, hammer, chain saw, steam, diesel, or gasoline powered shovel, derrick or hoist, lawnmowers, lawn maintenance equipment, or other equipment, the use of which is attended by loud and unusual noise, except during any emergency caused necessity to protect the public health and safety as determined by the director of public works, chief of police, Town Manager or his/her designee, Fairfax County Building Inspector, or Fairfax County Fire Marshal or his/her designee. The time limitations for Saturday, Sunday, New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, and Christmas Day shall not apply to usual and customary maintenance activities associated with recreational uses as defined in Town Code section 18-4. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no contractor or person performing the activities listed above for remuneration, except when it relates to a recreational use, shall be permitted to engage in such activity on Sunday; 
(5)  The operation of any propulsion engine of a commercial motor vehicle for more than three minutes when the vehicle is parked, left unattended, or is stopped for other than traffic or maintenance reasons; 
(6)  The operation of internal combustion powered refrigeration equipment on trucks, trailers or other vehicles between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. when the same are parked for more than ten minutes. 
(d)  Any person, firm or corporation which permits, allows or suffers any such acts set forth in subsection 10-20.1(c) shall be guilty of maintaining a public nuisance and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 10-20 of this Code. 
(Code 1969, § 10-20.1; Ord. of 12-5-1977; Ord. of 2-25-1991; Ord. of 3-2008; Ord. of 6-6-2011(2), § 1)  
Sec. 10-21. - Peeping or spying through windows, etc., prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the property of another and secretly or furtively peep, spy or attempt to peep or spy into or through a window, door or other aperture of any building, structure, or other enclosure of any nature occupied or intended for occupancy as a dwelling, whether or not such building, structure or enclosure is permanently situated or transportable and whether or not such occupancy is permanent or temporary, or to do the same, without just cause, upon property owned by him and leased or rented to another under circumstances that would violate the occupant's reasonable expectation of privacy. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use a peephole or other aperture to secretly or furtively peep, spy or attempt to peep or spy into a restroom, dressing room, locker room, hotel room, motel room, tanning bed, tanning booth, bedroom or other location or enclosure for the purpose of viewing any nonconsenting person who is totally nude, clad in undergarments, or in a state of undress exposing the genitals, pubic area, buttocks or female breast, and the circumstances are such that the person would otherwise have a reasonable expectation of privacy. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a lawful criminal investigation or a correctional official or local or regional jail official conducting surveillance for security purposes or during an investigation of alleged misconduct involving a person committed to the department of corrections or to a local or regional jail. 
(d)  As used in this section, the term "peephole" means any hole, crack or other similar opening through which a person can see. 
(e)  A violation of this section is a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1962, § 5-35; Code 1969, § 10-21; Ord. of 3-1966) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-130.  
Sec. 10-22. - Petit larceny. 
Any person who commits larceny from the person of another of money or other thing of value of less than $5.00, or commits simple larceny not from the person of another of goods and chattels of the value of less than $200.00, except as provided in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-95(iii), shall be deemed guilty of petit larceny, which shall be punishable as a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1962, § 5-36; Code 1969, § 10-22; Ord. of 3-1966; Ord. of 3-1967) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-96.  
Sec. 10-23. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-23.1. - Tampering with traffic signals. 
Any person found guilty of removing, taking, tampering with, destroying, altering, defacing, or damaging any sign or signal erected to control the flow of vehicular traffic on the public streets or highways of the Town shall be fined not less than $100.00, nor more than $1,000.00. 
(Code 1969, § 10-23.1; Ord. of 8-17-1970)  
Sec. 10-24. - Property or credit; making false statements to obtain. 
No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made, either directly or indirectly, or through any agency, any false statement in writing with intent that it shall be relied upon, concerning the financial condition or means or ability to pay of himself or any other person for whom he is acting, or any firm or corporation in which he is interested or for which he is acting, for the purpose of procuring for his own benefit or for the benefit of such person, the delivery of personal property, the payment of cash, the making of a loan or credit, the extension of credit, the discount of an account receivable or the making, acceptance, discount, sale or endorsement of a bill of exchange or promissory note; or, knowing that a false statement in writing concerning the financial condition or ability to pay of himself or of any such person has been made, procures with like intent, upon the faith thereof, for his own benefit, or for the benefit of such person, any such delivery, payment loan, credit, extension, discount making, acceptance, sale or endorsement, and fails to pay for such loan, credit or benefit so procured. 
(Code 1969, § 10-24)  
Sec. 10-25. - Stolen goods; receiving and buying. 
If any person buys or receives from another person, or aids in concealing any stolen goods or other things with an aggregate value of less than $200.00, knowing the same to have been stolen, he shall be deemed guilty of larceny thereof, and may be proceeded against, although the principal offender is not convicted. 
(Code 1962, § 5-25; Code 1969, § 10-25; Ord. of 3-1966)  
Sec. 10-26. - Telephone, telegraph, telecasting or lighting equipment; interfering or tampering with prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or maliciously to interfere with, or in any way tamper with, any telephone or telegraph wire or other material or property of any telephone, telegraph or telecasting company, or with any of the lights, electric wires or other apparatus or property used in the lighting of the Town. 
(Code 1962, § 5-33; Code 1969, § 10-26; Ord. of 3-1966) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-119.  
Sec. 10-27. - Trespass—Generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person without authority of law or without permission of the owner, lessee, custodian or other person lawfully in charge or possession of land, to go upon or remain upon or cross over the lands or premises of another. 
(Code 1962, § 5-40; Code 1969, § 10-27; Ord. of 3-1966; Ord. of 7-1966)  
Sec. 10-28. - Same—After having been forbidden to do so. 
(a)  No person shall without authority of law go upon or remain upon the lands, buildings or premises of another, or any part, portion or area thereof, after having been forbidden to do so, either orally or in writing, by the owner, lessee, custodian or other person lawfully in charge thereof, or after having been forbidden to do so by a sign posted on such lands, buildings, premises or part, portion or area thereof at a place where it may be reasonably seen, or if any person, whether he is the owner, tenant or otherwise entitled to the use of such land, building or premises, goes upon, or remains upon such land, building or premises after having been prohibited from doing so by a court of competent jurisdiction by an order issued pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 16.1-253, 16.1-253.1, 16.1-253.4, 16.1-278.2 through 16.1-278.6, 16.1-278.8, 16.1-278.14, 16.1-278.15, 16.1-279.1, 19.2-152.8, 19.2-152.9 or 19.2-152.10, or an ex parte order issued pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 20-103, and after having been served with such order, he shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. This section shall not be construed to affect in any way the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-132—18.2-136. 
(b)  Any owner of real property may, in writing on a form prescribed by the chief of police, designate the Police Department of the Town as a "person lawfully in charge thereof" as those terms are used in subsection (a) of this section, for the purpose of forbidding another to go or remain upon the lands, buildings or premises of such owner. Such designation shall include a legal address, detailed description of the land, building, or premises to which it applies; shall be signed by a person who can demonstrate that he is the owner of the property, or is legally authorized to act for the property owner; shall include a provision holding the Town harmless and indemnifying the Town for any claims arising from or in connection with the enforcement of this section; and shall be kept on file in the office of the chief of police or in such other location within the Police Department as the chief of police deems appropriate. 
(c)  A property owner's designation of the Police Department of the Town as a person lawfully in charge of the owner's property becomes effective when the chief of police or his designee delivers in person or mails to the property owner a copy of the property owner's designation which has been signed by the chief of police or his designee. A copy of the designation signed by the chief of police or his designee shall be kept on file as described in subsection (b) of this section. The decision whether to accept any designation is solely within the discretion of the chief of police or his designee, who may base his decision on such factors including, but not limited to, resource levels of the Police Department and the proper allocation of resources. 
(d)  Either the property owner or the chief of police or his designee may rescind or reject the designation of the Police Department of the Town as a person lawfully in charge of the owner's property totally, partially or temporarily at any time by written notification, which notification shall be kept on file with the property owner's designation as described in subsection (b) of this section. 
(e)  Such designation of the Police Department "as a person lawfully in charge" of the property shall be limited to the sole purpose of enforcing this section. 
(f)  In any prosecution under this section, a certified copy of the property owner's designation of the Police Department of the Town as a person lawfully in charge of the property, along with a certified copy of attestation by the chief of police or his designee that the chief of police or his designee has accepted the designation; the designation has not been rescinded by the property owner or rejected by the chief of police or his designee; and the designation is in writing and on file in the office of the chief of police or in such other location within the Police Department as the chief of police deems appropriate, shall be admissible in any court in a prosecution under this section as evidence of the facts therein stated, without proof of seal of signature of the person whose name is signed to it. 
(g)  This section shall not be construed to affect in any way the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 29-165 to 29-170. 
(Code 1962, § 5-40; Code 1969, § 10-28; Ord. of 3-1966; Ord. of 9-2005)  
Sec. 10-28.1. - Unlawful use of public right-of-way or other property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, organization or corporation to erect, place, maintain or cause to be placed, erected or maintained, any sign, notice or advertisement of any kind in or on any public right-of-way or other public property in the Town. 
(b)  This section shall not be interpreted to apply to signs installed by governmental authority as otherwise provided by law and which signs serve a public purpose. 
(Code 1969, § 10-28.1; Ord. of 2-28-1983)  
Sec. 10-28.2. - Improper use of streets and other public property. 
Any person occupying or using any of the streets, avenues, parks, bridges or any other public places or public property or any public easement of any description within the Town, in a manner not permitted to the general public, without having first legally obtained the consent of the Town shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. Each day's continuance thereof shall be a separate offense. Such occupancy or use shall be deemed a nuisance. The court trying the case may cause the nuisance to be abated and commit the offenders and all their agents and employees engaged in such offenses to jail until the order of the court is obeyed. 
(Code 1969, § 10-28.2; Ord. of 5-12-2003)  
Sec. 10-29. - Waterworks and sewage collection and disposal facilities; injuring, defacing, etc. 
No person shall injure or deface any sewage disposal facility, pump station or any house, wall, stopcock, fireplug, or any other fixture connected with or pertaining to any waterworks, or sewage facility, without lawful authority, climb over or get through the enclosure around such facility and waterworks, or place any building material or other thing on the stopcock or other fixture of a street water main or other service pipe so as to obstruct access thereto, or remove or injure any pipe, fireplug, hydrant, or stopcock, or use water from the waterworks for any other purpose for which he has not obtained permission. 
(Code 1962, § 5-42; Code 1969, § 10-29; Ord. of 3-1966)  
Sec. 10-30. - Wells or pits; filling before abandonment; duty of owners of land. 
Any person who has dug or has caused to be dug, or shall cause to be dug on his own land or the land of another, any well or pit shall fill such well or pit with earth before such well or pit is abandoned. Any person owning or in possession of land whereon any well or pit is located shall fill with earth any such well or pit which has been abandoned. 
(Code 1962, § 5-43; Code 1969, § 10-30; Ord. of 3-1966)  
ARTICLE 4. - OFFENSES AGAINST MORALITY AND DECENCY 
 
Sec. 10-31. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-32. - Bawdy place—Residing in or frequenting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to frequent, reside in or at or visit for illegal purposes, any bawdy place. As used in this section and in section 10-33, the term "bawdy place" means any place within or without any building or structure which is used or is to be used for lewdness, assignation or prostitution. 
(Code 1962, § 5-5; Code 1969, § 10-32; Ord. of 3-1966) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-347.  
Sec. 10-33. - Same—Keeping. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any bawdy place, or, with knowledge or reason to believe the same is to be used for illegal purposes, any place where persons may meet for the purpose of prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse in the Town. In a prosecution for this offense, the general reputation of the place may be provided. 
(Code 1962, § 5-15; Code 1969, § 10-33; Ord. of 3-1966) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-347.  
Sec. 10-33.1. - Massage parlor, bath parlor or health club—Generally. 
It shall be unlawful to operate any establishment in the Town public or private as a massage parlor, bath parlor or health club or similar type business where those administering the service or treatment provided therein administer such service or treatment to a person of the opposite sex. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 10-33.1; Ord. of 5-24-1971)  
Sec. 10-33.1.1. - Same—Illegal purposes. 
It shall be unlawful for any person acting as or employed as a massagist or in massage parlor or public baths to massage other persons or give or administer baths or other things in a manner that would or is intended to arouse, appeal to or gratify lust, passion, sexual desires or prurient interest of a person. Any person violating the provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 10-33.1.1; Ord. of 5-24-1971)  
Sec. 10-33.1.2. - Nude or indecent posing. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate any establishment, whether public or private facility, as a studio, club or similar type business where nude or indecently attired models are provided, to be photographed, sketched, or painted. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; and in addition to such penalty, it shall be the duty of the Town Manager to revoke the license of the owner or manager of the establishment wherein the provisions of this section shall have been violated. 
(b)  Violations of sections 10-33.1, 10-33.1.1, and subsection (a) of this section, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of no less than $25.00 or more than $500.00 or no less than ten days or more than one year in the county jail, or both. 
(Code 1969, § 10-33.1.2; Ord. of 5-24-1971)  
Sec. 10-34. - Drunkenness. 
If any person is intoxicated in public, whether such intoxication results from alcohol, narcotic drug or other intoxicant or drug of whatever nature, he shall be deemed guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. In any area in which there is located a court-approved detoxification center, a law-enforcement officer may authorize the transportation, by police or otherwise, of public inebriates to such detoxification center in lieu of arrest; however, no person shall be involuntarily detained in such center. 
(Code 1969, § 10-34; Ord. of 5-2004)  
Sec. 10-35. - Indecent exposure. 
Every person who intentionally makes an obscene display or exposure of his person, or the private parts thereof, in any public place, or in any place where others are present, or procures another to so expose himself, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. No person shall be deemed to be in violation of this section for breastfeeding a child in any public place or any place where others are present. 
(Code 1962, § 5-9; Code 1969, § 10-35; Ord. of 3-1966) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-387.  
Secs. 10-36—10-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 5. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PEACE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-40. - Pneumatic guns, slingshots, etc.—Use prohibited. 
No person shall use any instrument for projecting missiles likely to do injury to persons or property, such as a pneumatic gun, slingshot, grit shooter, bow and arrow, etc., in the Town. The provisions of this section shall not apply to instruction given under the control of personnel specifically authorized in writing by the Town Manager to perform such instruction. Additionally, the provisions of this section shall not apply to pneumatic guns at facilities approved for shooting ranges; on other property where firearms may be discharged, or on or within private property with permission of the owner or legal possessor thereof when conducted with reasonable care to prevent a projectile from crossing the bounds of the property. 
Supervision by a parent, guardian, or other adult supervisor approved by a parent or guardian of any minor below the age of 16 shall be required in all uses of pneumatic guns on private or public property. Minors above the age of 16 may, with the written consent of a parent or guardian, use a pneumatic gun at any place designated for such use by the local governing body or on private property with the consent of the owner. All minors, whether permitted by a parent or guardian to use a pneumatic gun or not, shall be responsible for obeying all laws, regulations and restrictions governing such use of pneumatic guns. A violation of any pneumatic gun offense set forth in this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
As used in this section, "pneumatic gun " means any implement, designed as a gun, that will expel a BB or a pellet by action or pneumatic pressure. "Pneumatic gun" includes a paintball gun that expels by action of pneumatic pressure plastic balls filled with paint for the purpose of marking the point of impact. 
(Code 1962, § 5-16; Code 1969, § 10-40; Ord. of 3-1966; Ord. of 7-2-2012(1))  
Sec. 10-41. - Disorderly conduct. 
A person is guilty of disorderly conduct if with the intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly creating a risk thereof, he: 
(a)  In any street, highway, public building, or while in or on a public conveyance, or public place in the Town, engages in conduct having a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person at whom, individually, such conduct is directed; provided, however, such conduct shall not be deemed to include the utterance or display of any words or to include conduct otherwise made punishable under this chapter; 
(b)  Willfully or being intoxicated, whether willfully or not, disrupts any meeting of the Town Council or any board, commission, or committee of the Town government, or of any school, literary society or place of religious worship, if such disruption prevents or interferes with the orderly conduct of such meeting or has a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person at whom, individually, such disruption is directed; provided, however, such conduct shall not be deemed to include the utterance or display of any words or to include conduct otherwise made punishable under this chapter; or 
(c)  Willfully or while intoxicated, whether willfully or not, and whether such intoxication results from self-administered alcohol or other drug of whatever nature, disrupts the operation of any school or any activity conducted or sponsored by any school, if the disruption prevents or interferes with the orderly conduct of the operation or activity, or has a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person at whom, individually, the disruption is directed. The person in charge of any such building, place, conveyance or meeting may eject therefrom any person who violates any provision of this section with the aid, if necessary, of any persons who may be called upon for such purpose. 
Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 10-41; Ord. of 2-1977; Ord. of 5-10-1982)  
Sec. 10-41.1. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-41.2. - Punishment for using abusive language to another. 
If any person shall, in the presence or hearing of another, curse or abuse such other person, or use any violent abusive language to such person concerning himself or any of his relations, or otherwise use such language, under circumstances reasonably calculated to provoke a breach of the peace, he shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 10-41.2; Ord. of 2-1977)  
Sec. 10-42. - Disturbing public assemblies. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the Town willfully to interrupt any assembly, meeting for the worship of God, or other meeting of persons lawfully assembled in any public building or place, or to disturb the same. 
(Code 1962, § 5-19; Code 1969, § 10-42; Ord. of 3-1966)  
Sec. 10-43. - Firearms; discharge prohibited; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the Town to willfully fire or discharge any gun, pistol or other firearms except in a shooting gallery constructed and operated in accordance with the design criteria and specifications of the National Rifle Association as set forth in the NRA Range Source Book, and further, except where such firing or discharging is done with the written permission of the Town Manager and under the supervision of properly authorized Town personnel. This section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer in the performance of his official duties nor to any other person whose act is otherwise justifiable or excusable at law in the protection of his life or property, or is otherwise specifically authorized by law. This prohibited discharge of firearms shall not apply to the killing of deer pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 29.1-529 on land of at least five acres that is zoned for agricultural use. 
(Code 1962, § 5-20; Code 1969, § 10-43; Ord. of 3-1966)  
Sec. 10-44. - Creation or continued excessive noise. 
(1)  The creation and continuation of any excessively loud, disturbing noise is a serious hazard to the public health, safety and welfare in the Town and the following are hereby prohibited: 
(a)  Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio, amplifier, television, record, tape or compact disc player, drum, musical instrument or similar device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Friday, Saturday or the day preceding a federal holiday, and between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday in such manner as to permit sound to be heard across a residential real property boundary or when the sound source is located within or on the grounds of a dwelling complex in such manner as to permit sound to be heard within any dwelling unit of the dwelling complex other than a dwelling unit from which such sound emanates; or 
(b)  When the sound source is located within or upon a motor vehicle on or upon public right-of-way or public property or on the grounds of a dwelling complex and the sound can be heard more than 50 feet from its source. 
(2)  Nothing contained herein is intended to prevent usual and customary noise incident to regularly scheduled school activities, parades and the like which may be authorized under this Code. 
(Code 1962, § 5-21; Code 1969, § 10-44; Ord. of 3-1966; Ord. of 12-20-2010, § 1)  
Sec. 10-45. - Weapons; carrying concealed prohibited. 
(a)  If any person carries about his person, hidden from common observation: 
(i)  Any dirk, bowie knife, switchblade knife, ballistic knife, machete, razor, slingshot, spring stick, metal knucks, or blackjack; 
(ii)  Any flailing instrument consisting of two or more rigid parts connected in such a manner as to allow them to swing freely, which may be known as a nun chahka, nun chuck, nunchaku, shuriken, or fighting chain; 
(iii)  Any disc, of whatever configuration, having at least two points or pointed blades which is designed to be thrown or propelled and which may be known as a throwing star or oriental dart; or 
(iv)  Any weapon of like kind as those enumerated in this subsection (a); 
he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. For the purpose of this section, a weapon shall be deemed to be hidden from common observation when it is observable but is of such deceptive appearance as to disguise the weapon's true nature. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to persons who are exempt from Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308(A). 
(Code 1969, § 10-45; Ord. of 1-1988) 
State Law reference— State law as to carrying concealed weapons, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308.  
Sec. 10-45.1. - Pointing or brandishing firearm or object similar in appearance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to point, or brandish any firearm, as hereinafter described, or any object similar in appearance to a firearm, whether capable of being fired or not, in such manner as to reasonably induce fear in the mind of another. Persons violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any police officer in the performance of his duty in making an arrest under the provisions of this section shall not be civilly liable in damages for injuries or death resulting to the person being arrested if he had reason to believe that the person being arrested was pointing, or brandishing such firearm, or object which was similar in appearance to a firearm, with intent to induce fear in the mind of another. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the term "firearm" means any weapon in which ammunition may be used or discharged, by explosion, or pneumatic pressure. The term "ammunition" means cartridge, pellet, ball, missile or projectile adapted for use in a firearm. 
(Code 1969, § 10-45.1; Ord. of 1-1988)  
DIVISION 2. - ROUTS, RIOTS AND UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLIES 
 
Sec. 10-46. - Obstructing free passage of others. 
Any person who in any public place or on any private property open to the public unreasonably or unnecessarily obstructs the free passage of other persons to and from or within such public place or private property and who shall fail or refuse to cease such obstruction or move on when requested to do so by the owner or lessee or agent or employee of such owner or lessee, or by a duly authorized law enforcement officer, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit lawful picketing. 
(Code 1969, § 10-46)  
Sec. 10-47. - What constitutes riot, rout or unlawful assembly. 
Whenever three or more persons assembled share the common intent to advance some lawful or unlawful purpose by the commission of an act or acts of unlawful force or violence likely to jeopardize seriously public safety, peace or order, and the assembly actually tends to inspire persons of ordinary courage with well-grounded fear of serious and immediate breaches of public safety, peace or order, then such assembly is an unlawful assembly. Every person who participates in any unlawful assembly shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. This section is not applicable if any such person carried, at the time of his participation in an unlawful assembly, any firearm or other deadly or dangerous weapon. 
(Code 1969, § 10-47)  
Sec. 10-48. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-49. - Participating in rout or unlawful assembly. 
Every person who participates in any rout or unlawful assembly shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 10-49)  
Sec. 10-50. - Remaining at place of riot, rout or unlawful assembly after warning to disperse. 
Every person, except public officers and persons assisting them, remaining present at the place of any riot, rout or unlawful assembly after having been lawfully warned to disperse, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 10-50)  
Sec. 10-51. - Commission, etc., of act amounting to riot at lawful assembly. 
When three or more persons assemble for a lawful purpose and afterwards proceed to commit or attempt or threaten to commit an act which would amount to rout or riot if it had been the original purpose of the meeting, every person, except public officers and persons assisting them, who does not retire when the change of purpose is made known, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 10-51)  
Sec. 10-52. - Resisting or obstructing execution of legal process. 
Every person acting jointly or in combination with any other person to resist or obstruct the execution of any legal process shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 10-52)  
Secs. 10-53—10-57. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-58. - Disposition of fines; payment of costs. 
All fines imposed for the violation of this division shall be paid to and retained by the Town, and the commonwealth shall not be chargeable with any costs in connection with any prosecution for the violation of this division. 
(Code 1969, § 10-58)  
ARTICLE 6. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE 
 
Sec. 10-59. - Obstructing justice by threats or force. 
A.  If any person without just cause knowingly obstructs a judge, magistrate, justice, juror, attorney for the commonwealth, witness, or any law-enforcement officer in the performance of his duties as such or fails or refuses without just cause to cease such obstruction when requested to do so by such judge, magistrate, justice, juror, attorney for the commonwealth, witness, or law-enforcement officer, he shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
B.  If any person, by threats or force, knowingly attempts to intimidate or impede a judge, magistrate, justice, juror, attorney for the commonwealth, witness, or any law-enforcement officer, lawfully engaged in his duties as such, or to obstruct or impede the administration of justice in any court, he shall be deemed to be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
C.  Any person who knowingly and willfully makes any materially false statement or representation to a law-enforcement officer who is in the course of conducting an investigation of a crime by another is guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 10-59; Ord. of 3-20-1995; Ord. of 11-18-2002) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-460.  
Sec. 10-60. - Officers—Making false entries or destroying records. 
No clerk of the court or other public officer shall fraudulently make a false entry or erase, alter, secrete or destroy any record, including a microphotographic copy, in his keeping and belonging to his office. Any person convicted under this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, shall forfeit his office and be forever incapable of holding any office of honor, profit or trust in the government of the Town and under the Constitution of Virginia. 
(Code 1962, § 5-45; Code 1969, § 10-60; Ord. of 3-1966) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-472.  
Sec. 10-61. - Same—Refusing to obey. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to obey a lawful order of a police officer of the Town. 
(Code 1962, § 5-47; Code 1969, § 10-61; Ord. of 3-1966)  
Sec. 10-62. - Same—Unlawful wearing of uniform. 
A.  No person, not an officer as is referred to in Code of Virginia, § 19.2-78, shall wear any uniform customarily worn by Town police officers, nor such uniform as is designated pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 19.2-78, or wear an insignia or markings containing the seal of the commonwealth or the insignia of any such officer's uniform, nor shall any person not such an officer, or not authorized by such officer, or not authorized by the military police of the armed forces or of the National Guard, or not authorized by the military police of other governmental agencies, use or cause to be used on the public roads or highways of the commonwealth, any motor vehicle bearing markings with the word "police" shown thereon. 
B.  The prohibition against wearing an insignia or markings containing the seal of the commonwealth or this Town shall not apply to any certified firefighter or to any certified or licensed emergency medical personnel. Any violation of this section shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1962, § 5-50; Code 1969, § 10-62; Ord. of 3-1966) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-175.  
Sec. 10-63. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-64. - Warrants, processes, writs, etc.; simulation. 
No person, for the purpose of collecting money, shall knowingly deliver mail, send or otherwise use or cause to be used any paper or writing simulating or intended to simulate any warrant, process, writ, notice of execution, lien or notice of motion for judgment. Violation of this section is a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1962, § 5-48; Code 1969, § 10-64; Ord. of 3-1966) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-213.  
ARTICLE 7. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC POLICY 
 
Sec. 10-65. - Ambulance, police or firefighting apparatus—summoning without just cause. 
It shall be unlawful for any person without just cause therefor to call or summon, by telephone or otherwise, any ambulance, police or firefighting apparatus, or for any person to maliciously activate a manual or automatic fire alarm in any building used for public assembly or for other public use, including, but not limited to, schools, theaters, stores, office buildings, shopping centers and malls, coliseums and arenas, regardless of whether firefighting apparatus responds or not. 
(Code 1962, § 5-52; Code 1969, § 10-65; Ord. of 3-1966) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212.  
Sec. 10-65.1. - Automatic dialing device; restriction on use. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install or operate an automatic dialing device which is programmed to transmit a prerecorded message or code signal directly to the county emergency operations center by the 911 Emergency Recording System approved by the Town. 
(b)  All automatic dialing devices which are installed and programmed to transmit a message or code signal directly to the county emergency operations center by the 911 Emergency Recording System shall be reprogrammed or disconnected. The user shall be responsible for said reprogramming or disconnection. 
(Code 1969, § 10-65.1; Ord. of 1-4-1982)  
Sec. 10-66. - Billiard parlors, skating rinks, bowling alleys, etc.; hours of operation; gambling, etc, prohibited on premises; presence of persons under 18 prohibited. 
A.  All billiard parlors, skating rinks, bowling alleys and other similar places of amusement in the Town may be operated only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on weekdays, and 1:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight on Sunday. 
B.  No gambling, betting, drinking, profane language or any disorderly conduct whatsoever shall be allowed in any room in which pool or billiard tables are kept, or in other similar places of amusement in the Town. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to frequent, play or loiter in any poolroom or billiard parlor in the Town, or for the proprietor thereof or his agent to permit such person to frequent, play or loiter therein. 
(Code 1962, § 5-51; Code 1969, § 10-66; Ord. of 3-1966) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-432, 18.2-433.  
Sec. 10-67. - False publications. 
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly and willfully to state, deliver or transmit by any means whatsoever to any publisher, or employee of a publisher, to any newspaper, magazine or other publication, any false and untrue statement concerning any person with intent that the same shall be published. 
(Code 1962, § 5-53; Code 1969, § 10-67; Ord. of 3-1966) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-209.  
Sec. 10-68. - False reports to police officers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to give a false report as to the commission of any offense to any law enforcement official with intent to mislead. 
(Code 1962, § 5-54; Code 1969, § 10-68; Ord. of 3-1966) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-461.  
Secs. 10-69, 10-70. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-71. - Iceboxes, refrigerators, etc.; abandonment. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to discard, abandon, leave or allow to remain in any place any icebox, refrigerator or other container, device or equipment of any kind with an interior storage area of more than two cubic feet of clear space, without first removing the doors or hinges from such icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment. 
B.  This section shall not apply to any icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment which is being used for the purpose for which it was originally designed, or is being used for display purposes by any retail or wholesale merchant, or is crated, strapped, or locked to such an extent that it is impossible for a child to obtain access to any airtight compartment thereof. 
C.  A violation of this section is punishable as a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1962, § 5-44; Code 1969, § 10-71; Ord. of 3-1966) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-319.  
Secs. 10-72—10-75. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-76. - Town employees; political activity. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person employed by the Town, in any agency or department thereof, to use his official authority or influence for the purpose of interfering with an election or affecting the result thereof. No appointive officer or employee of the Town, or any agency or department thereof, shall take any active part in political management or in political campaigns. All such persons shall retain the right to vote as they may choose and to express their personal opinions on all political subjects and candidates. However, they shall not express their opinion on such political subjects or candidates as officials or employees of the Town. 
B.  As used in this section, the term "appointive officer" shall mean the Town Manager, Town clerk, director of finance and Town attorney, but shall not include members of boards, commissions or committees of the Town whose members are appointed by the Town Council or recommended by the Town Council for appointment by the circuit court. 
(Code 1962, § 1-9; Code 1969, § 10-76; Ord. of 11-6-1978)  
Sec. 10-77. - Unsanitary conditions prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any noxious, unsanitary or offensive matter, stagnant water or other substance which is or might be injurious to the public health to be or remain on his property or in his possession or control. 
(Code 1962, § 5-65; Code 1969, § 10-77; Ord. of 3-1966)  
Sec. 10-77.1. - Discarded materials prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into the Town or to cause or suffer to be brought into the Town any brush, garbage, household or commercial type trash, debris or discarded materials of any kind for the purpose of having the same or any part thereof collected or disposed of during, by or through any Town-sponsored service, or any program conducted by the Town. 
(Code 1969, § 10-77.1; Ord. of 12-17-1984)  
Chapter 11 - PERSONNEL  
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a system of personnel administration that ensures that: 
A.  Employment with the Town government shall be based upon ability and fitness and free of personal and political considerations; 
B.  Just and equitable conditions of employment and incentives shall be established and maintained to promote efficiency and economy in the operation of the Town government; and 
C.  Positions having similar duties and responsibilities shall be classified and compensated on a uniform basis. 
(Code 1969, § 11-1; Ord. of 2-28-1994; Ord. of 10-22-2012)  
Sec. 11-2. - Equal employment opportunity statement. 
Equal employment opportunity laws are designed to safeguard individual rights. In keeping with these federal regulations, the Town of Vienna offers equal employment opportunities to all job applicants and employees. Appointments and promotions are based solely upon qualifications and experience and are free of consideration of race, color, religion, sex, age, marital status, national origin or disability. 
(Code 1969, § 11-2; Ord. of 2-28-1994; Ord. of 10-22-2012)  
Sec. 11-3. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Anniversary date indicates the date of initial employment with the Town. Anniversary dates determine leave accrual rates and are used for benefits applications such as effective date of coverage or length of service to determine retirement benefits. Anniversary dates may be adjusted as a result of an employee's change from a civilian position to a sworn one, leave without pay status in excess of 30 days, position reclassification or reallocation. 
Break in service means any separation from the Town service, whether by resignation, lay-off, disability, or retirement, when the employee is subsequently re-employed. An authorized leave without pay shall not constitute a break in service. 
Continuous service means employment without interruption, including absences on approved leaves, or absences to serve in the Armed Forces of the United States. 
Demotion or reduction in rank means reassignment of an employee from one position to another which has a lower maximum rate of pay. 
Director means, for the purposes of this article, director shall be deemed to include the director of human resources, chief of police, director of finance / treasurer, director of parks and recreation, director of planning and zoning, director of public works and director of information technology. 
Disability means a disabling condition, partial or complete, temporary or permanent, which prevents, hinders or adversely affects an individual's performance of his/her normal routine of work. 
Dismissal means separation from Town employment for cause. 
Exempt means an employee who is defined by the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) as being exempt from this law's minimum wage and overtime requirements. 
Full-time employee means an individual who is assigned to work a minimum of 40 hours per week or the shift work equivalent. 
Grievance means a complaint or dispute of an employee relating to his/her employment, with the following exceptions: the negotiation of wages, salaries, or fringe benefits; work activity accepted by the employee as a condition of employment; subjects covered by existing ordinances or established personnel policies and procedures; and failure to promote under a fairly applied procedure. 
Immediate family or relative means the employee's spouse, children, siblings, parents, in-laws, grandparents, by blood, marriage or adoption. 
Lay-off means separation of an employee from a position as a result of the abolition of the position, lack of work, or lack of funds. 
Non-exempt means an employee who is defined by the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) as being eligible for payment of this law's minimum wage and overtime requirements. 
Part-time employee means an individual who is assigned regular working hours of less than eight hours a day and/or less than 40 hours per week. A part-time permanent employee who regularly works at least 20 hours per week is eligible for sick and annual leave accumulation plus health insurance coverage in proration to his/her actual hours worked. 
Pay grade means a number indicating the pay range of a position. 
Position means any office or employment, whether occupied or vacant, full-time, part-time, permanent or temporary, consisting of duties and responsibilities assigned to one individual by a competent authority. 
Position description means a written narrative detailing the typical duties, responsibilities, and minimum desirable qualifications of a position. 
Probationary period means a period of 12 months for non-sworn personnel from the date of their appointment or one year for sworn police personnel from the date of the completion of their academy training, during which an employee hired to fill a permanent position is employed on a trial, or test, basis preliminary to approval of permanent status. 
Transferred, promoted, demoted or other change in status employees are required to serve a probationary period of 12 months. This probationary period is imposed for the purpose of evaluating the employee's suitability for the new position or status. An employee who fails to complete satisfactorily this probationary period may be restored to his/her former position, a similar position, or may be dismissed if conditions so warrant. 
Promotion means assignment of an employee from one position to another which has a higher maximum rate of pay. 
Permanent employee means anyone employed with the Town on a permanent, continuous basis. An employee is permanent upon the successful completion of the probationary period. Every permanent employee shall serve a probationary period after his/her appointment. The status of an employee shall not be changed from probationary until a certification is made by the department head that the employee's performance is satisfactory. A permanent employee can be appointed to full- or part-time status. 
Reinstatement means reappointment, after separation, of a former employee to his/her former position or one of a similar nature. 
Retirement means a withdrawal from active service based on age, years of service, or disability. 
Separation means vacating a position, either through resignation, lay-off, dismissal, disability, retirement, or death. 
Sexual harassment includes, but is not limited to: 
1.  Verbal harassment or abuse. 
2.  Subtle pressure for sexual activity. 
3.  Unnecessary physical contact such as hugging, patting, or pinching. 
4.  Requesting sexual favors accompanied by implied or overt threat concerning an individual's employment status or promise of preferential treatment with regard to an individual's employment status. 
Suspension means an enforced leave of absence without pay for disciplinary purposes or pending investigation of charges made against an employee. 
Temporary employee means anyone employed for a specific period (such as summer) or for a specific purpose (e.g., to replace a sick employee) and is considered temporary. A temporary employee is not eligible to receive any fringe benefits except as required under the Affordable Care Act. A temporary employee can be either full- or part-time and can be separated at any time when his/her services are no longer needed. 
Transfer means reassignment of an employee from one position to another or from one division to another. 
Unsatisfactory service means performance of assigned duties and responsibilities that falls below the accepted standards as to work habits, attitudes, and personal conduct. 
(Code 1969, § 11-3; Ord. of 2-28-1994; Ord. of 6-1994; Ord. of 2-2008; Ord. of 9-2009; Ord. of 10-22-2012; Ord. of 7-7-2014 )  
Sec. 11-3.1. - Criminal history record check and fingerprinting; appointment to sensitive positions. 
(a)  Finding. The Town Council of the Town of Vienna, Virginia, hereby finds that it is necessary in the interest of public welfare and safety to determine whether the past criminal conduct of a person conditionally offered employment in a sensitive position in the Town's competitive or exempt service is directly related to such position and would be compatible with the nature of such employment. 
(b)  Intent. It is the intent of the Town Council in enacting this section to comply with the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1503.1, and 15.2-1505.1 and 19.2-389(A)(A7), as amended, to be able to access criminal history record information, regarding those persons conditionally offered employment in sensitive positions in the Town service in order to determine whether the past criminal conduct of such persons would be compatible with the nature of such employment. Further, the provisions of this section are intended to be in addition to, and not in derogation of all other federal and state statutes and Town ordinances providing for access to criminal history record information concerning applicants for, and persons offered, positions in the Town service, including, but not limited to Code of Virginia, § 19.2-389(A)(25). 
(c)  Definitions. 
(1)  As used in this section, a "sensitive position" is a position in the Town service that meets one or more of the following criteria and is designated as such by the Town Manager in accordance with the provisions of subsection (e)(1)(A) of this section: 
(A)  Where the employee is responsible for providing services to further the health, safety, and welfare of minors, persons with disabilities, the elderly, or other persons unable to care for themselves; 
(B)  Where the employee, as part of his or her duties, must enter person's residences or businesses; 
(C)  Where the employee has the capability of making changes to Town technology systems; 
(D)  Where the employee is employed in a position involved in water or wastewater treatment or operation; 
(E)  Where the employee is required as part of his or her duties to operate a vehicle requiring a commercial driver's license or an aircraft; 
(F)  Where the employee handles cash or has the ability to effect transfers of Town funds or funds of others, or otherwise is accountable for Town funds; 
(G)  Where the employee has access to public records, records containing personal information as defined in Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3801(2), and/or records that are made confidential by state or federal statute; 
(H)  Where the employee needs to enter secured Town facilities; or 
(I)  Where the employee is otherwise directly responsible for the health, safety, and welfare of the general populace and/or the protection of critical infrastructure. 
(2)  As used in this section, the phrase "conditionally offered employment" shall include a conditional offer of initial employment in a sensitive position, a conditional offer to laterally transfer, promote, or demote an employee to a sensitive position, or the conditional offer of a sensitive position in the Town's competitive service to an employee in its exempt service or of a sensitive position in the Town's exempt service. 
(d)  Policy. All persons conditionally offered employment in a sensitive position in the Town service, shall as a condition of their employment, prior to the effective date of such employment, submit to fingerprinting and provide personal descriptive information to be forwarded to the Central Criminal Records Exchange and the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the purpose of obtaining criminal history record information regarding them. All offers of employment in sensitive positions are conditioned upon the person offered such described above. Failure of the person conditionally offered employment in a sensitive position to submit to fingerprinting and to provide personal descriptive information shall disqualify the person from employment in the position. 
(e)  Responsibilities. 
(1)  The Town Manager: 
(A)  After consultation with the director of human resources and department heads, shall establish and maintain the list of sensitive positions that are subject to the provisions of this section. He or she may list a position as a sensitive position by job classification under the Town's Classification Plan, by the department or subdivision of the department to which the position is assigned, by work location, by position number, or any combination thereof. The Town Manager may, from time to time, as may be necessary, add or remove positions from the list of sensitive positions. 
(B)  Shall receive the report from the Central Criminal Records Exchange concerning whether the person conditionally offered employment has no criminal history record information or the record of criminal history information. He or she may designate the director of human resources to receive such reports. 
(2)  The director of human resources shall: 
(A)  Ensure that the class specifications, position descriptions, and announcements of sensitive positions reflect that the positions are sensitive positions that are subject to the provisions of this section; provided, however, that his or her failure to do so shall not change the status of the position as a sensitive position subject to the provisions of this section. 
(B)  Upon receipt of the report from the Central Criminal Record Exchange concerning a person conditionally offered employment that indicates that the person has a criminal history record, and after consulting with the appointing authority, determine whether the conviction or convictions on the record directly relate to the sensitive position, whether the past criminal conduct contained in the record is compatible with the nature of the employment in the sensitive position, and whether such conviction or convictions disqualifies the person from employment in that sensitive position. In determining whether a criminal conviction directly relates to a sensitive position, the director of human resources shall consider the following criteria: 
(i)  The nature and seriousness of the crime; 
(ii)  The relationship of the crime to the work to be performed in the position applied for; 
(iii)  The extent to which the position applied for might offer an opportunity to engage in further criminal activity of the same type as that in which the person had been involved; 
(iv)  The relationship of the crime to the ability, capacity, or fitness required to perform the duties and discharge the responsibilities of the position being sought; 
(v)  The extent and nature of the person's past criminal activity; 
(vi)  The age of the person at the time of the commission of the crime; 
(vii)  The amount of time that has elapsed since the person's last involvement in the commission of a crime; 
(viii)  The conduct and work activity of the person prior to and following the criminal activity; and 
(ix)  Evidence of the person's rehabilitation or rehabilitative effort while incarcerated or following release. 
(C)  Notify in writing all persons who are denied employment in a sensitive position because of the information appearing in his or her criminal history record, that information obtained from the Central Criminal Records Exchange contributed to such denial, and inform him or her of his or her right to obtain a copy of his or her criminal history record from the Central Criminal Records Exchange. 
(D)  Shall issue procedural instructions and promulgate all forms necessary to carry out the provisions of this section. 
(3)  Department heads shall: 
(A)  Upon making a conditional offer of employment in a sensitive position, notify the Town Manager, or his or her designee, and the director of human resources, or his or her designee, of the extension of such offer; provided, however, that his or her failure to do so shall not change the status of the position as a sensitive position subject to the provisions of this section. 
(B)  Upon making a conditional offer of employment in a sensitive position, the director of human resources or his/her designee shall inform the offeree in writing that he or she must, as a condition of employment, submit to fingerprinting and provide personal descriptive information to be forwarded along with the applicant's fingerprints to the Central Criminal Records Exchange and the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the purpose of obtaining criminal history record information regarding him or her provided, however, that his or her failure to do so shall not change the status of the position as a sensitive position subject to the provisions of this section. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the voluntary disclosure by an applicant for a sensitive position of his or her criminal history record information and information relevant to the criteria set forth in subsection (e)(2)(B) during the application, examination, certification, and selection processes, or prohibiting the solicitation of such voluntary disclosure by applicants. 
(Code 1969, § 11-3.1; Ord. of 6-2007; Ord. of 10-22-2012; Ord. of 7-7-2014 )  
Sec. 11-4. - Application of chapter. 
This chapter applies to all employees of the Town of Vienna who are under the direction and appointment of the Town Manager and, where indicated by content, to members of the Town Council and appointed officials including appointed members of boards and commissions. 
(Code 1969, § 11-4; Ord. of 2-28-1994; Ord. of 10-22-2012)  
Sec. 11-5. - Responsibility and authority of the Town Manager. 
The Town Manager shall have the responsibility and authority for administering the personnel system established by this chapter. In implementing this chapter, the Town Manager is authorized to prepare administrative regulations that will generally itemize or detail specifics relating to a pertinent subject. They may be implemented in conjunction with this chapter and will bear the same authority. 
The director of human resources is designated as the Town's personnel officer and, subject to the directions of the Town Manager, is responsible for the administration of this chapter and the administrative regulations. The Town Manager, however, retains final responsibility for personnel administration with the Town government. 
(Code 1969, § 11-5; Ord. of 2-28-1994; Ord. of 10-22-2012; Ord. of 7-7-2014 )  
ARTICLE 2. - COMPENSATION 
 
Sec. 11-6. - Pay plan. 
A.  Administration. 
1.  The Town Manager is responsible for: 
a.  Developing a pay scale with an appropriate number of pay grades. 
b.  Assigning all positions to the pay grade, based upon a careful analysis of the requirements of the positions. Such analysis will include skills, responsibilities, effort required, work conditions, and education/experience. 
c.  Developing methods by which employees may progress from one pay grade to another. 
2.  The pay plan shall become effective upon approval by the Town Council. 
3.  In assigning salary ranges, consideration shall be given to prevailing rates of pay for comparable work in other public sector and private sector positions, the current cost of living, the duties and responsibilities of the position, and the Town's financial condition and policies. 
B.  Maintenance of the plan. 
1.  The department head is responsible for informing the Town Manager of any significant change in duties, responsibilities, working conditions, or other factors which might affect the pay grade of any position. 
2.  A general review of the entire plan by the department heads and Town Manager is required each year prior to the submission of that year's final budget requests to council. 
3.  A comprehensive review of the plan should be conducted every three to five years. 
C.  The pay scale. 
1.  The pay scale shall be an integrated scale with sufficient pay grades to adequately compensate the employees covered by the position classification plan. All increases shall be granted as defined in the Town's Administrative Regulations and shall be implemented upon Town Council approval. 
2.  Any market adjustments granted by the Town Council shall be applied to all the pay rates in the pay scale. 
D.  Allocation of positions to grades. Each position will be assigned to a pay grade. Initial employment shall normally be at the minimum rate for the assigned grade; however, when an applicant possesses unusual experience or ability, he/she may be hired at a higher rate, as recommended by the department head and approved by the Town Manager. 
E.  Compensation for work in a higher classification. If an employee is assigned by the Town Manager to work in the acting capacity of a higher grade position and assumes additional responsibilities for at least 30 days, he/she shall be granted an increase in salary as defined in the Town's Administrative Regulations. Such additional salary shall cease when the employee returns to his/her regular job. 
F.  Salary increases. All permanent Town employees included in the pay plan, who are not at the top of their grade, may become eligible for a pay increase. These increases if granted will be effective at such time as approved by Town Council. Upon reaching the end of the pay grade an employee is eligible only for market adjustments. 
G.  Overtime. Employees who perform necessary and assigned overtime work will be compensated under the guidelines of the Fair Labor Standards Act. Overtime pay for non-exempt employees shall be at one and one-half times the regular rate of pay or compensatory time may accrue at the same one and one-half rate. Exempt employees shall earn hour for hour compensatory time for authorized hours in excess of 40 hours per week. 
Overtime pay may be received only for work that is done on a mandatory basis outside of the normal work day. It cannot be earned by foregoing a lunch hour, arriving at the work site early or staying afterwards unless specifically required by the employee's supervisor. 
H.  Holiday pay. 
1.  Permanent employees are paid their regular straight time rate for all days designated as Town holidays in subsection 11-10(L). 
2.  Permanent, part time employees shall be paid only in the event that the holiday falls on their regularly scheduled work day and then only for the number of hours for which they are regularly scheduled at their straight time rate. 
3.  Temporary or seasonal employees shall be paid only in the event that the holiday falls on their regularly scheduled work day and then only for the number of hours for which they are regularly scheduled at their straight time rate. 
4.  All non-exempt personnel required to work on Town holidays receive their holiday pay for that day and pay at the rate of time and one-half for all hours worked. 
5.  When a holiday falls on a full-time, permanent employee's scheduled day off, one of his/her scheduled working days within the same pay period in which the holiday occurs may be designated by the department head as the official holiday. 
6.  In order to receive pay for an observed holiday, an employee must be in a work or paid leave status on his/her scheduled workday immediately preceding and following the holiday. 
I.  Starting rate of pay. New appointments shall normally be made at the minimum rate of the appropriate pay grade. However, original appointments above the minimum rate may be made with the advanced written approval of the Town Manager or his designee. 
J.  Transfer. A transfer occurs when an employee permanently changes from one position to another in the same pay grade. An employee's salary does not change in a transfer. 
K.  Demotion. A demotion occurs when an employee permanently changes from one position to another which has a lower salary grade. In no event shall the employee's new salary be above the highest step in the pay grade of his/her new classification. 
L.  Promotion. A promotion occurs when an employee permanently changes from one position to another which has a higher salary grade. 
(Code 1969, § 11-6; Ord. of 2-28-1994; Ord. of 6-1994; Ord. of 2-2008; Ord. of 9-2009; Ord. of 10-22-2012; Ord. of 7-7-2014 )  
Sec. 11-7. - Separation. 
Separation may result from any employee's resignation, layoff, retirement, dismissal, disability or death. 
A.  Resignation. In order to resign from the Town in good standing, an employee must submit his/her written resignation to the human resources office at least ten working days prior to departure. 
B.  Layoff. An employee may be laid off when a position is abolished, or as a result of lack of work or funds. Prior to a layoff, the employee will receive written notice at least 30 working days prior to the effective date, but in an emergency, no less than ten working days. 
C.  Dismissal. Reasons for dismissal may include, but are not limited to, violating established policies, procedures, rules or accepted standards of personal conduct. 
D.  Retirement. A withdrawal from active service based on age, years of service, or disability. 
E.  Termination of directors without cause/severance pay. At the discretion of the Town Manager, a director may be terminated from employment with the Town without cause with 30 days' notice. In the event of a termination without cause the director shall be entitled to severance pay in the amount of one month's salary for every year of service to the Town, in an amount not to exceed six months' salary. No severance shall be paid to a director who has been dismissed for cause. 
(Code 1969, § 11-7; Ord. of 2-28-1994; Ord. of 2-2008; Ord. of 9-2009; Ord. of 10-22-2012; Ord. of 10-22-2012; Ord. of 7-7-2014 )  
Sec. 11-8. - Benefits. 
All permanent, full time employees are eligible for retirement, life and health insurance and leave benefits. Permanent, part time employees who work at least 20 hours per week are eligible for the same benefits as full time employees, exclusive of retirement plans, at one-half the value given to full time employees. 
(Code 1969, § 11-8; Ord. of 2-28-1994; Ord. of 10-22-2012)  
Sec. 11-9. - Cash awards and incentive programs. 
Employee compensation may be supplemented by cash award or incentive programs that have been developed by the Town Manager. The basis for these awards may be any one or more of a variety of reasons, such as continual work excellence above the call of duty, superior work in handling an event, outstanding safety record, an act of heroism, or the contribution of a time or money saving idea. 
(Code 1969, § 11-9; Ord. of 2-28-1994; Ord. of 10-22-2012)  
ARTICLE 3. - LEAVE 
 
Sec. 11-10. - Leave. 
A.  Annual leave. 
1.  All full-time, permanent Town employees accrue annual leave at the following rates based on their anniversary date: 
Length of Service 	Hours Accumulated per Pay Period 
0 through 2 years 	4 
2 years, one day through 5 years 	5 
5 years, one day through 8 years 	6 
8 years, one day through 11 years 	7 
11 years, one day and up 	8 
 
2.  The maximum amount of annual leave that an employee may accumulate is 240 hours. Annual leave in excess of 240 hours at the end of each calendar year will be reduced to this limit. 
3.  New employees are eligible to use annual leave as soon as it is accrued. 
4.  Upon retirement or termination of employment, permanent employees who have completed their initial probationary period are entitled to payment for any unused annual leave up to a maximum of 240 hours, plus any additional annual leave accrued from December 31 to the date of separation. 
5.  Annual leave shall be taken in one-half-hour increments. 
6.  Annual leave continues to accrue while an employee is on any type of paid approved leave, except in those cases where an employee is receiving workers' compensation payments or is on catastrophic and/or extraordinary sick leave. 
7.  The Town Manager may approve an employee's request for payment in lieu of use of up to 40 hours of annual leave in any one fiscal year. No employee may reduce his/her leave balance to less than 40 hours when requesting payment for said leave. In no case shall annual leave be taken before it is earned. 
8.  Upon the hiring of exempt, administrative personnel, the Town Manager may, at his/her discretion, grant the accumulation of leave at a higher rate than the entry level amount in recognition of prior years of public service employment. 
9.  Permanent employees whose normal workweek is less than 20 hours per week shall not accrue annual leave. Permanent employees whose normal week is 20 hours or more shall accrue leave at one-half the regular accumulation rate. 
B.  Sick leave. All full-time, permanent employees accrue sick leave at the rate of four hours per pay period. Sick leave accrues with active service and/or while an employee is on any approved paid leave status, except in those cases when an employee is receiving workers' compensation payments or is on catastrophic and/or extraordinary sick leave. New employees are eligible to use sick leave as soon as it is accrued. 
Permanent employees who work less than 20 hours a week are not eligible for sick leave accumulation. Permanent employees whose normal workweek is 20 hours or more shall accrue sick leave at a rate of two hours per pay period. 
1.  Permanent employees may take sick leave for the following purposes: 
a.  Period of personal illness. 
b.  Death of a parent, sibling, child, spouse or grandparent related by marriage, blood or adoption. The maximum number of days granted per occurrence shall be three. 
c.  Serious illness of the immediate family where the employee's attendance is required. The maximum number of days granted per occurrence shall be three. 
d.  Medical and/or dental appointments for the employee only. 
2.  Sick leave shall be taken in one-half-hour increments. 
3.  No limits are placed on the accumulation of sick leave. Upon regular retirement from the Town of Vienna, employees will receive payment of 25 percent of their accumulated sick leave up to 1,040 hours. This payment will be made at the rate of pay at their date of separation. The balance of their accumulated sick leave is credited in full towards retirement benefits (length of service) under the Town of Vienna's Employee's Retirement Plan and the Town of Vienna Police Retirement Plan. 
4.  The Town may investigate any absence for which sick leave is requested. If an employee is required to visit a specific physician designated by the Town Manager, the Town will pay for the visit. 
C.  Restricted leave. 
1.  When an employee has established a pattern of abuse of leave privileges, he/she may be placed on restricted leave status. This procedure does not remove from the employee the ability to use his/her accrued leave benefits. However, specific procedures must be followed in order to use the leave. 
2.  Restrictive leave may be implemented by a supervisor or department head for a period not to exceed six months. Failure to follow the restricted leave procedure or continued abuse of leave may result in disciplinary action or dismissal. 
D.  Advanced sick leave. 
1.  With the approval of the Town Manager, sick leave not to exceed 40 hours may be advanced to a full-time, permanent employee with over one year of service in cases of serious illness or disability. Advanced sick leave is charged to future accounts of sick leave and, at the option of the employee, can be charged to future accounts of annual leave. 
2.  In the event an employee leaves the Town service prior to liquidation of advanced sick leave, the Town will be reimbursed for the outstanding balance. This amount due shall be withheld from the final paycheck or collected through other appropriate action. 
E.  Catastrophic sick leave. 
1.  When all other leave benefits have been exhausted, the Town Manager may request the Town Council to grant catastrophic sick leave. This additional leave may not exceed one-half day for each month of a permanent employee's credited service with the Town. All such requests will consider: 
a.  The nature and seriousness of the illness. 
b.  The prospects of eventual return to service. 
c.  Employee's length of service. 
d.  Employee's previous leave record. 
e.  Other justifications. 
2.  All such catastrophic sick leave may be charged to future accrued leave of any kind. 
3.  Catastrophic sick leave may be granted to a full-time employee with over one year of service in cases of serious personal illness or disability. 
F.  Leave without pay. Leave without pay may be granted to a full-time, permanent employee by the Town Manager at his/her discretion for a period not to exceed six months. Credit toward annual and sick leave will not be earned during leave without pay. Such leave does not constitute a break in service, but changes the anniversary date if the employee is absent for more than 30 days (except in cases covered under workers' compensation). For leave without pay that is in excess of 30 days, the employee must pay the full amount of his/her health insurance premium in order to maintain coverage by the first of each month. 
G.  Absence without leave. 
1.  An employee who has not had prior authorization to use annual leave or has not notified his/her supervisor of an illness is placed on absent-without-leave status. Upon returning to work, this absence must be explained to the employee's supervisor. Disciplinary action may be taken. An employee placed on such absent-without-leave status for three consecutive workdays is automatically terminated. 
2.  An absence-without-leave charge may be changed later to an appropriate type of leave in certain instances where the employee can present acceptable documentation to explain the absence. 
H.  Family leave. As provided for in the Family Medical Leave Act of 1993, permanent full and part time employees are eligible for participation in the family leave program. Plan guidelines and specifics are contained within the Town's administrative regulations. 
I.  Military leave. 
1.  Full-time, permanent employees who have completed their probationary period and leave the Town service to join the military force of the United States in an initial tour of duty, or are drafted into the military service, will be placed on military leave without pay, such leave to extend through a date 90 days after they are relieved from such service. In accordance with the provisions of the Selective Service Act, such employees shall be entitled to be restored to the position they vacated, or to another position of the same class, provided they make application within 90 days after the date of satisfactory separation and are physically and mentally capable of performing the work of the position. 
2.  A permanent employee who is a member of the National Guard or an organized military reserve of the United States will be allowed paid leave, not to exceed 15 calendar days during any one fiscal year, to attend training camps. Such employees will be paid at their regular hourly rate for no more than 40 hours per calendar week. 
J.  Civil leave. A full-time, permanent employee shall be given time off without loss of pay and without charge to any type of leave when performing jury duty; when subpoenaed to appear before a court, public body, or commission in connection with Town business; when performing emergency civilian duty in connection with national defense; when needed for the purpose of voting, up to one hour maximum. 
K.  Injury leave. 
1.  An employee who is injured while performing the duties of his/her position, without fault or negligence on his/her part, and when such injury is accepted as compensable under Virginia's Workers' Compensation Act, shall be granted injury leave with pay. 
2.  Such leave can only be authorized after the human resources office has received from the designated physician a medical certificate setting forth the nature and extent of the injury and probable period of disability. 
3.  While on injury leave, other leave benefits shall cease to accrue until the employee returns to duty. 
4.  Injury leave can be granted for up to seven days and cease when the Town's workers' compensation insurance carrier begins payment of salary benefits. 
L.  Holiday leave. 
1.  The following holidays are observed by the Town and shall be granted to employees with pay unless such employees are required to be on scheduled duty: 
New Year's Day (January 1) 
Martin Luther King Day (third Monday in January) 
Washington's Birthday (third Monday in February) 
Memorial Day (last Monday in May) 
Independence Day (July 4) 
Labor Day (first Monday in September) 
Columbus Day (second Monday in October) 
Veteran's Day (November 11) - Effective November 11, 2015 
Thanksgiving Day (fourth Thursday in November) 
Fall Holiday (fourth Friday in November) 
Christmas Eve (half day, December 24) 
Christmas Day (December 25) 
Inauguration Day (January 20, every fourth year) 
2.  In the event an approved holiday falls on a Saturday, the previous Friday will be considered as the holiday. If the holiday falls on a Sunday, it will be observed on Monday. 
M.  Transfer of leave. In the event that a permanent full or part time employee has depleted all of his/her accrued sick and annual leave plus compensatory time as a result of his/her own extended illness or that of a child, spouse or parent by blood, marriage or adoption, sick leave may be transferred from one employee to another. Authorization and participation in this program must be granted by the Town Manager under the guidelines identified in the administrative regulations. 
N.  Administrative leave. 
1.  In the event unusual circumstances preclude an employee from fully or satisfactorily fulfilling the duties of his/her position, the individual may be placed on administrative leave. This leave may be with or without pay for a period of time not to exceed 90 calendar days per occasion. 
2.  Time spent on administrative leave shall not be charged to any other leave except as determined by the director of human resources. While on administrative leave, the employee will cease to accumulate annual and sick leave. 
3.  Administrative leave can only be authorized by the Town Manager and then only upon the concurrence of the department head and director of human resources. 
4.  If Town offices are unavailable due to extreme weather conditions or other circumstances beyond the control of employees, administrative leave will be charged. The Town Manager has the authority to determine when employees will charge this type of leave. 
(Code 1969, § 11-10; Ord. of 2-28-1994; Ord. of 6-1996; Ord. of 7-2000; Ord. of 6-2002; Ord. of 2-2008; Ord. of 9-2009; Ord. of 10-22-2012; Ord. of 7-7-2014 )  
ARTICLE 4. - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 11-11. - Grievance policy. 
The Town of Vienna is committed to resolving employee complaints and grievances in a just and equitable manner. 
All permanent employees of the Town of Vienna have the right to submit grievances for resolution without threat of discrimination, coercion, recrimination, restraint or reprisal. It is the Town's belief that timely resolution of grievances enhances employer/employee relations and serves the mutual interest of all concerned parties. 
(Code 1969, § 11-11; Ord. of 2-28-1994; Ord. of 10-22-2012)  
Sec. 11-12. - Civilian employees' grievance procedure. 
The civilian grievance procedure is available for use by any permanent, non-probationary civilian employee except the Town Manager, Town Attorney, Town Clerk or director and any sworn police officer who has elected to proceed with the police officer's grievance procedure. The Town's administrative regulations contain the guidelines and process to be used under this grievance procedure. When submitting a grievance, a sworn police officer must identify in writing to the director of human resources which grievance procedure he/she so elects to use. 
(Code 1969, § 11-12; Ord. of 2-28-1994; Ord. of 2-2008; Ord. of 9-2009; Ord. of 10-22-2012; Ord. of 7-7-2014 )  
Sec. 11-13. - Police officers' grievance procedure. 
The police officer grievance procedure is available for use by any permanent, non-probationary police officer except the chief of police. The Town's administrative regulations contain the guidelines and process to be used under this grievance procedure. When submitting a grievance, a sworn police officer must identify in writing to the director of human resources which grievance procedure he/she so elects to use. 
(Code 1969, § 11-13; Ord. of 2-28-1994; Ord. of 2-2008; Ord. of 10-22-2012; Ord. of 7-7-2014 )  
ARTICLE 5. - OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT 
 
Sec. 11-14. - Police officers; off-duty employment. 
Sworn police officers of the Town are authorized to engage in part time off duty employment which may occasionally require the use of their police powers in performance of such employment. 
The chief of police shall promulgate reasonable rules to apply to such off duty employment and shall cause those rules to be included in the departmental general orders. 
(Code 1969, § 11-14; Ord. of 12-6-1999; Ord. of 10-22-2012)  
Chapter 12 - PLUMBING 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Title and scope. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Vienna Plumbing Code," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1969, § 12-1)  
Sec. 12-2. - Adoption of plumbing code. 
There is hereby adopted by the Town Council for the purpose of regulating the installation, alteration and repair of plumbing facilities, including licensing, permits, penalties and fees, the provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as modified and incorporated by reference in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Code 1969, § 12-2)  
Sec. 12-3. - Water shortage control plan. 
(A)  Authority to declare water emergencies. During the continued existence of climatic, hydrological and other extraordinary conditions the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Town of Vienna may require that certain uses of water, not essential to public health, safety and welfare, be reduced, restricted or curtailed. As the shortage of raw or potable water becomes increasingly more critical, conservation measures to reduce consumption or curtail nonessential water use may be necessary. 
The Town Manager or their designee is authorized to declare a water emergency in the Town restricting the use of water in any area of the Town. All water stages are built upon and require compliance with previous water stages. For example when a drought emergency is declared all provisions of a drought warning are in effect. Also the Town Manager or their designee may declare any of the three stages; they do not have to be declared sequentially. 
(B)  Publication of declaration. Upon the declaration of a water emergency, the Town Manager or their designee shall immediately post a written notice of the emergency at the front door of the Vienna Town Hall and shall place a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the area in which such emergency has been declared. 
(C)  Water use considerations. Upon the declaration of a water shortage or emergency, the Town Manager or their designee is authorized and directed to implement conservation measures by ordering the restricted use or absolute curtailment of the use of water for certain nonessential purposes for the duration of the water shortage or emergency in the manner hereinafter set out. In exercising this discretionary authority, and making the determinations set forth hereof, the Town Manager or their designee shall give due consideration to stream flow conditions, water levels, available/usable storage on hand, draw down rates and the projected supply capability in the Town; system purification and pumping capacity; daily water consumption and consumption projections of the system's customers; prevailing and forecast weather conditions; fire service requirements; pipeline conditions including breakages, stoppages and leaks; supplementary source data; estimates of minimum essential supplies to preserve public health and safety and such other data pertinent to the past, current and projected water demands. 
(D)  Limitation of restrictions. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any governmental activity, institution, business or industry which shall be declared by the Town Manager or their designee, upon a proper showing, to be necessary for the public health, safety and welfare or the prevention of severe economic hardship or the substantial loss of employment. Any activity, institution, business or industry aggrieved by the finding of the Town Manager or their designee may appeal that decision to the Vienna Town Council. 
(E)  Water conservation measures. Upon a determination by the Town Manager or their designee of the existence of the following conditions, the Town Manager shall take the following actions that shall apply to all water users in the Town: 
(1)  Drought watch: When moderate but limited supplies of water are available and a drought watch is declared, the Town Manager or their designee shall, through appropriate means, call upon the general population to employ prudent restraint in water usage. Public outreach activities shall be identified to inform the general population of the potential for drought conditions to intensify and potential water conservation activities that may be utilized. 
(2)  Drought warning: The drought warning stage includes voluntary water conservation actions due to the imminent onset of a significant drought event. Customers will be asked to reduce outdoor water use by only using water before 10:00 a.m. and after 7:00 p.m. and by: 
• Reducing turf watering; 
• Using a broom, not the hose, to clean driveways and sidewalks; 
• Reducing vehicle washing; 
• Using bucket watering instead of hose watering when possible; and 
• Turning off ornamental fountains. 
Customers will be asked to reduce indoor water use by: 
• Identifying and repairing leaks; 
• Turning off the water while shaving, brushing teeth, etc.; 
• Reducing shower time to five minutes or taking baths with less water; 
• Only using the clothes washer and dishwasher machines when there are full loads; 
• Storing water in the refrigerator instead of running it to get it cold; and 
• Installing water-saver devices in the home, such as low-flow toilets and shower heads. 
(3)  Drought emergency: As drought conditions continue to worsen, a drought emergency may be declared by the Town Manager or their designee. When a drought emergency is declared, the following mandatory water restrictions are imposed: 
• All public water uses not required for health or safety will be prohibited; 
• Watering outdoor vegetation will be prohibited, except from a watering can or other container not exceeding three gallons in capacity or with recycled water. Any person regularly engaged in the sale of plants will be permitted to irrigate only in amounts necessary to prevent the loss of nursery stock; 
• Washing vehicles except from a bucket or other container not exceeding three gallons in capacity or with recycled water will be prohibited; 
• Washing driveways, sidewalks, exteriors of homes or other outdoor surfaces will be prohibited; however, any person regularly engaged in the business of washing such areas shall be permitted to use water for such purposes as long as the amount of water being used is minimized; 
• The operation of any ornamental fountain or similar structure using water will be prohibited; 
• The filling or refilling of swimming pools or wading pools will be prohibited; 
• Restaurants and similar establishments will be prohibited from serving water unless specifically requested by the customer; and 
• Fire hydrant use will only be permitted for fire protection. 
(F)  Penalty and enforcement. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provision of the drought warning stage may be subject to the following civil penalties: 
(a)  For the first offense, violators shall receive a written warning delivered in person or posted by a representative of the Town. 
(b)  For the second offense, violators shall be fined $50.00, the fine to be imposed on the violator's next water bill, or in the case of violators not on the public water system, in a written notice. 
(c)  For the third offense, violators shall be fined $100.00 for each offense, the fine to be imposed on the violator's next water bill, or in the case of violators not on the public water system, in a written notice. 
(d)  For each subsequent offense, violators will be subject to water service termination and reconnection fees. 
(e)  Each violation by a person shall be counted as a separate violation by that person, irrespective of the location at which the violation occurs. 
(2)  Any person who violates any provision of the drought emergency stage may be subject to the following penalties: 
(a)  Residential customers who exceed the greater of 5,000 gallons of water per month of consumption or use more than their base usage for the same period in the previous 12 months will be charged two times the rate. 
(b)  Residential customers who continue to use more than 5,000 gallons of water per month of consumption or use more than their base usage for the same period in the previous 12 months will be subject to water service termination and reconnection fees. 
(3)  Persons who have been assessed a penalty shall have the right to challenge the assessment by providing a written notice to the Town Manager within ten days of the date of the assessment of the penalty. The Town Manager or their designee shall determine that the penalty was properly assessed and notify the complaining person in writing of their determination. 
(4)  The Town Manager or their designee may waive the penalty if they determine that the violation occurred due to no fault of the person. 
(G)  Notification of end of water emergency. The Town Manager or their designee shall notify the Town Council when, in their opinion, the water emergency situation no longer exists. Upon concurrence of the Town Council, the water emergency shall be declared to have ended. When this declaration is made, the information shall be conveyed to the general public through the news media. 
(H)  Separability. In the event that any provision of this ordinance or any portion thereof, any paragraph, sentence, or word be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remainder hereof as a whole or part thereof other than the part declared to be invalid. 
(Code 1969, § 12-3; Ord. of 10-17-2011, § 1)  
Sec. 12-4. - Water conservation. 
(a)  Flow rates and water usage regulations. In all new construction and in all replacement of fixtures, only fixtures not exceeding the following flow rates and/or water usage shall be installed. These rates are based on a pressure at the fixture of 40 to 50 psi. 
Water closets, tank type 	3.5 gal. per flush 
Water closets, flushometer type 	3.5 gal. per flush 
Urinals, tank type 	3.0 gal. per flush 
Urinals, flushometer type 	3.0 gal. per flush 
Shower heads 	3.0 gal. per minute 
Lavatory, sink faucets 	4.0 gal. per minute 
 
(b)  Lavatories for public use. Faucets of lavatories located in rest rooms intended for public use shall be of the metering, or self-closing type. 
(c)  Car wash installation. Car wash installations shall be equipped with an approved water recycling system. This clause shall be retroactive and all existing car wash installations shall be equipped with such recycling devices by not later than one year after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(d)  Coin-operated car washes or similar devices. No coin-operated car wash may be permitted to be installed and used until plans have been submitted to and approved by the administrative authority. The plans must show the method of connection to an approved sanitary system, disposal of rain subsurface water and the protection of the potable water system. 
(e)  Continuous flow equipment. Any water connected device or appliance requiring a continuous flow of five gallons per minute or more and not previously listed in this section shall be equipped with an approved water recycling system. 
(Code 1969, § 12-4; Ord. of 1-17-1977) 
State Law reference— Local water-saving ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-932.  
Sec. 12-5. - Public water supply agency data. 
Any person contemplating the construction of a water supply system shall, at the time of submitting subdivision plans, profiles and specifications, agree by written contract approved by the appropriate public water supply agency that, upon completion of the construction of such water system and the approval and acceptance thereof by the proper official, the water system so constructed shall become the property of the appropriate public water supply agency. 
(A)  All water mains, their sizes, valves and fire hydrants shall be shown. 
(1)  In subdivision streets on tangent sections, the water main shall be located eight feet north or east of the street centerline, and the gas main shall be located eight feet south or west of the centerline. 
(2)  On loop streets, the water main shall be located eight feet north or east of the predominate centerline of the street. The gas main shall be located eight feet south or west of the predominate centerline of the street. The water and gas mains shall then continue on the same side of the centerline as determined in this subsection for their entire lengths of the streets. 
(3)  Due to the complexity of design of townhouse streets, it is not feasible to specify the side of the street that the water line will be located. Designers of townhouse sites shall confer with the public water supply agency and the Washington Gas Light Company. They will assist the designers at this stage in effecting a satisfactory location for water and gas mains and eliminating the need for revisions to the finished drawings for the development. 
(4)  Water service cut-offs shall be located in the utility strip between the curb and gutter and sidewalk unless otherwise permitted by the director. The water service line shall be constructed into the lot prior to the placing of the concrete sidewalk. 
(5)  Dry water mains shall be shown on the plans. House and other building connections must be stubbed to the property line before the street paving section is constructed. 
(B)  Guideline criteria. 
(1)  All water main construction shall comply with the requirements of the standard specifications and plans of the public water supply agency serving the location. 
(2)  All water mains shall have a minimum cover of four feet unless otherwise designated. 
(3)  The developer shall request inspection by the public water supply agency three days prior to commencing construction of any water main. 
(4)  No underground electric, telephone, television cables, gas, chilled water lines or other underground utilities shall be installed within the public water supply easement parallel to the proposed water main. Plans and profiles of all utility crossings of water mains within the easements shall be submitted to the public water supply agency for approval prior to construction. 
(5)  Any relocation of existing water main due to development shall be provided for by the developer. 
(6)  No water main valves are to be closed prior to notification of the appropriate water supply agency. 
(7)  Water mains shall not be installed on site until easements are recorded and the developer has furnished proper forms for water main installation. 
(8)  All water mains three inches through 12 inches shall be Class 52, Ductile Iron Water Main unless otherwise designated. 
(9)  All hydrant, water service, fire line and stub-out valves shall be strapped. Swivel fittings are optional in lieu of strapping. 
(10)  The developer shall notify the public water supply agency prior to the installation of interior plumbing to determine the location of the water meter and any prewiring for remote register. 
(11)  When the property is located in areas where the pressure is less than 30 psi, booster pumps will be required to provide adequate pressure. 
(12)  The developer shall make provision for discharge of water as required by the public water supply agency for water meter repairs and testing with proper arrangements for erosion and sediment control during discharge. 
(13)  The working pressure shall be shown on the plans. In accordance with the Fairfax County Plumbing Code, a pressure regulating valve must be installed by the property owner in the building plumbing system where the working pressure exceeds 80 psi in order to eliminate water hammer and unnecessary wastage of water. 
(14)  The approximate location of curb stops shall be shown on the plans by the symbol 0. 
(15)  The developer agrees to assume complete responsibility and all costs for the installation of the mains and appurtenances and for any adjustments in alignment and grade, location, repairs and maintenance which may be required prior to finish grading and surfacing of streets and/or easements and final acceptance of the facilities. Final acceptance will not be considered until after the streets have been surfaced or the easements finally graded. 
(16)  Corrosion prevention and control measures shall be used to protect water mains when a water main crosses another buried utility line. 
(17)  Prior to any water main installation all required sanitary, including laterals, and storm sewers must be installed, their ditches compacted for full depth according to current requirements, the sanitary sewer accepted for service by the county's department of environmental management, and the streets and/or easements rough graded to meet current standards. 
(C)  Use of the public water supply as a source of water for temporary construction wash racks. 
(1)  All subdivision and site plans shall show the location in detail for a temporary wash rack for the cleaning of trucks and construction equipment leaving the site. The means by which water is provided and the area of temporary ponding for settling of water shall be shown. The public water supply may be used to provide wash water, provided the requirements as shown on the wash rack detail in the Town's construction details are met. 
(2)  If the extent of the site is so limited as not to warrant a wash rack, alternate provisions for cleaning shall be shown. 
(Code 1969, § 12-5; Ord. of 2-25-1980)  
Sec. 12-6. - Fire marshal data. 
1.  No person shall use, tamper with, damage or destroy any fire hydrants, valves or water mains within the Town and county except that a fire department may use such hydrants for firefighting and training purposes, or a person who has obtained a permit for use from the public authority or utility having jurisdiction over said items. When use is by a person under permit from the authority having jurisdiction, all policies that are outlined on said permit or application shall be complied with. 
2.  No plantings or erection of other obstructions shall be made within four feet of any fire hydrant. 
(A)  Guideline criteria. 
(1)  All hydrant branches shall have a minimum cover of three feet at the ditch line. 
(2)  All fire hydrant locations shall be reviewed by the Town for conformity to the Town standards as shown in the Town's construction details. 
(3)  It has been requested by the fire marshal's office that all site plans submitted for review include the following information: 
a.  Use group classification (defined by B.O.C.A.). 
b.  Type of construction (defined by B.O.C.A.). 
c.  Existing and proposed water mains. 
d.  Existing and proposed fire hydrants. 
e.  Water main size. 
f.  Available water pressure and flow capability. 
1)  Static pressure. 
2)  Residual pressure. 
3)  Flow in gallons per minute (gpm). 
g.  Type of fire suppression or detection equipment to be provided (i.e., sprinklers, standpipes, smoke or heat detectors, etc.). 
h.  Location and size of underground fire lines. 
i.  Location of fire department siamese connections (street in front of building). 
j.  Access for emergency vehicles shall be provided to within 100 feet of the main or principal entrance to every building. The access shall be provided by a public or private street or parking lot. 
k.  12-foot access to within 50 feet of edge of swimming pools with six-foot personnel gate in fence at point of access. (Exception: Pools located at single-family lots and individually owned.) 
l.  Height of building in feet and stories. 
m.  Breakdown of building interior such as firewalls, tenant separations, etc. 
(4)  If a private interior fire protection system is to be provided, it is subject to the approval of the county fire marshal and the Fairfax County Plumbing Code. 
(5)  Private bridges must have a design satisfactory to the director to carry fire equipment where necessary. AASHTO "Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges" and the VDH&T Bridge Engineer will be consulted for guidance on a case-by-case basis. 
(6)  Fire flow requirements for one- and two-family dwellings: Minimum exposure distances (with 20 psi residual pressure): 
0 feet—10 feet 	1,500 gpm a —2,000 gpm b 
11 feet—30 feet 	1,000 gpm a —1,500 gpm b 
31 feet and greater 	1,000 gpm 
 
a Where a single hydrant is used to meet fire demand. 
b Where a distribution grid is available and two hydrants within an acceptable spacing are used to meet fire demand. 
(7)  Fire flow requirements for other uses: 
a.  Townhouses and multiplex units: 2,500 gpm. 
b.  Apartments, hotels, motels, office, hospitals, nursing homes: 
1—3 stories 	2,000 gpm 
Over three stories 	2,500 gpm 
 
c.  Schools. 
d.  Mercantile, retail sales, shopping centers, etc.: 2,500 gpm. 
e.  Industrial, storage buildings repair garages, service station: 2,500 gpm. 
f.  Central well systems. 
Minimum 30,000 gallons storage applies only to one-and two-family dwellings where public water is not available. See section 1-2.1.J, Vol. 1, P.F.M. The figures in subsection 2.A(7) of this section are fire flow requirements for new development. Where the size and scope of the development exceeds these requirements, additional flow shall be provided in accordance with ISO requirements. In areas where the flows required in subsections 2.A(6) and (7) of this section cannot be reasonably met, the director, in conjunction with the fire marshal's office, may waive or alter such requirements. Such a waiver may be predicated upon the installation or provision of such elements as more fire retardant construction or additional fire detection as may be reasonable for the protection of life and property in a given situation. 
(8)  Insurance services office (ISO) guide for determination of required fire flow: 
a.  Determine type of construction. 
b.  Determine ground floor area or largest area between minimum two-hour rated firewalls. 
c.  Determine number of stories. 
d.  Determine required fire flow from ISO tables available from the Division of Administrative Services, Department of Environmental Management, 5th floor, Fairfax Building, 10555 Main Street, Fairfax, Virginia. 
(9)  Fire lanes. 
a.  When buildings are more than five stories or 50 feet in height, access shall be provided to both front and rear of the building. The access to the rear can be provided by either street, parking lot, or fire lane. The inner surface of the fire lane shall be no more than 15 feet from the exterior building wall. 
b.  Where required, fire lanes shall have a minimum width of 18 feet. 
c.  Where fire lanes are required or proposed, a minimum of three sets of the approved site plan shall be submitted to the fire marshal by the owner or submitting engineer for the purpose of fire lane markings, types of signs and location. 
(Code 1969, § 12-6; Ord. of 2-25-1980)  
Sec. 12-7. - Cross connection control and backflow prevention. 
There is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein 12 VAC 5-590-580 et seq., Cross Connection Control and Backflow Prevention in Waterworks. 
(Code 1969, § 12-7; Ord. of 6-15-1992)  
Sec. 12-8. - Right of entry. 
The director of public works or his designee shall have the right to enter, at any reasonable time, property served by a connection to the Town water system for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems for cross connections. Upon request, the owner or occupant of property served shall furnish to the director of public works pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information, or refusal of access when requested, shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(Code 1969, § 12-8; Ord. of 6-15-1992)  
Sec. 12-9. - Failure to comply. 
The Town may deny of discontinue the water service to a consumer if the required backflow prevention device is not installed or if it is found that the device has been removed or bypassed or if a cross connection exists on the premises or if the pressure in the waterworks is below ten psi gauge. Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the deficiencies have been corrected or eliminated in accordance with the commonwealth waterworks regulation. Any person or customer found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article or any written order of the Town in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 12-9; Ord. of 6-15-1992)  
Chapter 13 - REFUSE: GARBAGE AND WEEDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Waste management, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1400 et seq.; authority of Town to operate a garbage and refuse collection and disposal system, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-927; fee exemptions for garbage and refuse disposal, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-936. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 13-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Owner includes any persons holding title to any land or lot in the Town; lessees, tenants and principal occupants of any land or lot in the Town or agents of persons holding titles to such lands or lots, having care, custody, control or management of the land or lot; and fiduciaries holding title to or having the care, custody, control or management of land or lots in the Town for others. 
Weeds includes any and all economically useless plants; plants of unsightly appearance, of wild rank or uncontrolled growth standing on land, but excluding timber and plants or flowers cultivated as or for landscaping or useful economic purposes. 
(Code 1962, § 5-58; Code 1969, § 13-1; Ord. of 6-1963; Ord. of 3-1969)  
Sec. 13-2. - Dumping trash, etc., on highway, right-of-way or private property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or otherwise dispose of trash, garbage or other unsightly matter on a public highway, right-of-way or on private property. 
(Code 1962, § 5-58; Code 1969, § 13-2; Ord. of 3-1966)  
Sec. 13-3. - Trash, garbage, refuse, etc.—Property to be free of generally. 
(a)  The Town Council finds that the proliferation of trash, garbage, refuse and litter, including, but not limited to, discarded food and beverage containers, and other food and beverage related trash and litter within the Town constitutes a threat to the health and safety of the community. 
(b)  Owners of property within the Town shall keep such property free of trash, garbage, refuse, litter and other substance which might endanger the health of residents of the Town. 
(Code 1962, § 14-2; Code 1969, § 13-3; Ord. of 6-1963; Ord. of 9-29-1986)  
Sec. 13-4. - Same—Notice to remove. 
When substances of the nature set forth in section 13-3 are found upon property within the Town, the director of planning and zoning shall immediately notify the owner of such property to remove such substance. Such notification shall be by registered or certified letter sent to the owner at his last known address. If, after diligent inquiry, no address can be found for such owner, the letter herein referred to shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property. 
(Code 1962, § 14-2; Code 1969, § 13-4; Ord. of 6-1963; Ord. of 3-1969)  
Sec. 13-5. - Same—Procedure for removal by Town. 
If the substances referred to in section 13-3 have not been removed from the property by the owner within ten days from the date the letter referred to in section 13-4 has been mailed, or the notice posted, the director of planning and zoning shall cause the removal by Town forces, or the Town's agent, of such substances from such property forthwith. 
(Code 1962, § 14-2; Code 1969, § 13-5; Ord. of 6-1963; Ord. of 9-14-1998)  
Sec. 13-6. - Same—Costs of removal. 
Where substances have been removed from property by the director of planning and zoning pursuant to the provisions of section 13-5, the cost of such removal shall be billed to the owner of the property. If such bill is not paid, it shall be added to the Town real estate tax bill on such property, and shall be a lien on such property to the same extent and effect as the real estate tax is. 
(Code 1962, § 14-2; Code 1969, § 13-6; Ord. of 6-1963; Ord. of 9-14-1998)  
ARTICLE 2. - WEED AND VEGETATION ABATEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to abate weeds and other foreign growth, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-901; "restricted noxious-weed seeds" defined, 2 VAC 5-360-10. 
 
Sec. 13-7. - Grass, weeds and other foreign growth—Permitting in excess of six inches in height prohibited. 
Owners of property within the Town shall not allow grass, weeds, and other foreign growth thereon to exceed six inches in height within 100 feet of any street or adjacent property line. 
(Code 1962, § 14-3; Code 1969, § 13-7; Ord. of 6-1963; Ord. of 3-1969)  
Sec. 13-8. - Same—Notice to cut. 
Where grass, weeds or other foreign growth in excess of six inches in height are found upon property, the director of planning and zoning shall immediately notify the owner of such property to cut such grass, weeds or other foreign substances down to a height not to exceed three inches. Notification shall be made by the same procedure as set forth in section 13-4. 
(Code 1962, § 14-3; Code 1969, § 13-8; Ord. of 6-1963; Ord. of 3-1969; Ord. of 9-14-1998)  
Sec. 13-9. - Same—Procedure for cutting by Town. 
If the grass, weeds or other foreign growth have not been cut down within ten days from the date of the letter or posting provided for in section 13-4, the director of planning and zoning shall cause the cutting down by the Town, or the Town's agent, such grass, weeds or other foreign growth forthwith. 
(Code 1962, § 14-3; Code 1969, § 13-9; Ord. of 6-1963; Ord. of 3-1969; Ord. of 9-14-1998)  
Sec. 13-10. - Same—Cost of cutting. 
Where grass, weeds or other foreign growth have been cut down on property by the director of planning and zoning pursuant to the provisions of section 13-9, the cost of such cutting shall be billed to the owner of the property. If such bill is not paid, it shall be added to the Town real estate bill on such property, and shall be a lien on such property to the same extent and effect as the real estate tax is. 
(Code 1962, § 14-3; Code 1969, § 13-10; Ord. of 6-1963; Ord. of 9-14-1998)  
Sec. 13-11. - Same—Burning. 
Any owner of land required to remove weeds under the provisions of this chapter may after first complying with the requirements of the Fairfax County Air Pollution Control Ordinance, remove the same by burning under the supervision of the Town volunteer fire department. Prior to such burning, such owner shall agree in writing with the Town upon such form as shall be prescribed by the department of planning and zoning, to indemnify, reimburse and save the Town and its agents, officers and employees harmless from all damages that may result directly or indirectly to persons and property from the burning of weeds. 
(Code 1962, § 14-3; Code 1969, § 13-11; Ord. of 6-1963; Ord. of 2-1973; Ord. of 9-14-1998)  
Chapter 13A - REFUSE STORAGE; COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL  
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 13A-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations for the sanitary and effective storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the Town of Vienna, Virginia. 
(Ord. of 6-19-1967)  
Sec. 13A-2. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section. 
Contractor generated material. Any materials generated by a contractor such as debris resulting from a renovation or construction project that requires a building permit (or similar), tree debris left after having a tree removed, or any other debris generated by a contractor and left at the curb. 
Director. Director of Public Works for the Town of Vienna, Virginia unless otherwise stated. 
Garbage. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Household trash. Non-recyclable items that are generated during normal household activities and all garbage. 
Person. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Private collectors. Persons engaged in the collection and transportation of refuse from commercial, industrial, institutional or other establishments for compensation. 
Refuse. Solid waste, including sludge and other discarded material, such as solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations or from community activities or residences. "Refuse" does not include (i) solid and dissolved materials in domestic sewage, (ii) solid or dissolved material in irrigation return flows or in industrial discharges which are sources subject to a permit from the state water control board, or (iii) source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the Federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. § 2011, et seq.), as amended. 
Rubbish. Nonputrescible solid wastes, consisting of both combustible and non-combustible wastes. 
Single stream recycling. Household recyclable items including newspapers, books, magazines, catalogs, junk mail, flattened cardboard, paper, aerosol cans, glass, aluminum cans and foil, any plastic item, bagged plastic film and plastic bags, juice and milk cartons. 
Solid waste. Any garbage, refuse, sludge and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material, resulting from industrial, commercial, mining and agricultural operations, or community activities but does not include (i) solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage, (ii) solid or dissolved material in irrigation return flows or in industrial discharges which are sources subject to a permit from the state water control board, or (iii) source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the Federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended [42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.]. 
Special pickup. Separate pickup made by the Town for refuse which is too large or bulky for normal pickup. 
Storage area. An enclosed area on private property of commercial, industrial, institutional or other establishment used for the storage of solid waste or refuse. 
Town. The Town of Vienna, Virginia. 
Town collectors. Persons employed by the Town engaged in the collection and transportation of refuse, solid waste and single stream recycling in residential areas. 
Town Manager. The Manager of the Town of Vienna, Virginia. 
White goods/bulky appliances. Including but not limited to: stoves, cooktops, dishwashers, refrigerators, air conditioners, microwave ovens, hot water heaters, toaster ovens, convection ovens, garbage disposals, washing machines, clothes dryers, dehumidifiers, humidifiers, furnaces and other appliances. 
Yard waste. Grass, leaves, small clippings, acorns, walnuts, tree vegetation, weeds (free of dirt) and vines that can be turned into compost. Dirt and wood mulch will not be collected. 
(Ord. of 6-19-1967; Ord. of 11-7-2011, § 1; Ord. of 5-7-2012, § 1)  
Sec. 13A-3. - Authority to administer. 
The director of public works is hereby delegated authority to administer this chapter and to issue supplementary rules and regulations that are in support of, and not in conflict with, the provisions of this chapter. Said supplemental rules and regulations shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 6-19-1967)  
ARTICLE 2. - STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 13A-4. - Residential refuse. 
1.  All refuse and solid waste will be placed at the curb line by 6:00 a.m. on the designated day for each address. Plastic bags must be securely tied. Refuse will not be placed on the sidewalk or on any portion of a street right-of-way where it will interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Cans and containers will be removed from the curb line as soon as possible after trash pickup and will be stored behind the front line of the building. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided herein, refuse shall be stored in watertight metal or non-breakable plastic cans, equipped with handles and tight fitting covers. Cans shall have a maximum capacity of 55 gallons. Plastic bags with a minimum thickness of .5 mil may be substituted for the cans. Said plastic bags must be filled in such a manner as to prevent ripping or tearing of bags and must be tightly secured at the top. 
B.  Exceptions: 
1.  Yard waste which can be recycled should be placed in clear plastic bags or kraft paper bags next to the cans or refuse bags. 
2.  Tree parts and brush may be tied securely in bundles, placed in a trash can, or set out at the curb alongside household trash and recycling. Tree parts shall be limited to a maximum length of eight feet and a diameter of six inches. 
3.  Single stream recycling, where all household recyclables are placed together in the same container, shall be placed in a designated recycling container or clear plastic bags and shall be placed at the curb line next to the household trash, yard waste and brush. 
4.  Large items (with the exception of white goods) will be placed alongside the household waste, recycling and yard waste/brush collections. 
5.  To the extent possible, refuse/solid waste should be separated at the curb from any single stream recycling to avoid confusion at pickup. 
6.  Contractor generated materials of any type will not be collected. 
C.  Defective trash cans will be tagged by Town collectors indicating that they are no longer suitable for use. These will be removed if clearly marked "take" and are left in an upside down position at curbside. 
(Ord. of 6-19-1967; Ord. of 11-7-2011, § 1; Ord. of 5-7-2012, § 1)  
Sec. 13A-5. - Commercial refuse. 
A.  Each business establishment shall be equipped with adequate refuse containers or storage areas. All containers, except those for storage of bulky refuse, shall be vermin and water proof, of non-corrosive material and equipped with tight lids which shall be kept closed at all times except when filling or emptying the container. 
B.  Containers and storage areas shall be emptied regularly and cleaned sufficiently often to keep them free of obnoxious odors and vermin. 
C.  All storage areas shall be enclosed by adequate walls or opaque fencing and shall be well drained and fully accessible to collection equipment and to public health inspection and fire inspection personnel. Said areas shall protect refuse from dispersal by wind or otherwise and must be kept free of litter and refuse overflow. 
(Ord. of 6-19-1967)  
Sec. 13A-6. - Prohibited activities. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to place refuse in any street, alley, public or private place unless placed in proper containers or storage areas for collection. 
B.  It shall be unlawful to accumulate refuse on either residential or commercial properties, except in approved containers or storage areas. 
C.  It shall be unlawful to place any refuse in a manner where it may be scattered by the elements. 
(Ord. of 6-19-1967)  
ARTICLE 3. - COLLECTION 
 
Sec. 13A-7. - Residential. 
Single-family residential refuse, solid waste and single stream recycling shall be collected by the Town. The director of public works shall establish routes and schedules. Residents will be advised in writing of any schedule change, provided, however, that any temporary interruption or change of procedure will be publicized through available news media. The director may cancel pickup without notice during inclement weather or in case of emergency. 
(Ord. of 6-19-1967; Ord. of 5-7-2012, § 1)  
Sec. 13A-8. - Commercial. 
All business and commercial establishments, including multi-family residences, shall make their own arrangements for refuse removal. 
(Ord. of 6-19-1967; Ord. of 5-7-2012, § 1)  
Sec. 13A-9. - Private collector. 
A.  Private collectors who wish to engage in collection of refuse in the Town must obtain a Town permit from the director of public works. 
B.  Applications for permits for private collectors shall be made to the director. After approval by the director, an annual permit fee in the amount determined by the Vienna Town Council shall be paid to the director of finance or his authorized representative. Permits shall not be issued unless the minimum standards as provided by this chapter are met. 
C.  Permits shall expire one year from date of issue and may be reissued for one year by the director if he determines there has been compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Permits may be transferred with the consent of the director. 
D.  The permit or a photo static copy thereof shall be carried in the cab of each collection vehicle while operating in the Town. 
(Ord. of 6-19-1967; Ord. of 5-7-2012, § 1)  
Sec. 13A-10. - Vehicle requirements. 
All vehicles to be used in the collection of refuse shall be kept and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall be so constructed, maintained and operated as to prevent spillage of the type of refuse to be collected therein. All vehicles to be used in the collection of garbage or combined refuse shall be constructed and maintained with water-tight bodies and with covers of metallic or other rigid, impervious material or in the alternative, the entire bodies thereof shall be enclosed with only loading hoppers exposed; provided, that special vehicles used in new or experimental methods of refuse collection may be permitted by the director in writing. 
(Ord. of 6-19-1967)  
Sec. 13A-11. - Authority with respect to private collector permits. 
A.  The director may refuse to issue or renew, or he may revoke or suspend any permit upon a finding, after proper written notice, that the holder of such permit, or applicant therefor, has violated this chapter. 
B.  Any refusal to issue or renew, or any suspension or revocation of private collector permits shall be in writing, and be mailed or delivered to the address shown on the application. Any such revocation or suspension shall remain in effect until necessary corrections are made. 
C.  The Town Manager may hear testimony and decide all appeals. Any person aggrieved by the issuance, denial, renewal, suspension, revocation or other order of the director may appeal to the Town Manager within ten days. The Town Manager may affirm, modify or reverse the order of the director. Such appeal shall not stay execution of order unless the Town Manager, upon application, shall grant a stay. 
(Ord. of 6-19-1967)  
Sec. 13A-12. - Regulation of vehicles not covered by this article. 
Any vehicles used for the transportation of refuse in or through the Town which is not subject to the licensing provisions of this article shall transport the refuse in such a manner as not to create a nuisance or adversely affect public health. The refuse shall not be spilled, dumped or thrown onto any street, court, lane, alley, sewer inlet or vacant lot. 
Liquid or semi-liquid refuse, when hauled in non-watertight bodies, shall be carried in watertight containers. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent loose material from blowing. 
(Ord. of 6-19-1967)  
Sec. 13A-13. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article, by doing a prohibited act, or failing to perform a required act or failing to perform permitted acts in the prescribed manner, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall, upon conviction be punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 or not more than $300.00 or 30 days in jail, or both. Each day during which a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense and be so punishable. 
(Ord. of 6-19-1967)  
Chapter 14 - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Power of council to construct sewers and drains, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2122; long-range plan for on-site sewage, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-163. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Health department means the county health department. 
Health officer means the county health officer or his authorized representative, the Town sanitation officer. 
Install, repair, approved and standard mean in accordance with specifications and standards established within this chapter. 
(Code 1962, § 12-2; Code 1969, § 14-1)  
Sec. 14-2. - Approved method of disposal of human excrement—Required for all occupied premises. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any house used as a human habitation, any warehouse, any public building, or other place where human beings congregate or are employed in the Town to use or occupy, or rent or lease the same for use or occupancy by any person unless and until the house or building shall have been supplied or equipped with an approved method of disposal of human excrement of such construction as will comply with the requirements designated in this chapter. 
(Code 1962, § 12-1; Code 1969, § 14-2)  
Sec. 14-3. - Same—Enumerated. 
For the purpose of this chapter, an approved method of disposal of human excrement shall be deemed to be: 
(a)  A flush toilet connected to an approved public or private sewer. 
(b)  A flush toilet connected to an approved, properly installed septic tank system. 
(c)  A standard pit privy of concrete or double wood construction. 
(Code 1962, § 12-2; Code 1969, § 14-3)  
Sec. 14-4. - Separate toilet facilities required for each family dwelling unit. 
Any house or construction used as a human habitation shall have separate toilet facilities for each family dwelling unit. 
(Code 1962, § 12-2; Code 1969, § 14-4)  
Sec. 14-5. - Approved grade; backup valves required. 
The finished floor level of any kitchen, bathroom, or other area in which sewage handling facilities are located shall be a minimum of six inches above the centerline grade of the street in front of the property on which such facilities are located; or six inches above the nearest manhole if the sewer is located other than in the abutting street unless permission in writing to waive this requirement is obtained from the director of public works. The director of public works may waive the above requirements, provided he feels that installation below the above-described levels may be safely made. Should the director of public works deem it necessary, an approved check or backup valve may be required to be installed in the lateral or service serving the property. In the event such valve is required, the property owner shall have full responsibility for maintaining the same. 
(Code 1962, § 12-2.2; Code 1969, § 14-5)  
Sec. 14-6. - When wastes not to be added to Town sewer system. 
Wastes from commercial, industrial or manufacturing users shall not be added to the Town sewer system if they are of such a nature as to disrupt the normal action of the sewage treatment plant. 
(Code 1962, § 12.1; Code 1969, § 14-6)  
Sec. 14-7. - Specifications of water and sewage system to be approved by health officer before construction started in new subdivisions or developments. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to start any new subdivision or housing development before furnishing in triplicate plans and specifications of the sewage system or sewage disposal system to be used, together with plans for the anticipated water system to be used in the structure. These plans and specifications shall be approved by the health officer or his agent before construction is started. 
(Code 1962, § 12-10; Code 1969, § 14-7)  
Sec. 14-8. - Plan for connection to public sewer required prior to issuance of building permit. 
Any other provision of this Code to the contrary notwithstanding, no building permit shall be issued for the erection of a dwelling or other building unless such dwelling or building upon completion thereof is to be sewered by connection to an approved public sewer. 
(Code 1962, § 12-2; Code 1969, § 14-8; Ord. of 2-1964)  
ARTICLE 2. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 14-9. - County license required for cleaning or repairing. 
Any person contracting to repair or clean septic tanks in the Town for another person shall first pay the annual fee required by the county and obtain a license or permit according to the ordinances of the county. 
(Code 1962, § 12-11; Code 1969, § 14-9)  
Sec. 14-10. - Cleaning of septic tanks. 
1.  No person shall engage in the business of cleaning septic tanks until the equipment to be used by such person in connection with the operation of such business complies with the following standards and has been inspected and approved in writing by the health department. 
2.  Such inspection and approval by the health department shall be a prerequisite to the obtaining of the license or permit required in section 14-9 or to any renewal thereof; provided that the following minimum requirements shall be met: 
(a)  The tank into which the septic tank sludge is pumped or delivered and carried shall be fully enclosed and watertight. 
(b)  All inlets and outlets to such tank shall be fully enclosed and provided with watertight valves. 
(c)  Suction and discharge hose shall be watertight and provision shall be made for carrying such hose in a manner that will prevent any leakage therefrom. 
(d)  All exposed surfaces shall be painted and maintained in a sanitary condition by frequent washings. 
(e)  The name and address of the person owning or operating such equipment shall be painted thereon in letters at least four inches high. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful to dispose of the sludge and other material removed from septic tanks except by depositing it under the surface of the ground in such manner that it will not be exposed to the atmosphere or endanger the source of domestic water supplies, or by depositing it into a public sewage system or sewage treatment plant at such designated locations and under such conditions as may be promulgated by the owners or operators thereof. In any event, the sludge or other material shall be carefully deposited and the surfaces of the ground, manholes, tanks, etc., into which the deposit is made shall be maintained in a sanitary condition. Any covering of such surfaces with sludge or other material shall be promptly removed. 
(Code 1962, § 12-12; Code 1969, § 14-10)  
Sec. 14-11. - Condemnation of septic tanks or pit privies. 
Whenever it appears to the health officer or his agent that any septic tank or septic tank system or pit privy is in such condition as to endanger the life, health or safety of any person, whether such condition is the result of defective original construction, deterioration, decay, or other causes, the health officer shall condemn the septic tank system or pit privy and forbid further use of same until it is repaired and approved as required herein; provided that if the building which the condemned septic tank or septic tank system serves is within 300 feet of a public or private sewer, the owner of such septic tank or septic tank system shall be required to connect to the public or private sewer if the owner of the latter permits such connections. 
(Code 1962, § 12-13; Code 1969, § 14-11)  
ARTICLE 3. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 14-12. - Purpose and policy. 
This article and the following articles of this chapter set forth uniform requirements for all users of publicly owned treatment works (POTW) operated by the county or the District of Columbia, where the sewage is generated from Town-owned transmission system, enabling the Town to comply with applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403.1 et seq.). The objectives of this article are: 
(A)  To prevent the introduction into the POTW of pollutants which will interfere with the operation of the POTW; 
(B)  To prevent the introduction into the POTW of pollutants which will pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW; 
(C)  To protect both POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(D)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial waste and sludge from the POTW; 
(E)  To provide for the equitable distribution of the cost of operations, maintenance and improvement of the POTW; 
(F)  To facilitate compliance with VPDES and NPDES permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other federal or state laws to which POTWs are subject; 
(G)  To preserve the hydraulic capacity of the POTW. 
This article authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires industrial user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(Code 1969, § 14-12; Ord. of 3-16-1987; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-13. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations shall have the indicated meanings when used in this article and the following articles of this chapter: 
BOD 	Biochemical oxygen demand 
CFR 	Code of Federal Regulations 
EPA 	United States Environmental Protection Agency 
gpd 	Gallons per day 
mg/L 	Milligrams per liter 
NPDES 	National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
VPDES 	Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
POTW 	Publicly owned treatment works 
RCRA 	Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
SIC 	Standard Industrial Classification 
TSS 	Total suspended solids 
USC 	United States Code 
VR 	Virginia Regulations 
 
(Code 1969, § 14-13; Ord. of 3-16-1987; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-14. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article and the following articles of this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
Approval authority means the state department of environmental quality. 
Authorized representative (of the industrial user) means: 
(A)  If the industrial user is a corporation: 
(1)  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
(2)  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(B)  If the industrial user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or the proprietor. 
(C)  If the industrial user is a federal, state or local government: a director or the highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility or other public agency. 
(D)  The individuals described in subsections (A)—(C) of this definition may designate another representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization has been submitted to and approved by the Town. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, for five days at 20 degrees Celsius, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/L). 
Building sewer means a sewer system which conveys wastewater from the premises of a user to the POTW. 
Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an industrial user's pretreatment facility. 
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) which apply to a specific category of industrial users and which are technology based for the purpose of limiting the discharge of pollutants, especially priority pollutants, and which appear in 40 CFR 405—471. 
Color means the optical density at the visual wave length of maximum absorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred percent transmittance is equal to zero optical density. 
Compatible pollutant means biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, phosphorus, pH, fecal coliform bacteria and additional pollutants as identified in the county's Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) permit, if the individual POTW was designed to treat such pollutants, and if, in fact, such POTW does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree. 
Composite sample means the sample resulting from the combination of two or more discrete wastewater samples taken at selected intervals, based on either an increment of flow or time. The composite sample represents the average wastewater quality covering the sampling period. 
County means the County of Fairfax, Virginia, or the Board of Supervisors of Fairfax County, Virginia. 
Director means the director of the Town department of public works and his authorized representatives. 
Domestic-natured wastes means human excrement and gray water (from showers, washing machines, dishwashers and the like). 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency or the regional water management division director or other duly authorized official of that agency. 
Existing source means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Act (33 USC 1317). 
Facilities of the county means any POTW, treatment works, or portion thereof, which is owned or operated by the county or the District of Columbia. 
Flashpoint means the minimum temperature at which vapor combustion will spread away from its source of ignition. Below this temperature, combustion of the vapor immediately above the liquid will either not occur or will occur only at the point of ignition. 
Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow of the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any source. 
Industrial user means any source of indirect discharge of industrial wastes into a POTW. 
Industrial wastes means pollutants, exclusive of domestic-natured wastes, which result from any industrial, manufacturing, business, trade, institutional, service or similar process, including cooling water and process wastewater. 
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference means a discharge, which alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and, therefore, is a cause of a violation of the county or district's VPDES permit or an NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (including RCRA); any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
Medical wastes or infectious wastes means pollutants defined by the state department of waste management's infectious waste management regulations, VR 672-40-01 §§ 3.4 and 3.5, including, but not limited to, isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood byproducts, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites, etiologic agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes. 
New source means any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards under section 307(c) (33 USC 1317(c)) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307(c), provided that: 
(A)  No other source is located at that site; 
(B)  The source completely replaces the process or production equipment of an existing source at the site; or 
(C)  The new wastewater generating process of the source is substantially independent of an existing source at the site; and the construction of the source creates a new facility rather than modifies an existing source, at that site. 
For purposes of this definition, construction or operation has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
(A)  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
(1)  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
(2)  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
(B)  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition. 
Non-contact cooling water means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any chemical addition, raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product. 
Nonindustrial user means any source of the indirect discharge of solely domestic-natured waste. 
Pass through means a discharge which exits from the POTW treatment plant into receiving waters in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the VPDES or NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes, without limitation, all federal, state or local government entities. 
pH means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard units; logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in moles per liter of solution. 
Pollutant means any substance, except water that is less than or equal to 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65.5 degrees Celsius), which either alone or in conjunction with water, is permitted to enter a POTW. The term "pollutant" includes, but is not necessarily limited to, dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes. 
Premises having access to the facilities of the Town means any premises which abuts a highway, street, alley, public space or private property on which the facilities of the Town or county are located and which is not more than 300 feet from the facilities of the Town and which can be served by the facilities of the Town. 
Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction, elimination or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, by process changes or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants, unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment requirement means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment that is imposed on an industrial user. 
Pretreatment standards means prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local limits. 
Priority pollutants means the 65 classes of pollutants listed in 40 CFR 401.15 pursuant to section 307(a)(1) of the Act, and subsequently defined by the EPA as 126 specific compounds. 
Prohibited discharge means a pollutant that shall not be introduced into a POTW, as set forth in National Pretreatment Standards: Prohibited Discharges, 40 CFR 403.5 and section 67.1-2-1 of the Fairfax County Code. 
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means any treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292). This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
Sewerage facilities means any plumbing system, piping system, fixture or other appurtenance which is designed to carry wastewater. 
Significant industrial user means: 
(A)  Industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(B)  Any other industrial user that: 
(1)  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater, excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater; 
(2)  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
(3)  Is designated as significant by the Town on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
Slug discharge means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which constitutes a violation of the prohibited discharge standards. 
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
Toxic substance means one of the pollutants or any combination of those pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under the provision of section 307 (33 USC 1317) of the Act and any other substance deemed toxic by the director. 
Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with pretreatment standards and requirements because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. Noncompliance caused by operational error, improperly designed pretreatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation does not constitute an upset. 
User means any person who contributes, causes or permits any discharge into the POTW and the owner and tenant of any premises which contributes any discharge into the POTW. 
Wastewater or sewage means liquid and water-carried pollutants from any source which enters the POTW. 
Wastewater constituents and characteristics means the individual chemical, physical, bacteriological and radiological components, including volume and flow rate and other such parameters that serve to define, classify or measure the contents, quality, quantity and strength of wastewater; parameters include any pollutant expected to be present which is listed under 40 CFR 122, appendix D, tables II—V. 
(Code 1969, § 14-14; Ord. of 3-16-1987; Ord. of 9-14-1992; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-15. - Responsibility of director for facilities of the Town. 
The director shall have direct charge of the facilities of the Town, including responsibility for the operation, maintenance and administration thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 14-15; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-16. - Standards of design, construction and operation of facilities of the Town. 
The director shall prepare such standards as may be necessary to regulate the design, construction and operation of facilities of the Town. Such standards shall be subject to amendment from time to time as conditions warrant and shall be subject to the approval of the Town Council. 
(Code 1969, § 14-16; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-17. - Director's right of entry to premises. 
All premises connected to the facilities of the Town shall, at all reasonable hours, be open to the director for the purpose of installing, removing, repairing, maintaining, measuring or sampling or for inspecting the premises, fixtures and appurtenances therein which are connected to the facilities of the Town. 
(Code 1969, § 14-17; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-18. - Sewerage facilities in new subdivisions, developments or projects. 
(A)  Any person who intends to construct any new subdivision, development or project within the Town shall, before commencing with the construction thereof, furnish to the director, in triplicate, the plans, specifications and contract documents for the facilities of the Town contemplated to be constructed therein which affect or may affect the facilities of the Town. The construction of such sewage facilities shall not commence until the plans, specifications and contract documents therefor have been approved by the director. 
(B)  Such plans, specifications and contract documents shall be submitted in the manner required by the director as approved by the Town Council. 
(C)  The director shall review such plans, specifications and contract documents to determine whether they comply with the standards for the completion of sewage facilities as approved by the Town Council. If such plans, specifications and contract documents do so comply, the director shall approve the same for construction. 
(D)  Any deviation from the manner of submitting such plans, specifications and contract documents or any deviation from the standards as approved by the Town Council shall be cause for the director to refuse to review or approve such plans, specifications or contract documents. 
(E)  Any person contemplating the construction of sewage facilities shall submit, at the time of submitting the plans, specifications and contract documents therefor, a written contract approved by the Town attorney, providing that upon completion of the construction of such sewage facilities and the approval thereof by the director, the sewage facilities so constructed shall become the property of the Town Council and shall thereafter be subject to all of the regulations concerning the facilities of the Town. 
(Code 1969, § 14-18; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-19. - Damaging, tampering with structures, equipment prohibited. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, apparatus or equipment which is part of the facilities of the Town. Unless specifically authorized by the director, no person shall remove any manhole cover which is part of the facilities of the Town. 
(Code 1969, § 14-19; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-20. - Damaging or defacing property; cutting trees; dumping refuse or rubbish. 
No person shall damage or deface the facilities of the Town and no person shall cut any trees or dump any refuse or rubbish upon any part of the property used in connection with the facilities of the Town. 
(Code 1969, § 14-20; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-21. - Damage to facilities of the Town to be reported to director; liability for payment. 
In the event of damage to any part of the facilities of the Town, it shall be the responsibility of the person causing such damage to immediately notify the director. The necessary repairs or replacement shall be made by the Town or the county or under supervision of the Town at the expense of the person causing such damage. 
(Code 1969, § 14-21; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-22. - Protection from new construction of plumbing connections or sewerage facilities. 
Any person engaged in construction of an authorized plumbing connection or sewage facilities shall comply with all provisions of this chapter as well as chapter 65 of the Fairfax County Code (plumbing and gas provisions), and shall install adequate safeguards during construction to ensure compliance at all times. 
(Code 1969, § 14-22; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-23. - Removal of safety and warning devices prohibited. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, remove, destroy, move, deface or tamper with any safety light, barricade, or other safety device placed for either the public or workers' protection during the construction, repair or maintenance of any sewage facility. 
(Code 1969, § 14-23; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
ARTICLE 4. - GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 14-24. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
(A)  General prohibitions. 
(1)  No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the POTW any pollutant which will cause an interference or a pass through or which is harmful to the health, safety or welfare of POTW personnel or the general public. 
(2)  No user shall discharge industrial waste to the POTW except as specifically approved in writing by the director. 
(B)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall discharge the following pollutants into the POTW: 
(1)  Pollutants which may create a fire or explosive mixture in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test method specified in 40 CFR 261.21. At no time shall either of two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the system or at any point in the system be more than five percent nor any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Such pollutants include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides. 
(2)  Pollutants having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 11.0, or which could otherwise cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW. Such pollutants include, but are not limited to, acids, sulfides, concentrated chloride and fluoride compounds and substances which will react with water to form acidic or alkaline products. 
(3)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which may cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW, including substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit (zero degrees Celsius) and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65.5 degrees Celsius) and a pH between 5.0 and 11.0, but in no case solids greater than one-half inch in any dimension. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, grease, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, cement, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes. 
(4)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants, released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW. 
(5)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65.5 degrees Celsius), or which, due to its temperature, will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant, but in no case wastewater which will cause the temperature of the wastewater entering the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius). 
(6)  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause an interference or a pass through, not to exceed 100 ppm. 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may be injurious to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the director in accordance with section 67.1-3-5 of the Fairfax County Code. 
(9)  Wastewater containing any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other pollutant which, either alone or by interaction with other pollutants, is sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or is sufficient to prevent the safe entry of the POTW by maintenance and repair personnel. 
(10)  Wastewater having color characteristics which cannot be removed by the treatment process, including, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, or wastewater which imparts sufficient color to the POTW's effluent to violate the VPDES or NPDES permits. 
(11)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as to violate the limits established by applicable county, state or federal regulations, including, but not limited to, VR § 680-21-01.12 and 10 CFR 20.2003. 
(12)  Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage, except as specifically authorized by the director. 
(13)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the director. 
(14)  Hazardous wastes, as defined by 40 CFR 261, except as may be specifically authorized by the director. 
(15)  Pollutants discharged to the POTW other than by an approved building sewer connection or discharge point. 
(16)  Wastes which are economically recyclable, including antifreeze (ethylene glycol), as determined by the director. 
(C)  Method of processing or storage. The pollutants prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. All floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must flow to the industrial user's pretreatment facility before connecting with the POTW, unless an alternate system is approved by the director. 
(Code 1969, § 14-24; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-25. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
(A)  This chapter incorporates by reference the categorical pretreatment standards set out in 40 CFR 405—471. 
(B)  Upon the promulgation of the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards for an industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than the limitations imposed by the Town and the county and/or by the state for such subcategory, shall immediately supersede the Town and the county and/or state limitations. 
(C)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(D)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed, prior to the sampling location, with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the director shall, as appropriate, impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). Standards apply at the end of the regulated process unless the standard indicates otherwise. 
(E)  An industrial user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if it can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions of 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(F)  An industrial user may obtain a net/gross adjustment to a categorical pretreatment standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(Code 1969, § 14-25; Ord. of 9-26-1994) 
State Law reference— National standards incorporated by reference, 9 VAC 25-31-780.  
Sec. 14-26. - State pretreatment standards. 
(A)  Users are required to comply with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements as set out in 9 VAC 25-31-770 et seq., which is incorporated herein by reference. 
(B)  Upon the promulgation by the state of requirements and limitations on discharges that are more stringent than the equivalent federal and Town and county limitations, the state limitation shall apply. 
(Code 1969, § 14-26; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-27. - Local limits. 
The director may impose maximum mass and/or concentration discharge limits for any pollutant, to protect the POTW from pass through or interference and to ensure that the treatment plant complies with the objectives of section 14-12 and applicable state and federal law. The applicable limitation shall apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged into the POTW. Alternately, a user may elect to comply with local limits restrictions, measured at the end of process, in lieu of providing a monitoring facility or of separating domestic-natured wastestreams from industrial wastestreams. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal. Compliance with all parameters may be determined by the Town or the county from a single grab sample. Where specific prohibitions or limits on pollutants are developed for the POTW in accordance with this section, such limits are deemed pretreatment standards. 
(Code 1969, § 14-27; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-28. - Right of revision. 
The Town reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
(Code 1969, § 14-28; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-29. - Dilution. 
No user shall increase the volume of water used in any process or operation which is discharged into the sanitary sewer, or in any way attempt to dilute its discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate pretreatment, to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation, unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
(Code 1969, § 14-29; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-30. - Special agreement. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting a special agreement between the Town and an industrial user, regarding the treatment of its waste, so long as such agreement is consistent with the purposes and policies set forth in section 14-12. 
(Code 1969, § 14-30; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-31. - Water and wastes from privately owned treatment facilities. 
Water or wastes from any privately owned community, municipal or corporate treatment facility may be discharged into the facilities of the county only after the execution of an agreement between the county and owner of such facility that provides for reimbursement to the county of the cost of treatment of such water or wastes. Any such discharge shall comply with all provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 14-31; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-32. - Compatible pollutant limitations. 
The discharge into the POTW of any waters or wastes containing any of the parameters listed below and equaling or exceeding the respective amounts indicated shall be subject to review and approval of the director and may be subject to a surcharge as determined by the director. 
(A)  A discharge flow of 25,000 gallons per day. 
(B)  A BOD of 250 mg/L or a mass emission of 23.7 kilograms per day. 
(C)  A suspended solids of 275 mg/L or a mass emission of 26.0 kilograms per day. 
(D)  A total phosphorus of nine mg/L or a mass emission of 0.85 kilograms per day. 
(Code 1969, § 14-32; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
ARTICLE 5. - PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER 
 
Sec. 14-33. - Pretreatment facilities. 
Industrial users shall provide such wastewater pretreatment as necessary to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and prohibited discharge standards within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state or the director, whichever is more stringent. All facilities necessary for such compliance shall be provided, operated and maintained at the industrial user's expense. Detailed plans and, in the case of proposed modifications to existing facilities, plan revisions showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures, including preventive maintenance, shall be submitted to the director for review, and shall be acceptable to the director before the construction or modification of the facility. The approval of such plans shall in no way relieve the industrial user from its responsibility to modify the facility as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the Town and the county under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 14-33; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-34. - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(A)  Whenever deemed necessary to protect the POTW or to determine an industrial user's compliance with this chapter, the director may require industrial users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, discharge wastewater only to designated sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate domestic-natured sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and take such other measures as may be necessary. 
(B)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 14-29, which prohibit wastewater dilution, the director may permit the use of equalization tanks or facilities for the purpose of protecting against hydraulic surges and slug discharges. 
(C)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater that is likely to contain such substances, except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director and shall be so located as to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be regularly inspected and, as necessary, cleaned and repaired at the expense of the industrial user. 
(D)  Industrial users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Code 1969, § 14-34; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-35. - Maintenance records. 
Industrial users shall maintain complete maintenance and operation records for their pretreatment facilities and shall retain such records for a minimum period of three years. Such records shall be available during normal working hours for inspection and copying, on request of the EPA, the state water control board or the county or the Town. 
(Code 1969, § 14-35; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-36. - Accidental discharge/slug control plans. 
Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of materials which may interfere with the POTW. As determined by the director, those industrial users which, due to the nature of their operation, have a reasonable potential to discharge materials which may interfere with the POTW must develop and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan ("plan"). No industrial user shall implement its plan until it has been approved by the Town and the county. The plan shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
(A)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges. 
(B)  Description of stored chemicals. 
(C)  Procedures for immediately notifying the director of any accidental or slug discharges or any discharge which would violate any of the prohibited discharges or pretreatment standards enumerated in article 4 of this chapter. 
(D)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures shall include, but not be limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), control of plant production, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Code 1969, § 14-36; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-37. - Hauled wastewater. 
(A)  Septic tank wastes, portable toilet waste and other wastes authorized by the director may be introduced into the POTW by haulers who possess a valid county health department sewage handler license, only at locations designated, at such times as are established and for such charges as may be set by the director. The director may require such haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits, complete waste tracking forms, conduct waste analysis prior to discharge, collect representative samples and/or obtain the approval of the director prior to each discharge into the POTW. Such waste shall not violate article 4 of this chapter or any other requirements established by the Town or the county. 
(B)  The discharge of any hauled industrial waste into the POTW is prohibited except as specifically approved by the director. Such discharges are otherwise subject to this chapter and may be subject to additional treatment surcharges. 
(C)  Hauled wastewater from any jurisdiction outside the county, except for the cities of Fairfax and Falls Church and the towns of Clifton, Herndon and Vienna, is prohibited from being discharged into the POTW. 
(Code 1969, § 14-37; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
ARTICLE 6. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION 
 
Sec. 14-38. - Wastewater analysis. 
When requested by the director, an industrial user shall submit information on its wastewater constituents and characteristics within 30 days of such request. An industrial user that constitutes a new source shall submit such information prior to commencing its discharge. The director is authorized to prepare a survey form for this purpose and may periodically require industrial users to update the survey. Failure to complete this survey shall be reasonable grounds for terminating service to the industrial user. 
(Code 1969, § 14-38; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-39. - Wastewater discharge permit requirement. 
(A)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the director, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to section 14-41 may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
(B)  The director may require other industrial users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(C)  Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or with any other requirements of federal, state and county law. 
(Code 1969, § 14-39; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-40. - Confidential information. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, monitoring programs and inspection and sampling activities shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Information that the user wishes to be treated as confidential shall so indicate by labeling or otherwise designating on the top of each page the words "Confidential Business Information." Information deemed confidential by the director shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available, upon request, to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and for enforcement proceedings involving the user. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data," as defined by 40 CFR 2.302, shall not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Code 1969, § 14-40; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-41. - Wastewater discharge permitting—Existing connections. 
Any user that does not possess a valid wastewater discharge permit, as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and that is required by this chapter to obtain such permit, and that was discharging into the POTW prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, shall, within 30 days after said date, apply to the director for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with this chapter. Such user shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived except in accordance with a valid wastewater discharge permit. 
(Code 1969, § 14-41; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-42. - Same—New connections. 
Any significant industrial user proposing to begin or recommence discharging industrial wastes into the POTW must obtain a wastewater discharge permit for such discharge prior to the beginning or recommencement of such discharge. 
(Code 1969, § 14-42; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-43. - Wastewater discharge permit application contents. 
(A)  No permit shall be granted to an industrial user until it has submitted the information required by section 14-53, as applicable, and an application containing the following information: 
(1)  Description of the activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW. 
(2)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation. 
(3)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and average rate of production. 
(4)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day). 
(5)  The site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, detailed to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge. 
(6)  Time and duration of discharges. 
(7)  If additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance (O&M) will be required to meet the standards, then the industrial user shall prepare a schedule to indicate the shortest amount of time necessary to accomplish installation or adoption of such additional treatment or O&M and in no event shall the completion date be later than the compliance date established for an applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions apply to this schedule: 
(a)  The schedule shall contain dates for the commencement and completion of additional pretreatment measures as required for the industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. No increment shall exceed nine months, nor shall the total compliance period exceed 18 months. 
(b)  No later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the director including as a minimum, whether or not the industrial user complied with the requirements for incremental progress, the reason for any delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return to the established schedule. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the director. 
(8)  Any other information deemed necessary by the director to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
(B)  Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the industrial user for revision. 
(C)  The director may periodically require industrial users to update wastewater discharge permit application information. Failure to provide such information within a reasonable period of time shall be grounds to terminate service to the industrial user. 
(Code 1969, § 14-43; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-44. - Application signatories and certification. 
All wastewater discharge permit applications and industrial user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Code 1969, § 14-44; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-45. - Wastewater discharge permit decisions. 
The director will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and, within 90 days of receipt of all required information, determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The failure to make such a decision within the required period will be deemed a denial of the application. 
(Code 1969, § 14-45; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
ARTICLE 7. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS 
 
Sec. 14-46. - Wastewater discharge permit—Duration. 
Permits shall be issued for the time period specified by the director, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. 
(Code 1969, § 14-46; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-47. - Same—Contents. 
(A)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
(1)  A statement that indicates the duration of the permit and its expiration date. 
(2)  A statement that the permit is nontransferable without prior notification to and written approval from the director, in accordance with section 14-50, and further, that the current user is responsible for furnishing the new user with a copy of the existing permit. 
(3)  Applicable effluent limits based on federal, state and county standards. 
(4)  A statement of self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state and county law. 
(5)  A statement of the applicable penalties for violation of the pretreatment standards and requirements, and compliance schedules. 
(6)  Requirements for the reporting of any instance of noncompliance by the permittee to the director. 
(B)  Permits may also contain, without limitation: 
(1)  Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or maximum concentration, mass, flow or other measure of pollutant discharge. 
(2)  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology or the construction of appropriate containment devices that are designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW. Waste minimization plans may be required. 
(3)  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions, including management practices, necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges. 
(4)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW. 
(5)  Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(6)  A statement that compliance with permit terms does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the permit. 
(7)  Requirements for the installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment. 
(8)  Such additional conditions as are deemed necessary by the director to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 14-47; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-48. - Same—Appeals. 
(A)  Any person aggrieved, including the industrial user, may file a written petition with the director to reconsider and change a decision, regarding the issuance of a permit or its terms, within 30 days of the date of the notice that the permit is denied or awarded. Such an appeal is deemed timely filed if received at the office of the director within 30 days of the date of such notice or, if mailed, if properly addressed to the director and postmarked within 30 days of the date of such notice, provided that such appeal, if mailed, is actually received by the director within 45 days of the date of such notice. 
(B)  Failure to submit a timely petition shall be deemed to be a waiver of the right to appeal. 
(C)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the permit provisions objected to, the reasons for any objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to have included in the permit. 
(D)  The decision appealed is not stayed pending the outcome of the appeal. 
(E)  If the director fails to act on the appeal within 30 days, the petition to reconsider shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a permit, not to issue a permit or not to modify a permit shall be considered final administrative action for the purposes of judicial review. 
(F)  If the ruling made by the director is unsatisfactory to the person requesting reconsideration, he may, within ten days after notification of the director's action, file a written appeal to the Town Council. Failure of the council to rule on such appeal within 60 days from the date of filing shall be deemed to be a denial of the appeal. The director's decision, action or determination shall remain in effect during such period of reconsideration. 
(Code 1969, § 14-48; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-49. - Same—Modification. 
The director may modify a permit at any time for good cause including, but not limited to, the following: 
(A)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(B)  To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of permit issuance. 
(C)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of a previously authorized discharge. 
(D)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, POTW personnel, or the receiving waters. 
(E)  A violation of any terms or conditions of the permit. 
(F)  A misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the permit application or in any required reporting. 
(G)  A revision of or a grant of a variance, pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13, from the categorical pretreatment standards. 
(H)  To correct typographical or other errors in the permit. 
(I)  To reflect the transfer of ownership and/or operation of a facility to a new user. 
(Code 1969, § 14-49; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-50. - Same—Transfer. 
Permits may be reassigned to a new owner and/or user only after prior written approval of the director. The permittee must give at least 30 days' advance notice of such reassignment to the director. Such notice must include a written certification by the new owner and/or user which: 
(A)  States that the new owner and/or user has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes. 
(B)  Identifies the specific date on which the reassignment is to occur. 
(C)  Agrees to assume responsibility for complying with the existing permit. 
The failure to obtain the approval of the director prior to reassignment renders the permit void as of the date of such reassignment. 
(Code 1969, § 14-50; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-51. - Same—Revocation. 
The director may revoke a permit for the following reasons: 
(A)  Violation of any permit condition. 
(B)  Failure to notify the director of changed conditions of the wastewater prior to the changed discharge. 
(C)  Failure to accurately report wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
(D)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application. 
(E)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports. 
(F)  Tampering with monitoring equipment. 
(G)  Refusing to allow director or authorized representatives of the director timely access to any and all areas within the facility premises for sampling, inspection, or inspection-related photography. 
(H)  Refusing to allow director or authorized representatives of the director timely access to facility records. 
(I)  Failure to meet pretreatment standards. 
(J)  Failure to pay fines. 
(K)  Failure to pay sewer charges. 
(L)  Failure to meet compliance schedules. 
(M)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey. 
(N)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of ownership of a permitted facility or of the business conducted within such facility. 
(O)  Failure to notify the director of material modifications to the facility. 
(P)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement or any other provisions of this chapter. 
Permits shall be voidable for nonuse, cessation of operations or the transfer of business ownership. An existing permit becomes void upon the issuance of a replacement permit. 
(Code 1969, § 14-51; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-52. - Same—Reissuance. 
A significant industrial user shall apply for permit reissuance at least six months before the expiration of its existing permit by submitting a completed permit application in accordance with section 14-43, unless otherwise authorized by the director. 
(Code 1969, § 14-52; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
ARTICLE 8. - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 14-53. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(A)  Generally. Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (B) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, including existing users which have changed their operation or processes so as to become new sources, shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (B) of this section. A new source shall also report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. A new source shall further give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(B)  Identifying information. Users subject to the requirements of subsection (A) of this section shall submit the following information: 
(1)  Identification. The name and address of the facility, including the name of all owners and/or users. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation. This description must include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement. The measured average and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
(a)  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process; 
(b)  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and long term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall also be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 14-60. 
(6)  Certification. A statement, certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required in order to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. Such statement shall be further signed and certified by the authorized representative in accordance with section 14-44. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which such additional pretreatment and/or O&M can be provided. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 14-43(A)(7). 
(Code 1969, § 14-53; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-54. - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director a report containing the information described in section 14-53(B)(4) through (6). For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the such user's long-term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include such user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 14-44. 
(Code 1969, § 14-54; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-55. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(A)  Unless otherwise authorized by the director, significant industrial users shall, at a frequency of at least once every six months, submit a written report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flow for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 14-44. 
(B)  The industrial user shall be responsible for ensuring that all wastewater samples are representative of the industrial user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, cleaned and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the industrial user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(C)  If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirements of this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the director, using the procedures specified in section 14-60, the results of such monitoring shall be included in the compliance report. 
(Code 1969, § 14-55; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-56. - Reports of changed conditions. 
Each industrial user shall notify the director of any planned significant changes to the industrial user's operations or pretreatment systems which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater, at least 30 days before the proposed change. In the event of any such change: 
(A)  The director may require the industrial user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application pursuant to article 6 of this chapter. 
(B)  The director may issue a wastewater discharge permit or modify the existing permit. 
(C)  No industrial user shall implement such changes unless approved by the director in writing. 
(D)  For the purposes of this section, significant changes include, but are not necessarily limited to, flow increases of 20 percent or greater and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutant. 
(Code 1969, § 14-56; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-57. - Reports of potential problems. 
(A)  In the case of an accidental or other discharge which may cause problems for the POTW or otherwise violate this chapter, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the director of the incident. Such notification shall include the location of the discharge, the type of waste, its concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(B)  Within five days following any such discharge the user shall, unless waived by the director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future discharges. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user from liability for any fine, civil penalty, or other obligation which may be imposed by this chapter. 
(C)  Industrial users subject to section 14-36 shall post a notice indicating whom to call in the event of such a discharge. Such notice shall be maintained at all times in plain view on the industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent place. Industrial users shall notify all employees who may be present when such a discharge occurs of the emergency notification procedure. 
(D)  Failure to appropriately notify the director in accordance with this section shall be deemed separate and distinct violation from the discharge violation. 
(Code 1969, § 14-57; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-58. - Reports from unpermitted industrial users. 
All industrial users not subject to categorical pretreatment standards and not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide such reports as may be required by the director. 
(Code 1969, § 14-58; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-59. - Reporting violations; repeat sampling and reporting. 
If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the industrial user must notify the director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user shall repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of such analysis to the director within 30 days of becoming aware of the initial violation. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the director may waive resampling requirements if the director monitors the facility at least once a month, or if the director conducts a sampling between the industrial user's initial sampling and the industrial user's receipt to the results of the initial sampling. 
(Code 1969, § 14-59; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-60. - Analytical requirements. 
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or any monitoring report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA and the Town and the county. 
(Code 1969, § 14-60; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-61. - Sample collection. 
(A)  Except as indicated in subsection (B) of this section, the industrial user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the discharge. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(B)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. Other parameters, as identified in 40 CFR 403, may also require sampling by grab collection. 
(Code 1969, § 14-61; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-62. - Timing. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked if properly addressed to the director and if received by the director's office within five days of the postmark date. Reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, within a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date such reports are received by the director's office. 
(Code 1969, § 14-62; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-63. - Monitoring records. 
Industrial users shall retain and make available for inspection and copying all records and information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter and, additionally, records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the industrial user independent of such requirements. Such records shall include the date, exact place, method, time of sampling, name of the person taking the sample, date of analyses, name of the person conducting the analyses, analytical techniques or methods used and the results of such analyses. Such records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation regarding the discharge of pollutants by the industrial user or concerning compliance with this chapter, or where the industrial user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director or the EPA. 
(Code 1969, § 14-63; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
ARTICLE 9. - COMPLIANCE MONITORING 
 
Sec. 14-64. - Right of entry; inspection and sampling. 
(A)  Industrial users shall allow the director and any duly authorized representative of the director ready access to all areas of the premises of the industrial user for the purposes of inspection, inspection-related photography, sampling, records examination and copying and any other purposes related to the enforcement of this chapter. 
(B)  Where an industrial user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, such user shall make necessary arrangements with its security staff so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the director and any duly authorized representative of the director, state, and EPA personnel will be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their responsibilities pursuant to this chapter and applicable state and federal law. 
(C)  No industrial user shall refuse or unreasonably delay access by the director to the industrial user's premises. 
(Code 1969, § 14-64; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-65. - Monitoring facilities. 
(A)  The director and state and EPA personnel shall have the right to set up, or require the installation of, on the industrial user's property, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of such user's operations. 
(B)  All significant industrial users shall provide monitoring facilities. Unless an alternate design is required or approved by the director, monitoring facilities shall consist of a manhole or vault constructed in accordance with the applicable plans and specifications contained in the county's public facilities manual. The monitoring facility shall be located on the user's premises, in the user's building sewer, unless otherwise authorized by the director. In addition, the director may require an industrial user to install monitoring equipment, as necessary. Such equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of such user. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated periodically to ensure measurement accuracy. 
(C)  When more than one user can discharge into a common building sewer, the director may require installation of a separate monitoring facility for each user. When, in the opinion of the director, there is a significant difference in the wastewater constituents and characteristics produced by the different operations of a single user, the director may require separate monitoring facilities for each regulated process. 
(D)  The monitoring facility shall be located so as to be readily accessible to the director. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the industrial user at the written or verbal request of the director and shall not be replaced except as permitted by the director. The costs of clearing such obstruction shall be borne by the industrial user. 
(E)  All domestic-natured waste from new sources which are significant industrial users shall be kept separate from all industrial wastes until the industrial wastes have passed through the user's pretreatment facility and monitoring facility. 
(Code 1969, § 14-65; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
ARTICLE 10. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 14-66. - Publication of industrial users in significant noncompliance. 
The Town shall annually publish, in a newspaper with the largest daily circulation in the Town, a list of the industrial users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant noncompliance" shall mean a violation which meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(A)  That 66 percent or more of the wastewater pretreatment measurements taken during a six-month period exceeded the discharge limit for any one pollutant; 
(B)  That 33 percent or more of the wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period for each pollutant parameter equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(C)  Any discharge that the director determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public); 
(D)  Any discharge that has caused imminent danger to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the director's exercise of his emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(E)  The failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance; 
(F)  The failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, any report required by this chapter; 
(G)  The failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(I)  Any other violation which the director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the POTW's pretreatment program. 
(Code 1969, § 14-66; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-67. - Notice of violation. 
When the director determines that any industrial user has violated or is violating any provision of this chapter, a permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the director may serve upon such user a written notice of violation. Within five days of the receipt of this notice, the industrial user must, unless such requirement is waived by the director, submit to the director an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions. Submission of this plan shall not relieve the industrial user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take emergency action or other appropriate enforcement action without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(Code 1969, § 14-67; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-68. - Consent orders. 
The director may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any industrial user that has violated or is in violation of a provision of this chapter. Such orders may include specific action to be taken by the industrial user to correct such violation within a specified time period. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as compliance orders issued pursuant to section 67.1-8-5 of the Fairfax County Code and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(Code 1969, § 14-68; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-69. - Show cause hearing. 
The director may order any industrial user which has violated, or is violating, any provision of this chapter, permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, to appear before the director and show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the industrial user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that such user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the industrial user. A show cause hearing is neither a bar against nor a prerequisite to any other enforcement action under this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 14-69; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-70. - Compliance; cease and desist orders. 
(A)  When the director finds that an industrial user has violated or is violating this chapter, permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the director may issue an order directing the industrial user to cease and desist all such violations and to: 
(1)  Immediately, or within a specified time period, comply with all chapter requirements. 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
(3)  Take such action as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. The director may require such additional self-monitoring for up to 90 days after consistent compliance has been achieved, after which time the self-monitoring requirements of the permit shall recommence. 
(B)  Such orders may also provide that sewer service shall be discontinued unless after a specified time period, adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. 
(C)  A compliance/cease and desist order shall be judicially enforceable and is neither a bar against nor a prerequisite to any other enforcement action under this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 14-70; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-71. - Emergency suspensions. 
(A)  The director may suspend wastewater treatment service, and/or the permit of an industrial user and further, in coordination with the county water authority, water service, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health, safety or welfare of persons, which interferes with the operation of the POTW, or which presents an endangerment to the environment. 
(B)  Any industrial user notified of the suspension of its permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of an industrial user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director shall take such measures deemed necessary, including severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the system, its receiving stream, or endangerment to individuals or the environment. The director may allow the industrial user to recommence its discharge when such user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that the period of endangerment has passed. 
(C)  An industrial user which is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge which presents an imminent endangerment to the health, safety or welfare of persons, which interferes with the operation of the POTW, or which presents an endangerment to the environment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the director prior to the date of any show cause hearing under section 14-69. 
(D)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(Code 1969, § 14-71; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-72. - Show cause suspensions. 
Upon notice and opportunity to show cause under section 14-69 the director may suspend wastewater treatment service and, in coordination with the water supplier, water service, for any violation set forth in section 14-51. For good cause and upon such notice and opportunity to show cause, the director may further direct the physical severance of the user's sewer connection to the POTW. 
(Code 1969, § 14-72; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-73. - Injunctive relief. 
When the director determines that an industrial user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the director may petition the circuit court for the issuance of injunctive or other appropriate equitable relief, including a requirement for the industrial user to conduct environmental remediation. Such relief is neither a bar against nor a prerequisite to other enforcement action pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 14-73; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-74. - Search warrants. 
If the director has been refused access to a building, structure or property, or any part thereof, he may obtain a search warrant upon demonstrating, to the satisfaction of any judge, magistrate or other person having authority to issue criminal warrants, that reasonable and probable cause exists to believe that there has been a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample pursuant to this chapter. Such search warrant shall be based upon a complaint under oath supported by an affidavit. 
(Code 1969, § 14-74; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-75. - Civil penalties. 
(A)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, any order or permit issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement shall be liable to the Town for a civil penalty, not to exceed the maximum fine allowed for a Class 1 misdemeanor, for every such violation. Each day on which a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation. 
(B)  In determining the amount of liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances including, but not limited to, any economic benefit gained by the user as a result of the violation. 
(C)  Any person whose acts result in the assessment of a civil penalty against the Town, pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.32, shall be liable to the Town for such penalty. 
(D)  Such relief is neither a bar against nor a prerequisite to other enforcement action pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 14-75; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-76. - Criminal violations. 
Any person who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this chapter, any order or permit issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and punishable by the maximum fine or imprisonment, or both fine and imprisonment, as provided by law. Each day for which a violation is proven shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1969, § 14-76; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-77. - Remedies non-exclusive. 
The remedies provided in this chapter are not exclusive and may be taken individually or in combination with each other or in addition to remedies available under state and federal law. 
(Code 1969, § 14-77; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 14-78. - Appeal. 
(A)  Decisions regarding the issuance or terms of a wastewater discharge permit may be appealed in accordance with section 14-48. 
(B)  Decisions, other than decisions regarding the issuance or terms of a wastewater discharge permit, which interpret or implement the terms of this chapter, may be appealed by any person aggrieved, including the industrial user, by filing such appeal with the director, within ten days of such decision. Such appeal is deemed timely filed if received at the office of the director within ten days of the date of such decision or, if mailed, if properly addressed to the director and postmarked within ten days of the date of such decision, provided that such appeal, if mailed, is actually received by the director within 15 days of the date of such decision. 
(1)  Failure to submit a timely appeal shall be deemed to be a waiver of the right to appeal. 
(2)  The appealing party must set forth in detail the justification for such appeal, including the alternative decision it seeks in lieu of the decision complained of. 
(3)  The decision appealed is not stayed pending the outcome of the appeal. 
(4)  If the director fails to act on the appeal within 30 days, the appeal shall be deemed to be denied. The denial of an appeal shall be considered final administrative action for the purposes of judicial review. 
(5)  If the ruling made by the director is unsatisfactory to the person requesting reconsideration, he may, within ten days after notification of the Town's action, file a written appeal to the Town Council. Failure of the council to rule on such appeal within 60 days from the date of filing shall be deemed to be a denial of the appeal. The director's decision, action or determination shall remain in effect during such period of reconsideration. 
(Code 1969, § 14-78; Ord. of 9-26-1994)  
Chapter 15 - SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Ordinances regulating certain vendors, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-913; municipal regulation of peddlers and dealers in secondhand goods, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1114. 
 
Sec. 15-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Canvasser or solicitor means: 
(a)  Any person, whether a resident of the Town or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not; provided that such definition shall include any person who, for himself, or for another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel or motel room, lodginghouse, apartment, shop, or any other place within the Town for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. 
(b)  Any person who requests directly or indirectly money, credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of value on the plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of value will be used for a charitable or religious purpose. 
(Code 1969, § 15-1; Ord. of 6-16-1975)  
Sec. 15-2. - Permit and license—Required; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser to engage in such business within the Town without first obtaining a permit and license therefor in compliance with the provisions of this chapter; provided that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to unpaid agents or members of a nonprofit organization engaged in such activities for the purpose of raising money to be used solely for charitable, community service, nonprofit recreational or religious purposes, consistent with the organization's charter or organizational purpose and organizations exempted by Code of Virginia, § 57-63. 
(b)  Exemption as herein provided may be granted by the Town Manager or his designate upon receipt of written request setting forth the use to which proceeds so derived will be applied, together with such proof as may be required of the nonprofit status of the organization so applying. 
(Code 1962, § 16-1; Code 1969, § 15-2; Ord. of 7-1-1966; Ord. of 9-1966; Ord. of 9-14-1992)  
Sec. 15-3. - Same—Application; investigation fee. 
(a)  Applicants for permit and license under this chapter shall file with the director of finance a sworn application in writing, in duplicate, on a form to be furnished by the director of finance which shall give the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of the applicant. 
(2)  Permanent home address and full local address of applicant. 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold. 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship. 
(5)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired. 
(6)  The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time the application is filed and the proposed method of delivery. 
(7)  Reserved. 
(8)  The fingerprints of the applicant and the names of at least two reliable property owners of the county who will certify as to the applicant's good character and business respectability; or, in lieu of the names of references, such other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character and business responsibility. 
(9)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(b)  At the time of filing the application, a fee of $5.00 shall be paid to the director of finance to cover the cost of investigation of the facts stated therein. 
(Code 1962, § 16-3; Code 1969, § 15-3; Ord. of 7-1-1966; Ord. of 4-4-1994)  
Sec. 15-4. - Same—Investigation of applicant; issuance; records to be kept by director of finance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application, the original shall be referred to the chief of police who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good; provided that a decision shall be made in no more than 15 days. 
(b)  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for the same, and return the application to the director of finance who shall within seven additional days notify the applicant in writing that his application is disapproved and that no permit and license will be issued. 
(c)  If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his approval, execute a permit addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied for and return the permit, along with the application, to the director of finance who shall, within seven additional days, and upon payment of the prescribed license fee, deliver to the applicant his permit and issue a license. Such license shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer and shall show the name, address and photograph of the licensee, the class of license issued and the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and the length of time the same shall be operative, as well as the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in such soliciting or canvassing. The director shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued. 
(Code 1962, § 16-4; Code 1969, § 15-4; Ord. of 7-1-1966; Ord. of 4-4-1994)  
Sec. 15-5. - Same—Fees. 
(a)  The license fee which shall be charged by the director of finance for a license under this chapter shall be $3.00 per day, $7.00 per week, $12.00 per month and $20.00 per year. 
(b)  The annual fees herein provided shall be assessed on a calendar year basis, and on or after July 1, the amount of such fee for annual license shall be one-half the amount stipulated in subsection (a) of this section for the remainder of the year. 
(c)  None of the license fees provided for by this chapter shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce. In any case where a license fee is believed by a licensee or applicant for license to place an undue burden upon such commerce, he may apply to the Town Manager for an adjustment of the fee so that it shall not be discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair as to such commerce. Such application may be made before, at, or within six months after payment of the prescribed license fee. The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting testimony, show his method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the Town Manager may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden on such commerce. The Town Manager shall then conduct an investigation, comparing the applicant's business with other businesses of like nature and shall make findings of fact from which he shall determine whether the fee fixed by this chapter is unfair, unreasonable or discriminatory as to applicant's business and shall fix, as the license fee for the applicant, an amount that is fair, reasonable and nondiscriminatory; or, if the fee has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the fee so fixed. In fixing the fee to be charged, the Town Manager shall have the power to base the fee upon a percentage of gross sales, or any other method which will ensure that the fee assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the fees as prescribed by subsection (a) of this section. Should the Town Manager determine the gross sales measure of the fee to be the fair basis, he may require the applicant to submit, either at the time of termination of applicant's business in the Town or at the end of each three-month period, a sworn statement of the gross sales and pay the amount of fee therefor; provided that no additional fee during any one calendar year shall be required after the licensee shall have paid an amount equal to the annual license as prescribed in this section. 
(Code 1962, § 16-5; Code 1969, § 15-5; Ord. of 7-1-1966; Ord. of 4-4-1994)  
Sec. 15-6. - Same—Exhibition. 
Solicitors and canvassers are required to exhibit their licenses at the request of any citizen. 
(Code 1962, § 16-8; Code 1969, § 15-6; Ord. of 7-1-1966)  
Sec. 15-7. - Same—Expiration date. 
All annual licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on December 31 in the year when issued. Other than annual licenses shall expire on the date specified in the license. 
(Code 1962, § 16-13; Code 1969, § 15-7; Ord. of 7-1-1966)  
Sec. 15-8. - Same—Revocation. 
(a)  Permits and licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the Town Manager after notice and hearing for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business as solicitor or as canvasser. 
(3)  Any violation of this chapter. 
(4)  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(5)  Conducting the business of soliciting, or of canvassing, in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace, or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(Code 1962, § 16-11; Code 1969, § 15-8; Ord. of 7-1-1966)  
Sec. 15-9. - Bond. 
Every applicant shall file with the director of finance a surety bond, running to the Town in the amount of $1,000.00 with surety acceptable to and approved by the Town Manager, conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the Town and the statutes of the state regulating and concerning the business of the solicitor. 
(Code 1962, § 16-6; Code 1969, § 15-9; Ord. of 7-1-1966; Ord. of 6-1968; Ord. of 4-4-1994)  
Sec. 15-10. - Badges. 
The director of finance shall issue to each licensee at the time of delivery of his license a badge which shall contain the words "Licensed Solicitor," the period for which the license is issued and the number of the license in letters and figures easily discernible from a distance of ten feet. Such badge shall, during the time such licensee is engaged in soliciting, be worn constantly by the licensee on the front of his outer garment in such a way as to be conspicuous. 
(Code 1962, § 16-7; Code 1969, § 15-10; Ord. of 7-1-1966; Ord. of 4-4-1994)  
Sec. 15-11. - Business hours. 
The time during which solicitors and canvassers may engage in business within the Town shall be limited to the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. during the days of Monday through Saturday, inclusive. 
(Code 1962, § 16-8; Code 1969, § 15-11; Ord. of 7-1-1966; Ord. of 8-1968)  
Sec. 15-12. - Duty of police to enforce chapter. 
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Town to require any person seen soliciting or canvassing, and who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed, to produce his solicitor's or canvasser's license and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found to be violating the same. 
(Code 1962, § 16-9; Code 1969, § 15-12; Ord. of 7-1-1966)  
Sec. 15-13. - Reports of violations of chapter. 
The chief of police shall report to the director of finance all convictions for violation of this chapter and the director of finance shall maintain a record for each license issued and record the reports of violation therein. 
(Code 1962, § 16-10; Code 1969, § 15-13; Ord. of 7-1-1966; Ord. of 4-4-1994)  
Sec. 15-14. - Appeals from actions of chief of police or director of finance. 
Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police or the director of finance in the denial of a permit or license as provided in section 15-4, or the action of the Town Manager in the assessing of the fee as provided in section 15-5 shall have the right of appeal to the Town Council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the council within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for appeal. The council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in section 15-8 for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1962, § 16-12; Code 1969, § 15-14; Ord. of 7-1-1966; Ord. of 4-4-1994)  
Chapter 16 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— General authority of municipality relative to streets and sidewalks, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2001 et seq.; laying pipes in streets, Code of Virginia, § 56-257 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Warnings of street hazards. 
Any person creating a condition upon any street, alley, or sidewalk in the Town which is hazardous to pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic shall cause a warning light to be placed on such obstruction, which warning light shall be kept burning from sunset to sunrise. 
(Code 1962, § 5-60; Code 1969, § 16-1; Ord. of 3-1966)  
Sec. 16-1.1. - Approved permit for work in public right-of-way required. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or do any work of any kind in any street, highway, public right-of-way, easement or other area dedicated to the public use within the Town without having first made application to the department of public works and having received approved plans covering the work and a permit to do the work as shown on such plans. 
(b)  Adherence to plans. All construction, planting, modifications, repair work, or maintenance of any nature performed by any individual shall be performed according to the permit, plans, specifications, regulations and written instructions of the department of public works unless otherwise specified. The department may waive the requirements of formal plans where the work to be done is of a routine nature and is so limited in scope as not to require detailed plans and specifications for its proper execution. 
(c)  Commencement of work. Permits that have been approved shall become null and void if no work has been started within six months after the date of approval, or if, after starting the work, there is a period of six months in which there has been no work performed in accordance with the approved plans, or shall become null and void as specified in the Code of Virginia, unless a reasonable additional delay in completion of construction has been approved by the director of public works. 
(d)  Inspection. In order to make the proper check of the work done, the owner, contractor or agent will notify the department of public works upon the completion of each portion or type of work done under the permit so that proper inspection may be made to determine its correctness, such as the inspection of grade or rough excavation, drainage structures and utility lines before backfilling, storm sewers before backfilling, curb and gutter forms before placing concrete, subgrade before placing surface, and completion of the surface of street. 
(e)  Maintenance of traffic. All construction or repair work being done by any person in any street, highway, public right-of-way, easement, or other area dedicated to public use shall be sufficiently and adequately protected by barricades at all times. Traffic controls for street construction, maintenance, and utility operations shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices published by the Federal Highway Administration. Such warning devices shall be maintained at all times. Both pedestrian and vehicular traffic shall be maintained at all times except as approved in accordance with the approved permit for the work. 
(f)  Charges. The cost of the engineering services rendered by the department of public works including studies, approval of plans, permit issuance, supervision and inspection of construction, are described in the public works fee schedule in section 1-13. 
(Code 1969, § 16-1.1)  
Sec. 16-2. - Placing dirt, ashes, etc., upon streets prohibited; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or place dirt, ashes, stone, wood or any other material upon any street within the Town; provided that the penalty for violation of this section shall not be imposed upon persons placing building materials upon a street, in connection with construction work, after having obtained a permit from the director of public works to place such materials upon the street for a limited period of time and having placed such materials in the space designated and manner directed by the director of public works, and having not permitted the same to remain there longer than the limited period stipulated in the permit. 
(Code 1962, § 5-59; Code 1969, § 16-2; Ord. of 3-1966)  
Sec. 16-2.1. - Riding of horses and ponies on sidewalks, sidewalk areas, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or lead any horse or pony on any sidewalk or sidewalk area, paved or unpaved, or in any area between any sidewalk and any curb or curbline in the Town. 
(Code 1969, § 16-2.1; Ord. of 11-3-1969)  
Sec. 16-2.2. - Storm drainage facilities; maintenance and cleanliness. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, or cause to be deposited, in any public storm drainage facility, including gutters, ditches and watercourses, any substance including, but not limited to, trash, accumulations of grass clippings, petroleum products, petroleum waste, or other noxious or flammable substance; provided, however, that leaves may be piled at curbs during such seasons and in such areas as may now or in the future be furnished mechanical leaf collection service. 
(Code 1969, § 16-2.2; Ord. of 9-25-1972)  
ARTICLE 2. - CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS 
 
Sec. 16-3. - Declaration of necessity. 
The Town Council may, upon its own motion, or in response to a petition submitted by others, declare the necessity for a sidewalk along any developed street. 
(Code 1969, § 16-3; Ord. of 6-5-1967, § 1)  
Sec. 16-4. - Determination of type of sidewalk to be constructed and allocation of costs. 
The Town Council shall determine the type of sidewalk to be constructed and the method of allocation of costs, based upon the following factors: 
(a)  The existence of curbs and gutters along the street under consideration. 
(b)  The necessity of widening the street. In general, only those streets designated as major arterial, inner loop and secondary shall be considered for widening at public expense. 
(c)  Topographic features, including drainage problems. 
(d)  The extent to which the abutting property owners are willing to participate in costs. 
(Code 1969, § 16-4; Ord. of 6-5-1967, § 2)  
Sec. 16-5. - When Portland cement sidewalks to be constructed. 
Portland cement concrete sidewalks shall be constructed where any of the following exists: 
(a)  Curbs and gutters are already in place. 
(b)  The necessity for widening the street at public expense will justify the installation of curbs, gutters and the necessary storm drainage. 
Property owners along the street will bear their pro rata share of the cost of sidewalk improvements and at least 50 percent of the cost of curbs and gutters and storm drainage. 
(Code 1969, § 16-5; Ord. of 6-5-1967, § 3)  
Sec. 16-6. - Construction of asphaltic concrete or gravel sidewalks. 
Asphaltic concrete sidewalks or gravel sidewalks shall be constructed along all streets other than described in section 16-5 when sidewalk construction is deemed necessary. 
(Code 1969, § 16-6; Ord. of 6-5-1967, § 4)  
Sec. 16-7. - Assessments of cost of Portland cement concrete sidewalks. 
(a)  Assessments for the cost of Portland cement concrete sidewalks only shall be as follows: 
(1)  The property owner shall be assessed 50 percent of the cost of any permanent concrete sidewalk construction along the property owner's lot frontage; except that in no case shall the property owner be assessed for more than 100 feet of front footage. 
(2)  The property owner shall be assessed for 25 percent of the cost of any permanent concrete sidewalk constructed along the side yard of any property; except that in no case shall the property owner be assessed for more than 100 feet of side footage. 
(3)  Where property is owned and occupied by a church, fraternal club, philanthropic or charitable organization, such church, club or organization shall be assessed for 25 percent of the total cost of installing all footage of sidewalk abutting its property. 
(4)  Up to five annual installments shall be allowed for the payment of any sidewalk assessments with interest at six percent per annum being assessed on the unpaid balance beginning at the beginning of the third year. 
(5)  The administrative procedures as set forth in Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2404 through 15.2-2413 shall govern in the assessment of construction costs. 
(b)  When a lot is composed of a total square footage that is double or greater than double the minimum square footage required in the zone in which the lot is located, the provisions of this section shall not apply. The assessed cost for such lot shall be 50 percent of the cost of the total front and side footage; provided that this policy shall not apply to property that would normally be considered suitable for subdivision. 
(Code 1969, § 16-7; Ord. of 6-5-1967, §§ 5, 6)  
ARTICLE 3. - SNOW EMERGENCY 
 
Sec. 16-8. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Local streets means all streets designated as other than main arterial, inner loop and secondary on the master street plan of the Town. 
Manager means the Town Manager or, in his absence, his duly designated and acting representative. 
Roadway means that portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. 
Snow emergency route means those streets marked as such in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Snow tires means any tires mounted on drive wheels of motor vehicles which are especially designed to give effective traction on snow, mud, or ice-covered streets by means of extra heavy duty treads with special high-traction patterns, except that no tire so defined shall be construed to be a snow tire if it is damaged or worn to the extent that its performance would be substantially impaired. 
Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Tire chains means any metal chains mounted on drive wheel tires of motor vehicles which cross the tread of each such tire laterally in at least three different places. 
(Code 1969, § 16-8; Ord. of 6-22-1970)  
Sec. 16-9. - Parking on snow emergency routes. 
(a)  Whenever the manager finds on the basis of falling snow, sleet, or freezing rain, or on the basis of a forecast by the U.S. Weather Bureau or other weather service of snow, sleet, or freezing rain, that weather conditions will make it necessary that motor vehicle traffic be expedited and that parking on Town streets be prohibited or restricted for snow plowing and other purposes, the manager shall put into effect a parking prohibition on parts of or all snow emergency routes as necessary by declaring it in a manner prescribed by this article. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, a parking prohibition shall automatically go into effect on any part of any snow emergency route on which there has been an accumulation of snow and ice of three inches or more for one hour or more between 5:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. of any day. 
(c)  Once in effect, a prohibition under this section shall remain in effect until terminated by an announcement of the manager in accordance with this article, except that any street area which has become substantially clear of snow and ice from curb to curb for the length of the entire block shall be automatically excluded therefrom. While the prohibition is in effect, no person shall park or allow to remain parked any vehicle on any portion of a snow emergency route to which it applies. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to permit parking at any time or place where it is forbidden by any other provision of law. 
(Code 1969, § 16-9; Ord. of 6-22-1970)  
Sec. 16-10. - Parking on local streets. 
(a)  Whenever the manager finds, on the basis of falling snow, sleet, freezing rain, or on the basis of a forecast by the U.S. Weather Bureau or other weather service of snow, sleet, or freezing rain, that weather conditions will make it necessary that motor vehicle traffic be expedited and that parking on Town streets be prohibited or restricted for snow plowing, and other purposes, the manager shall put into effect a parking prohibition on parts of or all local streets as necessary by declaring it in a manner prescribed by this article. The prohibition shall remain in effect until terminated by announcement of the manager in accordance with this article, except that any street area which has become substantially clear of snow and ice from curb to median line for the length of the entire block shall be automatically excluded therefrom. 
(b)  While the prohibition is in effect, no person shall park or allow to remain parked any vehicle on any street to which it applies during the time from 7:00 a.m. until 11:30 p.m. of any day. 
(c)  However, nothing in this section shall be construed to permit parking at any time or place where it is forbidden by any provision of law. 
(Code 1969, § 16-10; Ord. of 6-22-1970)  
Sec. 16-11. - Advancement of quitting time traffic regulations. 
Whenever the manager finds, on the basis of falling snow, sleet or freezing rain, or on the basis of a forecast by the U.S. Weather Bureau or other weather service of snow, sleet, or freezing rain, that weather conditions will make it necessary that motor vehicle traffic be expedited; and whenever he finds additionally that large numbers of employees within the Town and the surrounding metropolitan area are to be dismissed from duty in advance of their normal quitting time because of weather conditions and that such dismissal will advance the beginning of heavy quitting time traffic, he shall, by making a declaration in a manner prescribed by this article, appropriately advance the effective time of those traffic regulations which normally go into effect just before quitting time for the working day such as, for example (and not by way of limitation), those relating to standing, parking, one-way streets, unbalanced lanes, and left turns. The regulations as so advanced in their operation shall remain in effect until their normal termination at 8:00 p.m., or otherwise, as may be indicated at specific locations. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to permit parking at any time or place where it is forbidden by any other section of this article. 
(Code 1969, § 16-11; Ord. of 6-22-1970)  
Sec. 16-12. - Condition of motor vehicle operated on snow emergency routes. 
(a)  No person operating a motor vehicle on a snow emergency route on which there is a covering of snow, sleet, or ice shall allow such vehicle to become stalled wholly or partly because the drive wheels thereof are not equipped with effective tire chains or snow tires. 
(b)  No person operating a motor vehicle on a part of a snow emergency route on which there is a covering of snow, sleet, or ice, or on which there is a parking prohibition in effect shall allow such vehicle to become stalled because the motor fuel is exhausted or the battery has become inoperative. 
(Code 1969, § 16-12; Ord. of 6-22-1970)  
Sec. 16-13. - Stalled vehicles on snow emergency route. 
Whenever a vehicle becomes stalled for any reason, whether or not in violation of this article, on any part of a snow emergency route on which there is a covering of snow, sleet, or ice, or on which there is a parking prohibition in effect, the person operating such vehicle shall take immediate action to have the vehicle towed or pushed off the roadway of such snow emergency route either into the first cross street which is not a snow emergency route, or onto the public space portion of a nearby driveway. No person shall abandon or leave his vehicle in the roadway of a snow emergency route (regardless of whether he indicates, by raising the hood or otherwise, that the vehicle is stalled) except for the purpose of securing assistance during the actual time necessary to go to a nearby garage, gasoline station, or other place of assistance and return without delay. 
(Code 1969, § 16-13; Ord. of 6-22-1970)  
Sec. 16-14. - Declarations of the manager. 
(a)  The manager shall cause each declaration made by him pursuant to this article to be publicly announced by means of broadcasts from stations with a normal operating range covering the Town, and he may cause such declaration to be further announced in newspapers of general circulation when feasible. Each announcement shall describe the action taken by the manager, including the time it became or will become effective, and shall specify the streets or areas affected. A parking prohibition or advancement of quitting time traffic regulations declared by the manager shall go into effect one hour after it has been announced at least two times between 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. in accordance with this section. 
(b)  The manager shall make or cause to be made a record of each time and date when any declaration is announced to the public in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1969, § 16-14; Ord. of 6-22-1970)  
Sec. 16-15. - Termination of parking prohibition. 
Whenever the manager shall find that some or all of the conditions which give rise to a parking prohibition in effect pursuant to this article no longer exist, he may declare the prohibition terminated, in whole or in part, in a manner prescribed by this article effective immediately upon announcement. 
(Code 1969, § 16-15; Ord. of 6-22-1970)  
Sec. 16-16. - Provisions temporarily effective to take precedence. 
Any provision of this article which becomes effective by declaration of the manager or upon the occurrence of certain weather conditions shall, while temporarily in effect, take precedence over other conflicting provisions of law normally in effect, except that it shall not take precedence over provisions of law relating to traffic accidents, emergency travel of authorized emergency vehicles, or emergency traffic directions by a police officer. 
(Code 1969, § 16-16; Ord. of 6-22-1970)  
Sec. 16-17. - Signs to mark snow emergency routes. 
On each street designated by this article as a snow emergency route, the manager shall post special signs at intervals not exceeding 1500 feet with the wording "Snow Emergency Route. No Parking or Impeding Traffic Flow During Emergency. Towing Enforced." These signs shall be distinctive and uniform in appearance and shall be plainly readable to persons traveling on the street or highway. 
(Code 1969, § 16-17; Ord. of 6-22-1970; Ord. of 12-7-1970)  
Sec. 16-18. - Removal, impounding, and return of vehicles. 
(a)  Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to remove or have removed a vehicle from a street to the nearest garage or other place of safety (including another place on a street) or to an area designated or maintained by the Police Department, or otherwise maintained by this Town, when: 
(1)  The vehicle is parked on a part of a snow emergency route on which a parking prohibition is in effect. 
(2)  The vehicle is stalled on a part of a snow emergency route on which there is a covering of snow, sleet or ice, or on which there is a parking prohibition in effect and the person who was operating such vehicle does not appear to be removing it in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(3)  The vehicle is parked in violation of any parking ordinance or provision of law and is interfering or about to interfere with snow removal operations. 
(b)  Whenever an officer removes or has removed a vehicle from a street as authorized in this section and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof, such officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to such owner of the fact of such removal and the reasons therefor and of the place to which such vehicle has been removed. In the event any such vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of such notice shall be given to the proprietor of such garage. 
(c)  Whenever an officer removes or has removed a vehicle from a street under this section and does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner, or for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as hereinbefore provided, and in the event the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period of three days, then and in that event, the officer shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of such removal by mail to the state department whose duty it is to register motor vehicles, and shall file a copy of such notice with the proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle may be stored. Such notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the date, time and place from which removed, the reasons for such removal, and the name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored. 
(d)  No person shall recover any vehicle removed in accordance with this section except as provided herein. Before the owner or person in charge of such vehicle shall be allowed to recover it from the place where it has been placed or impounded, he shall present to a member of the Police Department evidence of his identity and right to possession of the vehicle, shall sign a receipt for its return, shall pay the cost of removal not to exceed $20.00, and shall pay any cost of storage accrued not to exceed $3.00 for the first day or portion thereof, and $3.00 for each additional day or portion thereof thereafter. Until paid, these charges constitute a lien on the vehicle which may be enforced in the same manner as a garage keeper's lien in accordance with the provisions of law. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of the Police Department to keep a record of each vehicle removed in accordance with this section. The record shall include a description of the vehicle, its license number, the date and time of its removal, where it was removed from, its location, the name and address of its owner and last operator, if known, its final disposition and the parking violation involved. 
(f)  This section shall be supplemental to any other provisions of law granting members of the Police Department authority to remove vehicles. 
(Code 1969, § 16-18; Ord. of 6-22-1970)  
Sec. 16-19. - Citation on vehicle parked or left in violation of article. 
Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or left in violation of any provision of this article, and is not removed and impounded as provided for in this article, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a traffic citation, on a form provided by the chief of police, for the driver to answer to the charge against him within 14 days during the hours and at a place specified in the citation. 
(Code 1969, § 16-19; Ord. of 6-22-1970)  
Sec. 16-20. - Failure to comply with traffic citation attached to vehicle. 
If a violator of this article does not appear in response to a traffic citation affixed to such motor vehicle in accordance with this article within a period of 14 days, the clerk of court shall send the owner of the motor vehicle to which the traffic citation was affixed a letter informing him of the violation and warning him that in the event such letter is disregarded for a period of seven days, a warrant of arrest will be issued. 
(Code 1969, § 16-20; Ord. of 6-22-1970)  
Sec. 16-21. - Evidence with respect to vehicles parked or left in violation of article. 
In any prosecution with regard to a vehicle parked or left in a place or in a condition in violation of any provision of this article, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked or left in violation of a provision of this article, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the defendant was the person who parked or left the vehicle in violation of this article. 
(Code 1969, § 16-21; Ord. of 6-22-1970)  
Sec. 16-22. - Snow emergency routes designated. 
The following streets or portions of streets within the Town are hereby designated as snow emergency routes: all streets designated on the Master Street Plan dated March 16, 1965, (or any revision thereof) as main arterial, inner loop and secondary. 
(Code 1969, § 16-22; Ord. of 6-22-1970)  
Sec. 16-23. - Penalties. 
Every person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 16-23; Ord. of 6-22-1970)  
Sec. 16-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 4. - ENCROACHMENT OF CERTAIN VEGETATION 
 
Sec. 16-25. - Trees, shrubs, vines, hedges, etc.—Encroachment on sidewalks and rights-of-way prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the owners of property within the Town to allow tree branches, shrubs, vines, or hedges to overhang sidewalks or other public rights-of-way in such a manner as to obstruct the free movement of, or endanger, pedestrians or bicyclists using such sidewalks. 
(Code 1969, § 16-25; Ord. of 12-1-1980)  
Sec. 16-26. - Same—Notice to cut. 
(a)  Where tree branches, shrubs, vines, or hedges on such property are found to so obstruct sidewalks or rights-of-way, the Director of Parks and Recreation shall immediately notify the owner of such property to cut such tree branches, shrubs, vines, or hedges so as to render any effected sidewalks or rights-of-way free of obstruction. 
(b)  Such notice shall be in writing and sent by certified mail to the occupant of such property or the owner thereof at his last known address as reflected on the real property tax records of the Town. If after diligent inquiry, no address can be found for such owner, the notice herein referred to shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property. 
(Code 1969, § 16-26; Ord. of 12-1-1980; Ord. of 9-14-1998)  
Sec. 16-27. - Same—Procedure for cutting by Town. 
If such tree branches, shrubs, vines or hedges have not been cut as provided in section 16-26 within ten days from the date of mailing or posting of the notice provided for in section 16-26, the Director of Parks and Recreation shall cause the cutting down by the Town's agent such tree branches, shrubs, vines or hedges. 
(Code 1969, § 16-27; Ord. of 12-1-1980; Ord. of 9-14-1998)  
Sec. 16-28. - Same—Costs of cutting. 
Where tree branches, shrubs, vines or hedges, have been cut down on property by the director of public works pursuant to the provisions of section 16-27, the cost of such cutting shall be billed to the owner of the property. If such bill is not paid prior to the issuance of the next real estate tax bill, it shall be added to that Town real estate tax bill on such property and shall be a lien on such property to the same extent and effect as the real estate tax. 
(Code 1969, § 16-28; Ord. of 12-1-1980)  
Chapter 17 - SUBDIVISIONS  
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 17-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alley means a minor public street which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties having principal frontage on another street. 
Approve includes "or disapprove." 
Comprehensive plan means the plan as defined and provided for in Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2223—15.2-2232, prepared by the planning commission and approved by the Town Council for the general physical development of the Town, including any unit or part thereof and any amendment to such plan or part thereof. 
Cul-de-sac means a minor street with only one outlet and culminated by a turnabout. 
Distances and areas means measurements in a horizontal plane. 
Final plat means the final map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented to the Town Council for approval, and which, if approved will be submitted for recording. 
Local street means a public street primarily designed to serve as access to abutting property and not intended to provide for through traffic movement. 
Local thoroughfare means a public street primarily designed to serve as access to abutting property, and to provide secondary through traffic movement. 
Lot means a portion of a subdivision intended for transfer of ownership, or for building development for a single building and its accessory buildings. The term "lot" shall include "plot" and "parcel." 
Official map means the map established by the council of the Town showing the streets, highways, waterways and public areas, or additions thereto, resulting from the approval and filing of subdivision plats. 
Planning commission or commission means the planning commission of the Town. 
Plat includes the terms: "map," "plan," "plot," "replat", or "replot"; a map or plan of a tract or parcel of land which is to be, or which has been subdivided. When used as a verb, the term "plat" is synonymous with "subdivide." 
Preliminary plat means the preliminary map, drawing or chart indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the planning commission for its consideration. 
Reserve strip means a narrow plot of land alongside a public street, of insufficient depth for subdivision, retained by the subdivider to prevent access to the street by the owner of adjoining property. 
Roadway means that portion of the street available for vehicular traffic, and where curbs are laid, being the portion from face to face of curbs. 
Service drive means a public street, generally paralleling and contiguous to a main traveled way, primarily designed to promote safety by eliminating promiscuous ingress and egress to the right-of-way and providing safe and orderly points of access at fairly uniformly spaced intervals. 
Street means a public way for vehicular or pedestrian traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, expressway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, circle or otherwise. 
Street tree means any canopy or shade tree planted at regular intervals within or adjacent to street rights-of-way and with a minimum diameter of not less than two to three inches in width measured at a height of four and one-half feet above the ground at the time of planting. 
Street width means the horizontal distance between the street lines, or property lines, measured at right angles to the side lines. 
Subdivider means a person owning any tract, lot or parcel of land to be subdivided; a group of two or more persons owning any tract, lot or parcel of land to be subdivided, who have given their written power of attorney to one of their group or to another individual to act on their behalf. 
Subdivision means: 
(a)  The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels of less than two acres, each for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development. 
(b)  Where a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land, regardless of the size of the parcels. 
(c)  The improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential, commercial or industrial structures or groups of structures involving the division or allocation of land for the opening, widening or extension of any street, except private streets serving industrial structures. 
(d)  The division or allocation of land as open spaces for common use by owners, occupants or leaseholders. 
(e)  The division or allocation of land as easements for the extension and maintenance of public sewer, water, storm drainage or other public facilities. 
(f)  The term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. 
Tree means any self-supporting woody plant growing upon the earth which usually produces one main trunk with a diameter of no less than four inches at a height of 4½ feet above the ground, and which produces a more or less distinct and elevated head with many branches. 
Tree canopy or tree cover means all areas of coverage by plant material exceeding five feet in height. 
(Code 1962, § 13-4; Code 1969, § 17-1; Ord. of 2-1966; Ord. of 2-25-1974; Ord. of 9-25-1989; Ord. of 4-2010; Ord. No. 2013-007, § 1, 8-19-2013)  
Sec. 17-2. - Interpretation and purpose of chapter. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Such provisions are intended to provide for permanently wholesome community environment, adequate Town services, safe streets, and the integrity of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas and quality of state waters as established in chapter 18, article 21.1. 
(Code 1962, § 13-2; Code 1969, § 17-2; Ord. of 2-1966; Ord. of 1-6-1992)  
Sec. 17-3. - Planning commission to administer chapter; authority of planning commission generally. 
The planning commission is hereby delegated general authority to administer this chapter. The commission is charged with the responsibility of approving preliminary plats in accordance with the regulations contained in this chapter, and its members shall be appointed for terms of two years or to fill the unexpired term of a vacant seat on the commission. The commission shall likewise consider final plats and make recommendations for approval or disapproval to the council, which retains unto itself the authority for final approval of final plats, and shall exercise all other powers conferred upon it by the Code of Virginia and the Charter of the Town of Vienna. No agent of the Town shall have authority to waive or authorize any departure or waiver from the application of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 17-3; Ord. of 6-9-1975; Ord. of 8-15-2011, § 1)  
Sec. 17-4. - Compliance with chapter required; conference between subdivider and Town Manager, etc., prior to preparation of plat. 
No person shall subdivide any tract of land situated within the Town except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of state law relating to land subdivision and development. Each subdivider shall confer with the Town Manager, zoning administrator and director of public works before preparing the preliminary plat, in order that he may become familiar with the requirements of these regulations and the comprehensive plan as they may apply to the land proposed to be subdivided, it being understood that the Town Council shall not be bound by any statements made in such conference. 
(Code 1962, § 13-5; Code 1969, § 17-4; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-5. - Making and recording plats required generally. 
Any subdivider of any tract of land situated within the Town who subdivides the same shall cause a plat of such subdivision, with reference to known or permanent monuments, to be made and to be recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the county. 
(Code 1962, § 13-6; Code 1969, § 17-5; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-6. - Procedure for obtaining final approval generally. 
In obtaining final approval of a proposed subdivision by the planning commission and the Town Council, the subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat, improvement plans, a performance bond, a maintenance bond and a final plat in accordance with these regulations. 
(Code 1962, § 13-7; Code 1969, § 17-6; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-7. - Approval and certification of plat required prior to recording. 
No plat of any subdivision of any tract of land which is situated within the Town shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the county unless and until it shall have been submitted to and approved by the Town Council in accordance with the regulations set forth in this chapter and so certified by the mayor or other agent designated by the council. 
(Code 1962, § 13-28; Code 1969, § 17-7; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-8. - Changes on preliminary of final plat after approval. 
No change, erasure or revision shall be made on any preliminary or final plat, nor on accompanying data sheets after approval has been endorsed in writing on the plat or sheets unless authorization for such change has been granted in writing by the planning commission or the Town Council, as appropriate. 
(Code 1962, § 13-19; Code 1969, § 17-8; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-9. - Sale of land in subdivision prior to recording plat. 
No person shall sell or transfer any land located within a subdivision by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat of a subdivision before such plat has been duly recorded as provided in this chapter, unless such subdivision was lawfully created and the plat thereof duly recorded prior to February 7, 1966. 
(Code 1962, § 13-29; Code 1969, § 17-9; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-10. - Issuance of building or repair permits. 
No building or repair permits shall be issued for any structure on a lot in a subdivision for which a plat has not been approved and recorded in the manner prescribed in this chapter. 
(Code 1962, § 13-30; Code 1969, § 17-10; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-11. - Furnishing of municipal services. 
No municipal services whatsoever will be provided by the Town in any subdivision which has not been approved as provided for in this chapter, or in which the necessary water and sewage facilities have not been dedicated to and accepted by the Town. 
(Code 1962, § 13-31; Code 1969, § 17-11; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-12. - Variances. 
Where, in the case of a particular proposed subdivision, it can be shown that strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter would result in extraordinary hardship to the subdivider because of unusual topography; or where conditions peculiar to the site would result in inhibiting the achievement of the objectives of these regulations, the Town Council may vary, modify or waive the requirements so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided that such variance, modification or waiver will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations or interfering with carrying out the comprehensive plan of the Town; and provided further that the Town Council shall not vary, modify or waive any requirements establishing lot widths or the front footage of lots, and this section shall not be construed to grant such authority to the council. Any variance, modification or waiver thus authorized shall be entered in the minutes of the council with a statement of the reason on which the variance was justified and shall be noted on the final plat. 
(Code 1962, § 13-44; Code 1969, § 17-12; Ord. of 2-1966; Ord. of 12-7-1981)  
Sec. 17-13. - Vacation of plats. 
Vacation of recorded plats or portions of recorded plats may be accomplished with approval of the Town Council, in accordance with the applicable provisions of state law relative to land subdivision and development. 
(Code 1962, § 13-45; Code 1969, § 17-13; Ord. of 2-1966)  
ARTICLE 2. - PRELIMINARY PLAT 
 
Sec. 17-14. - Preparation; scale. 
The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of not more than one inch equals 100 feet and shall be plainly marked "Preliminary Plat." The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a surveyor or certified professional engineer duly licensed by the state. 
(Code 1962, § 13-23; Code 1969, § 17-14; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-15. - Contents. 
The preliminary plat shall show, on a map, all the facts needed to enable the planning commission to determine whether the proposed layout of land in a subdivision is satisfactory from the standpoint of public interest, and shall include the following information: 
A.  Proposed subdivision name or identifying title and a description of its location. 
B.  Name and address of record owner, subdivider and designer of preliminary layout. 
C.  A statement, if such is the case, that the subdivider intends to actually record and develop only a portion of the land included in the subdivision layout. 
D.  Location of property lines, existing easements, buildings, watercourses, existing utilities, culverts and other essential features. 
E.  The names of all abutting subdivisions and the names of owners of record of abutting property. 
F.  Location, names and present width of existing and proposed streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks and other public open spaces within and immediately adjacent to subject subdivision. 
G.  All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated for public use and the conditions of such dedication. 
H.  Date, true north point, scale and a key map showing the general location of the proposed subdivision in relation to surrounding development. 
I.  Deed description and map of survey of the tract boundary made and certified by a licensed surveyor. 
J.  The location of sidewalks, sanitary sewers, storm drains, water mains, curbs and gutters, and the sizes and types thereof; and the location of manholes and basins and underground conduits. 
K.  Connections with existing sanitary sewers and existing water supply. 
L.  Surface water control. 
1.  Provisions for collecting and discharging surface water drainage and preliminary designs for any stormwater management facilities, bridges, or culverts which may be required. Such provisions shall include, but not be limited to: 
(a)  Preliminary grading plan for the site; 
(b)  A separate sheet indicating existing drainage divides; 
(c)  Pre-development runoff; 
(d)  Post-development runoff; 
(e)  Off-site drainage, all of which shall be restricted to existing stormwater drainage facilities, watercourses, or streambeds; 
(f)  Increased runoff due to development; 
(g)  Type of stormwater management facility; 
(h)  All elements required to comply with the requirements for a stormwater management plan in section 23-14; 
(i)  Hydrography for ten-year storm; 
(j)  Designation of on-site storm drainage easements to be dedicated to the Town for overland drainage that exceeds a discharge of four cubic feet per second, or that traverses a minimum of three lots; 
2.  Except with the expressed written approval of the director of public works: 
(a)  No surface water control or drainage piping shall be installed with a fall of less than one percent; 
(b)  All finished surface grading shall have a slope of at least two percent; 
(c)  Runoff, diversion, or channelization of surface water to adjacent properties shall be zero, or such amount as is recommended by the director of public works, and shown on the preliminary plat to be the minimum attainable through use of the best available technology, considering all of the applicable circumstances, but in no case shall the runoff be more than the runoff prior to the development; 
(d)  The capacity of all storm drainage facilities shall be designed to exceed by at least ten percent that required to meet ten-year storm design criteria; 
(e)  No diversion of surface water drainage into existing stormwater control facilities shall cause the total flow into or through such facilities to exceed the lesser of 90 percent of their designed capacity or 90 percent of their actual capacity as installed; and 
(f)  All stormwater control facilities shall be located on land within the subdivision which they serve except for preexisting watercourses or Town-owned stormwater facilities into which they discharge. 
M.  The proposed lot lines with dimensions and lot areas. 
N.  The zoning classification and proposed use for the area being subdivided; and any proposed changes in the use, height or area under any zoning regulations applicable to the area. 
O.  Contours at vertical intervals of not more than five feet. 
P.  The location and type of all existing trees. If the property is densely wooded in whole or in part, the limits of such densely wooded areas may be shown on the plan in lieu of locating individual trees within these areas. 
Q.  A tree protection plan specifically identifying by species, size and location all trees six inches in diameter measured four feet above grade which are to be preserved and maintained through and after construction and providing for the protection of same prior to grading or movement of heavy equipment and for the parking of construction vehicles outside the drip line of said trees. 
R.  Specifications for the removal of trees and protection of trees during clearing and destruction. 
S.  Grade changes or other work adjacent to a tree that is to be preserved which might affect it adversely, with specifications on how the ground drainage and aeration will be maintained around said tree. 
T.  Certification that all trees designated to be maintained in subsection Q of this section will be maintained and, if destroyed or damaged beyond saving during construction, the same will be replaced in the same location by a tree of like species not less than four inches in diameter measured four feet from grade. Said certification will be accompanied by a cash or surety bond satisfactory to the Town to ensure such maintenance and replacement or specifically made a part of that performance bond required by section 17-65. 
U.  The exact location of any grave, object or structure marking a place of burial on the lands proposed for subdivision. 
V.  Identification and delineation of all Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area RPA and RMA boundaries on submitted plats and site plans as required by article 21.1 of chapter 18 (zoning). 
W.  A written explanation of measures to be employed in Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas to meet the criteria and intent of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act, including any best management practices as required by section 17-64.1 and as established in chapter 18, article 21.1. 
X.  For Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas, a water quality impact assessment as required by chapter 18, article 21.1. 
(Code 1962, § 13-24; Code 1969, § 17-15; Ord. of 2-1966; Ord. of 2-25-1974; Ord. of 10-1988; Ord. of 2-1989; Ord. of 1-1990; Ord. of 8-1990; Ord. of 1-6-1992; Ord. of 6-20-2011(1), § 1; Ord. No. 2014-004, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 17-15.1. - Planting and replacement of trees. 
A.  The preliminary plat required by this article shall be accompanied by a plan providing for the planting and replacement of trees on site during development to the extent that, at maturity of 20 years, minimum tree canopies or covers will be provided in the respective zoning districts of the Town as follows: 
1.  20 percent tree canopy in the RS-16, RS-12.5 and RS-10 zones. 
2.  15 percent in the RM-2 and RTH zones. 
3.  Ten percent tree canopy in the T, C-1, C-1A, C-2, CMP and CM zones. 
B.  All trees planted shall meet the specifications of the American Association of Nurserymen and the Town shall maintain in writing a system for rating the desirability for planting of various tree species, which writing shall be available in the office of the director of public works. 
C.  The planting of trees shall be done in accordance with either the standardized landscape specifications jointly adopted by the Virginia Nurserymen's Association, the Virginia Society of Landscape Designers and the Virginia chapter of the American Association Society of Landscape Architects, or the road and bridge specifications of the state department of transportation. 
D.  Existing trees which are to be preserved as otherwise provided in this chapter may be included in the plan to meet all or part of the canopy requirements, and may include wooded preserves, if the site plan identifies such trees and the trees meet standards of desirability and life expectancy established by the Town. 
E.  The Town Council may grant reasonable exceptions or deviations from the requirements of this section when strict application of the requirements would result in unnecessary or unreasonable hardship to the developer, or to allow for reasonable development of the following: 
1.  Areas devoid of woody materials. 
2.  Dedicated school sites. 
3.  Playing fields and other non-wooded recreation areas and uses of a similar nature. 
F.  Violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor punishable by fine of not more than $250.00 and each day after the first during which such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1969, § 17-15.1; Ord. of 9-25-1989; Ord. of 7-1991)  
Sec. 17-16. - Reservation of land for public purposes. 
The Town Council may require subdividers of subdivisions to dedicate land for streets, parks, playgrounds, libraries, municipal buildings and similar public uses, subject to the following regulations: 
(a)  Subdividers shall not be required to dedicate land for parks or playgrounds exceeding five percent of the area of the subdivision, exclusive of street and drainage reservation, without reimbursement by the Town. Where land is required in excess of this amount, the reimbursement by the Town shall be based on a proportionate share of: 
(1)  Cost of raw land; 
(2)  Cost of improvements, including interest on investment; 
(3)  Development costs; plus 
(4)  Not more than ten percent profit on the total of such costs. 
(b)  Subdividers shall not be required to reserve land for public purposes other than streets, drainage, parks and playgrounds, except on a reimbursement basis. They shall not be required to hold such land proposed for purchase by the Town longer than 12 months following the recording of the plat for such purchase. If such land is not purchased by the Town within the 12 months, it may be sold as lots for the same purposes for which the subdivision was platted. To facilitate such possible eventual sale of reserved land as separate lots, the subdivider shall show on his final plat, by dotted lines and dotted numbers, the sizes and dimensions of lots to be created within the boundaries of any such reserved land, and may sell such lots, after the expiration date of the reservations, by lot numbers, without filing an amended plat. The council shall make certain that any such reserved land is divisible into lots and streets in a manner compatible with the remainder of the subdivision, so that the subdivider will not be required to reserve an unusable portion of his subdivision. 
(c)  The requiring of the dedication of public spaces as provided in subsection (a) of this section shall not constitute an acceptance of the dedication by the Town. 
(Code 1962, § 13-24; Code 1969, § 17-16; Ord. of 2-1966; Ord. of 12-1967)  
Sec. 17-17. - Application for approval. 
Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, and before any permit for the erection of a structure shall be granted, the subdivider shall apply in writing to the planning commission for approval of his subdivision and submit to the commission ten copies of a preliminary plat complying with the requirements of this chapter. Such plans shall be accompanied by a fee for the examination or approval of plats as set forth in the schedule of fees adopted by the Town Council and shall be collected by the director of finance of the Town for deposit to the credit of the general fund. 
(Code 1962, § 13-8; Code 1969, § 17-17; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-18. - Discussions about plat with planning commission, etc.; recommended changes. 
The subdivider shall discuss the preliminary plat with the planning commission or zoning administrator in order to determine whether or not his preliminary plat generally conforms to the requirements of this chapter and of the zoning regulations. The subdivider shall then be advised in writing, which may be by formal letter or by legible markings on a copy of one of the preliminary plats submitted, concerning any additional data that may be required. 
(Code 1962, § 13-9; Code 1969, § 17-18; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-19. - Referral to Town and county officials. 
The planning commission shall transmit copies of the plat for their study and recommendations to the zoning administrator, director of public works, Town Manager, Town Police Department, county fire marshal and such other official body or agency as may be deemed necessary by the commission. 
(Code 1962, § 13-10; Code 1969, § 17-19; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-20. - Time within which planning commission to act. 
The planning commission shall act on the preliminary plat within 60 days after filing unless such time is extended by agreement with the subdivider, during which period it shall receive a written report with recommendations from each official or agency enumerated in section 17-19. If no action is taken by the commission within the 60 days after filing or such longer period as may have been agreed upon, the preliminary plat as filed shall be deemed approved and it shall be the duty of the commission to comply with section 17-21. 
(Code 1962, § 13-11; Code 1969, § 17-20; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-21. - Notice of action taken by planning commission. 
The planning commission shall, as soon as possible, consider the reports and pass on the plat. It shall then set forth its recommendations in writing, whether of approval, modification or disapproval. In case of modification or disapproval, it shall give its reasons therefor to the subdivider who may revise the plat accordingly. Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the commission, the commission shall forthwith return one copy of the approved preliminary plat to the subdivider and the subdivider may proceed with the preparation of the final plat. 
(Code 1962, § 13-2; Code 1969, § 17-21; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-22. - Effect of approval. 
The approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission is revocable, does not constitute a guarantee of approval of the final plat and does not constitute final approval or acceptance of the subdivision by the council or authorization to proceed on construction of improvements within the subdivision. 
(Code 1962, § 13-13; Code 1969, § 17-22; Ord. of 2-1966)  
ARTICLE 3. - FINAL PLAT 
 
Sec. 17-23. - Subdivider to furnish engineering data; approval of director of public works. 
Before submitting the final plat to the Town Council for approval, the subdivider shall furnish all plans and information as listed in sections 17-24 to 17-26 and as necessary for the detailed engineering consideration of the improvements required and obtain the approval of the director of public works, which shall be endorsed thereon. Each final plat submission shall also be accompanied by a fee payable to the Town in the amount as set forth in the schedule of fees as adopted by the Town Council. 
(Code 1962, § 13-14; Code 1969, § 17-23; Ord. of 2-1966; Ord. of 4-20-1992)  
Sec. 17-24. - Engineer or surveyor to prepare plat. 
Every final plat shall be prepared by a surveyor or certified professional engineer duly licensed by the state. 
(Code 1962, § 13-25; Code 1969, § 17-24; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-25. - Owner's statement. 
Every final plat, or the deed of dedication to which such plat is attached, shall contain in addition to the engineer's or surveyor's certificate a statement as follows: 
"The platting or dedication of the following described land (here insert correct description of the land subdivided) is with the free consent and in accordance with the desire of the undersigned owners, proprietors and trustees (if any)." 
The statement shall be signed by such persons and duly acknowledged before some officer authorized to take acknowledgments of deeds. When thus executed and acknowledged, the plat, upon approval as specified in this article, shall be filed and recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the county and indexed under the names of the owners of the land signing such statement and under the name of the subdivision. 
(Code 1962, § 13-26; Code 1969, § 17-25; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-26. - Contents. 
The subdivision plat submitted to the Town Council for final approval and subsequent recording shall be clearly and legibly drawn in ink upon tracing cloth, or other approved media, at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch. In addition to the requirements of section 17-25, the following shall be shown on the final plat: 
(a)  Name of subdivision, Town, county, state, owner and subdivider; north point, the scale and date of drawing; number of sheets; and the name of the licensed professional surveyor or engineer. 
(b)  Location of proposed subdivision by an insert map at a scale of not less than six inches equal one mile indicating thereon adjoining roads and their names and numbers, Town, subdivision and other landmarks. 
(c)  Boundary survey, with an error of closure within the limit of one in 10,000, related to the true meridian. The survey may be related to the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey state grid north if the coordinates of two adjacent corners of the subdivision are shown. 
(d)  Certificate signed by the surveyor setting forth the source of title of the owner of the land subdivided, and the place of record of the last instrument in the chain of title. 
(e)  When the subdivision consists of land acquired from more than one source of title, the outlines of the various tracts shall be indicated by dash lines, and identifications of the respective tracts shall be placed on the plat. 
(f)  The accurate location and dimensions by bearings and distances with all curve data of all lot and street lines and centerlines of streets; boundaries and widths of all easements; boundaries of parks, school sites or other public areas; the number and area of all lots; all existing and platted streets, their names, numbers and widths. 
(g)  All dimensions shown in feet and decimals of a foot to the closest 0.01 of a foot; all bearings in degrees, minutes and the nearest ten seconds. 
(h)  The data for all curves along street frontage shall be shown in detail at the curve or at a curve data table showing the following: Delta, radius, arc, tangent, chord and chord bearing. 
(i)  All survey monuments and benchmarks, together with their description. 
(j)  The accurate outline, dimensions and purposes of all property which is offered for dedication or is to be reserved for acquisition for public use, or is to be reserved by deed covenant for the common use of the property owners in the subdivision. 
(k)  If a zoning change is involved, certification from the zoning administrator shall accompany the plat, stating that the change requested has been approved and is in effect. 
(l)  A plat note indicating if the property, or any portion thereof, is within any Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area and indicting what specific additional restrictions will apply to the property as set forth in chapter 18, article 21.1. 
(Code 1962, § 13-27; Code 1969, § 17-26; Ord. of 2-1966; Ord. of 1-6-1992)  
Sec. 17-27. - Submission to council for approval. 
(a)  The subdivider shall, within six months after receiving the planning commission's official notification concerning the preliminary plat, file with the Town Council an original and ten copies of a final subdivision plat in accordance with this article. Failure to do so shall make preliminary approval null and void. The council may grant an extension up to six months to a subdivider who has a reasonable basis, in the council's opinion, for requesting such an extension. 
(b)  The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat; except that it shall incorporate all changes or modifications required by the commission. 
(c)  The council shall transmit copies of the plat for their study and recommendations to the zoning administrator, director of public works, Town Manager, Town Police Department, county fire marshal, Town planning commission and such other official body, company or agency as council may deem advisable. 
(Code 1962, § 13-16; Code 1969, § 17-27; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-28. - Notification of subdivider prior to consideration by council. 
The Town Council shall notify the subdivider by mail ten days prior to the date of consideration of the final plat. 
(Code 1962, § 13-17; Code 1969, § 17-28; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-29. - Actions of council. 
(a)  The Town Council shall, within 60 days from the date of submission of the final plat, approve, modify or disapprove such plat, and failure to act within 60 days shall be deemed approval. The council's approval of the plat shall be certified by the mayor or other agent designated by the council and attested by the clerk, by so indicating on the final plat. If the plat is disapproved, a statement of the reason for such action shall be attached to the plat and returned to the subdivider. 
(b)  The plat shall not be approved until the subdivider has complied with the general requirements and minimum standards of design in accordance with this chapter. 
(Code 1962, § 13-18; Code 1969, § 17-29; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-30. - Filing of final plat after approval. 
When the final plat has been approved by the Town Council, one copy shall be delivered to the planning commission, one copy to the director of public works and one to the Town clerk for their respective files. The original plat, duly certified, shall be given to the subdivider for recording in the office of the clerk of the court of the county. 
(Code 1962, § 13-20; Code 1969, § 17-30; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-31. - Recording. 
The subdivider shall record the final plat in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the county within 60 days after the date of approval; otherwise the final plat shall be null and void, and the Town Council's approval thereof automatically withdrawn. 
(Code 1962, § 13-21; Code 1969, § 17-31; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-32. - Reapproval by Town Council upon failure of subdivider to record. 
In the event that an approved plat is not recorded within 60 days from the date of its final approval as provided for in section 17-31, such plat may be resubmitted to the Town Council for reapproval, upon payment of a fee as specified in section 1-12. Upon certification to it by the zoning administrator that no change has been made in the resubmitted plat from the one originally approved, the council may approve such resubmitted plat. If, however, any change has been made in this Code or other Town ordinances since the original approval of the plat which would affect the subdivision or any portion thereof, as shown on the plat, the provisions of this section for reapproval shall not apply, and the plat shall be treated as a new application, pursuant to the other provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1962, § 13-22; Code 1969, § 17-32; Ord. of 2-1966; Ord. No. 6-6-2011(3), § 1)  
ARTICLE 4. - DESIGN STANDARDS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 17-33. - Compliance with comprehensive plan and official map. 
The proposed subdivision shall conform to the comprehensive plan and official map of the Town. 
(Code 1962, § 13-32; Code 1969, § 17-33; Ord. of 2-1966)  
DIVISION 1.1. - SEWERS, STORM DRAINS AND UTILITIES 
 
Sec. 17-33.1. - Location. 
(a)  All sanitary sewers, storm drains and utilities shall be located in and under streets, alleys or public ways unless the planning commission in its administration of this chapter determines that such location is not engineeringly feasible or is not practicable or would conflict with the intent of this chapter or chapter 18. 
(b)  In such event, the planning commission may approve alternate locations after first having complied with section 17-55. 
(Code 1969, § 17-33.1; Ord. of 3-1997)  
DIVISION 2. - STREETS 
 
Sec. 17-34. - Arrangement, character, extent, etc. 
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the official map and comprehensive plan and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. Where not shown on the official map or comprehensive plan, the arrangement and other design standards of streets shall conform to the provisions found in this division. 
(Code 1962, § 13-33; Code 1969, § 17-34; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-35. - Relation to adjoining street systems. 
The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provisions for the continuation of the existing streets in adjoining areas, and shall in every case provide at least one street which shall connect with, intersect with, or join in a safe and approved manner one or more already existing and paved streets within the Town. 
(Code 1962, § 13-33; Code 1969, § 17-35; Ord. of 2-1966; Ord. of 1-1967)  
Sec. 17-36. - Projection of streets. 
Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the proper projection of streets. 
(Code 1962, § 13-33; Code 1969, § 17-36; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-37. - Streets to be carried to property lines. 
When a new subdivision adjoins unsubdivided land susceptible to being subdivided, all new streets which will terminate at the boundaries of unsubdivided tracts shall be constructed to such boundaries. 
(Code 1962, § 13-33; Code 1969, § 17-37; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-38. - Street jogs. 
Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 250 feet shall be avoided. 
(Code 1962, § 13-33; Code 1969, § 17-38; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-39. - Dead-end street or cul-de-sac. 
Dead-end streets or culs-de-sac, designed to be so permanently, shall not be longer than 800 feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least 90 feet, and a street property line diameter of at least 110 feet. If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar turnaround shall be provided and provision made for future extension of the street into adjoining properties. 
(Code 1962, § 13-33; Code 1969, § 17-39; Ord. of 2-1966; Ord. of 5-11-1987)  
Sec. 17-40. - Service drives. 
Service drives shall be required as shown on the master street plan. 
(Code 1962, § 13-33; Code 1969, § 17-40; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-41. - Widths; dedication of rights-of-way. 
No streets of less than full width shall be allowed. Street widths shall not be less than as follows: 
Street Type 	Width 
Service drives 	32 feet 
Secondary and local streets 	50 feet 
Main arterial and inner loop 	60 feet 
 
When a subdivision abuts any dedicated right-of-way or any street which is included in the state system of secondary highways, the subdivider shall be required to dedicate, for each side of such street to which the subdivision abuts, up to one-half of any right-of-way necessary to make such street comply with the minimum right-of-way width fixed for the same. The subdivider shall be responsible for the grading and surfacing of and installation of all curb, gutter, sidewalk and street trees on all such dedicated area according to specifications established by the Town. 
(Code 1962, § 13-33; Code 1969, § 17-41; Ord. of 2-1966; Ord. of 4-2010)  
Sec. 17-42. - Intersections. 
The intersection of more than two streets at one point shall be avoided except where it is impracticable to secure a proper street system otherwise. Streets shall intersect one another at an angle as near to a right angle as possible, and no intersections of streets at angles less than 60 degrees shall be approved. Street intersections shall be rounded with a curve of a radius acceptable to the planning commission. 
(Code 1962, § 13-33; Code 1969, § 17-42; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-43. - Deflections. 
Where a deflection angle of more than ten degrees in the alignment of a street occurs, a curve of reasonably long radius shall be introduced. On streets 50 feet or more in width, the centerline radius of curvature shall not be less than 300 feet. 
(Code 1962, § 13-33; Code 1969, § 17-43; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-44. - Reserve strips. 
Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except under conditions approved by the planning commission. 
(Code 1962, § 13-33; Code 1969, § 17-44; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-45. - Grades. 
No street grade shall be less than one percent, and shall not exceed the following, with due allowances for reasonable vertical curves: 
Street Type 	Percent Grade 
Service drives 	8% 
Secondary and local streets 	10% 
Main arterial and inner loop 	8% 
 
(Code 1962, § 13-33; Code 1969, § 17-45; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-46. - Names and numbers. 
Names of new streets shall not duplicate existing or platted street names unless a new street is a continuation of, or in alignment with the existing or platted street. House numbers shall be assigned in accordance with the house numbering system now in effect in the Town. 
(Code 1962, § 13-33; Code 1969, § 17-46; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-47. - Access to streets across ditches. 
The subdivider shall provide access to all proposed streets across all ditches or watercourses in a standard method approved by the director of public works. 
(Code 1962, § 13-33; Code 1969, § 17-47; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-48. - Vacation. 
The planning commission shall not recommend the vacation of any street or part of a street dedicated for public use, if such vacation interferes with the uniformity of the existing street pattern or any future street plans prepared for the areas. 
(Code 1962, § 13-33; Code 1969, § 17-48; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-49. - Private streets. 
Private streets shall not be approved nor shall public improvements be approved for any private street. 
(Code 1962, § 13-33; Code 1969, § 17-49; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-50. - Street interval. 
In general, provisions should be made for through streets at intervals not exceeding 1,600 feet. 
(Code 1962, § 13-33; Code 1969, § 17-50; Ord. of 2-1966)  
DIVISION 3. - ALLEYS 
 
Sec. 17-51. - Residential areas. 
Alleys shall not be permitted in residential areas except where, in the opinion of the planning commission, it considers such alleys to be necessary because of unusual circumstances. 
(Code 1962, § 13-34; Code 1969, § 17-51; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-52. - Commercial and industrial districts. 
Alleys shall be provided in the commercial and industrial districts and where commercial or industrial zones abut residential zones (RS-16, RS-12.5 or RS-10) except, after receiving a recommendation from the Town Manager, the planning commission may waive the alley requirement and require a 20-foot utility easement in lieu of the alley or otherwise provide for the disposition of land area which would be occupied by said alley, where other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading and parking, consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed and where such waiver will not limit access to any existing alley. 
(Code 1969, § 17-52; Ord. of 7-1974)  
Sec. 17-53. - Width. 
The right-of-way width of an alley shall be 20 feet. 
(Code 1962, § 13-34; Code 1969, § 17-53; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-54. - Dead-end alleys. 
Dead-end alleys shall not be permitted. 
(Code 1962, § 13-34; Code 1969, § 17-54; Ord. of 2-1966)  
DIVISION 4. - EASEMENTS 
 
Sec. 17-55. - Public utilities and storm drains. 
Provision shall be made for easements for public utilities and storm drains as determined by the planning commission. No buildings or structures shall be permitted on easements without approval of the commission. 
(Code 1962, § 13-35; Code 1969, § 17-55; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-56. - Streams and watercourses. 
Wherever any stream, pond or surface watercourse is located in an area that is being subdivided, the subdivider shall, at his own expense, make adequate provisions for the proper drainage of surface water and shall also provide and grant to the Town an easement along such streams and watercourses meeting the approval of the planning commission. 
(Code 1962, § 13-35; Code 1969, § 17-56; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-57. - Lengths. 
Block lengths shall not exceed 1,000 feet or be less than 300 feet. 
(Code 1962, § 13-36; Code 1969, § 17-57; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-58. - Width. 
Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots of minimum depth. However, the planning commission may approve a single tier of lots where: 
(1)  Fronting on major streets; 
(2)  Prevented by topographical conditions; or 
(3)  Size of the property so requires. 
(Code 1962, § 13-36; Code 1969, § 17-58; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-59. - Crosswalks. 
In blocks over 900 feet long, pedestrian crosswalks may be required by the planning commission in locations deemed necessary to public health, convenience and necessity. Such crosswalk shall be five feet wide, adequately lighted and be straight from street to street. The crosswalks and associated lighting shall be installed by the subdivider and dedicated to the Town. 
(Code 1962, § 13-36; Code 1969, § 17-59; Ord. of 2-1966)  
DIVISION 5. - LOTS 
 
Sec. 17-60. - Dimensions. 
Lot dimensions and areas shall satisfy the requirements of the zoning regulations. 
(Code 1962, § 13-37; Code 1969, § 17-60; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-60.1. - Lot shape factor. 
No lot shall be created to be irregularly shaped or extended so that it has a "lot shape factor" in excess of 25. Lot shape factor equals the square of the lot perimeter divided by the lot area. 
Any proposed variance, modification or waiver from the lot shape factor requirement shall follow the procedures as set forth in section 17-12 of the Vienna Town Code. 
(Ord. No. 7-2-2012(2))  
Sec. 17-61. - Location. 
Each lot shall abut on a street dedicated by the subdivision plat or on an existing publicly dedicated street. Interior lots having frontage on two streets shall be prohibited except where unusual conditions, in the opinion of the planning commission, make other design undesirable. 
(Code 1962, § 13-37; Code 1969, § 17-61; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-62. - Corner lots. 
Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient for maintenance of required building lines on both streets as required by the zoning regulations. 
(Code 1962, § 13-37; Code 1969, § 17-62; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-63. - Lines. 
Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles, or radial to the street line. 
(Code 1962, § 13-37; Code 1969, § 17-63; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-64. - Lot remnants. 
All remnants of land below minimum size left over after subdividing of a tract shall be added to adjacent lots unless the subdivider intends to effect the sale thereof or utilize such remnant in an adjacent subdivision rather than be allowed to remain as unsalable parcels. 
(Code 1962, § 13-37; Code 1969, § 17-64; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-64.1. - Chesapeake Bay resource protection areas. 
(a)  Whenever a parcel being subdivided is in whole or partly located within a resource protection area, the parcel should be subdivided so that no development will occur within the resource protection area. If the subdivision cannot be accomplished without development, such development must be in accordance with applicable provisions of chapter 18, article 21.1, including the use of best management practices for control of non-point source pollution to offset the effects of development within the resource protection area. The design, specifications and calculations of the proposed best management practice shall be submitted with the preliminary plat for review and approval by the director of public works. 
(b)  Binding documentation regarding the construction and maintenance of the proposed best management practice must be submitted and approved as part of the final plat. 
(Code 1969, § 17-64.1; Ord. of 1-6-1992)  
ARTICLE 5. - IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 17-65. - Performance bond; cancellation of building permits for failure to start construction. 
Before consideration of a final plat of a subdivision by the Town Council, the subdivider shall guarantee the completion of the improvements required by this article by means of a bond executed by a surety company acceptable to the council based on an estimate certified by the director of public works. The amount of the bond shall be the estimated cost of construction of such improvements plus ten percent for price escalation resulting from normal cost increases between the time of approval and the initiation of construction on a subdivision. The surety will be subject to the condition that the improvements will be completed within 18 months after approval of the final plat, unless such period is extended by the council, and in the event they are not completed, the Town may proceed with the work and hold the owner and the bonding company jointly responsible for the costs thereof. As an alternative, the subdivider may deposit a certified check with and payable to the director of finance in place of the surety bond or a bank or savings and loan association's letter of credit on designated funds satisfactory to the council. In the event that construction as indicated on the approved plat is not commenced within six months of approval of the plat by council, any and all building permits issued prior to such date for any such construction shall be null and void, and in such event, the owner shall thereafter and prior to commencing any construction provide council with a certified check in the above mentioned amount, or with a renewed surety bond, which bond shall meet all the requirements hereinabove set forth, and shall be conditioned upon completion of all required improvements within 18 months after the initiation of such construction, and no building permit shall issue for any such construction indicated on such plat until the certified check or bonding requirement is met by the owner. 
(Code 1962, § 13-15; Code 1969, § 17-65; Ord. of 2-1966; Ord. of 1-1967; Ord. of 7-12-1982; Ord. No. 6-6-2011(3), § 1)  
Sec. 17-65.1. - Use of escrowed improvement funds. 
Town Council, in its discretion, may use funds escrowed pursuant to provision section 17-65, above, and provision 5 of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2241, as amended, for improvements similar to but other than those for which the funds were escrowed, if the council (i) obtains the written consent of the owner or developer who submitted the escrowed funds; (ii) finds that the facilities for which funds are escrowed are not immediately required; (iii) releases the owner or developer from liability for the construction or for the future cost of constructing those improvements for which funds were escrowed; and (iv) accepts liability for future construction of these improvements. If the Town fails to locate such owner or developer after making a reasonable attempt to do so, the Town may proceed as if such consent has been granted. In addition, the escrowed funds to be used for such other improvement may only come from an escrow that does not exceed a principal amount of $30,000.00 plus any accrued interest and shall have been escrowed for at least five years. 
(Code 1969, § 17-65.1; Ord. of 7-3-2000; Ord. No. 6-6-2011(3), § 1)  
Sec. 17-65.2. - Public improvement completion time extensions. 
Any subdivider's request to Town Council for additional time to complete improvements beyond the initial 18 months specified in section 17-65, shall require an updated estimate and bond, and payment of the fee described in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. 6-6-2011(3), § 1)  
Sec. 17-66. - Maintenance bond. 
The subdivider shall, immediately prior to acceptance thereof by the Town of any street, water line or sewer line, file a bond in the amount of ten percent of the original installation costs, to cover maintenance and repair arising from defective workmanship or material for a period of two years. 
(Code 1962, § 13-15; Code 1969, § 17-66; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-67. - Improvements at subdivider's cost. 
The subdivider shall be responsible for the installation of all improvements listed below, all of which shall be installed at no cost to the Town, unless otherwise provided in this Code: 
(a)  Monuments. Monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, points of curves in streets and at intermediate points as shall be required by the director of public works. The monuments shall be of such material, size and length as may be approved by the director of public works. All monuments shall be clearly visible for inspection and use. 
(b)  Alleys. All alleys shall be graded and surfaced. 
(c)  Roadways, sidewalks, curbs and gutters. All required roadways, including sidewalks, curbs, gutters and street trees along all lot lines of all dedicated rights-of-way. Entrance drives shall be paved to the property line of each lot. 
(d)  Street name signs. Street name signs shall be installed at all street intersections at locations approved by the director of public works. 
(e)  Lighting. Lighting facilities and light standards shall be approved by the director of public works. 
(f)  Water lines. The subdivider shall connect with the Town water mains and provide a water connection for each lot within the subdivision. 
(g)  Sewers. Sanitary sewer systems shall be connected to the Town sanitary sewer system, and each lot within a subdivision shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system. 
(h)  Stormwater disposal. Adequate provisions shall be made for the disposal of stormwater. All storm drainage shall terminate in an approved watercourse. The connecting of any part of the storm sewer system to any part of the sanitary sewer system is prohibited. 
(i)  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed in all subdivisions. Fire hydrant standards shall be subject to the approval of the county fire marshal. 
(j)  Utilities below ground. All new transmission, distribution and customer service utility facilities, carrying or used in connection with electric power, telephone, telegraph, cable television, petroleum, gas or steam, installed within the boundaries of any subdivision, the final plat of which is approved subsequent to April 28, 1969, shall be placed below the surface of the ground; provided that: 
(1)  Equipment such as electric distribution transformers, switchgear, meter pedestals and telephone pedestals, which is normally installed above ground in accordance with accepted utility practices for underground distribution, may be so installed; 
(2)  Meters, service connections and similar equipment normally attached to the outside wall of the premises it serves may be so installed; and 
(3)  Temporary overhead facilities required for construction purposes will be permitted. 
(k)  BMP facilities or structures. Any BMP facility or structure necessary to achieve the water quality standards of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act as stated in chapter 18, article 21.1. 
All improvements herein required shall be in accordance with accepted standards of utility practice for underground construction. 
(Code 1962, § 13-43; Code 1969, § 17-67; Ord. of 2-1966; Ord. of 4-28-1969; Ord. of 6-2-1969; Ord. of 1-6-1992)  
Sec. 17-67.1. - Dedication of sidewalks for single-lot development. 
The developer of any lot shall dedicate land along the lot frontage for sidewalk, curb, and gutter improvements as shown on the adopted Town Pedestrian Plan. Dedication of such improvements shall be in accordance with the standards set forth in this Code. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015(2) )  
Sec. 17-67.2. - Completion of sidewalks for single-lot development. 
(a)  The developer of any lot that fronts an existing street and where adjacent property on either side has an existing sidewalk, shall dedicate land, construct a sidewalk and connect such new sidewalk to the existing adjacent sidewalks. Such new sidewalk shall be constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in this Code. 
(b)  Upon application by the developer to the Town Council, the Town Council may, in its discretion, waive the construction of such new sidewalk and permit the deposit of designated funds for such construction in accordance with sections 17-65 and 17-65.1. 
(Code 1969, § 17-67.1; Ord. of 9-24-2007; Ord. of 3-16-2015(2) ) 
Editor's note— An ordinance of March 16, 2015 , renumbered § 17.67.1 as § 17.67.2.  
Sec. 17-68. - Specifications. 
Copies of approved specifications shall be made available to the subdivider on request. 
(Code 1962, § 13-39; Code 1969, § 17-68; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-69. - Improvement plans. 
The subdivider shall submit to the director of public works the following "as-built" plans, drawn to a horizontal scale of one inch to 100 feet or less and a vertical scale of one inch to 20 feet or less. All elevations shall be referred to mean sea level. 
(a)  The plan and profiles of each street with grades and street intersection elevations. 
(b)  The plan and profile of sanitary sewers and stormwater sewers with grades and pipe sizes indicated, and a plan of the water distribution system showing pipe sizes and location of valves and fire hydrants. 
(Code 1962, § 13-43; Code 1969, § 17-69; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-70. - Inspection of construction. 
Inspections during and after installation of improvements shall be made by the director of public works to ensure conformity with approved plans and specifications. The subdivider shall notify the director of public works prior to beginning and completion of any improvements required under this chapter. Fees for inspection shall be charged in accordance with the schedule of fees established by the Town Council. The subdivider shall provide adequate supervision on the project during construction of required improvements and shall keep one set of approved plans and profiles available on the project site at all times when work is being performed. 
(Code 1962, § 13-40; Code 1969, § 17-70; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Sec. 17-71. - Acceptance of improvements generally. 
The Town Council shall not accept any required improvements until the director of public works has certified in writing to the Town Council that all specifications have been met, and that a set of "as built" drawings prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer has been furnished to the Town. Said "as-built" drawings shall include: 
(a)  Water lines and appurtenant structures; 
(b)  Sanitary sewer lines and appurtenant structures; 
(c)  Surface water drainage lines, detention facilities, and appurtenant structures; and, 
(d)  One-foot contours of the entire area, surface drainage arrows, invert and top elevations and slope of all installed pipes and structures. 
(Code 1969, § 17-71; Ord. of 2-1966; Ord. of 2-1989)  
Sec. 17-72. - Acceptance procedure. 
The Town Council shall accept the improvements required by this chapter by recording such acceptance in its minutes. In the event the council shall fail to act on the recommendations of the director of public works on any improvement required under this chapter within 90 days, such improvement shall be automatically accepted as of the last day of such 90-day period. 
(Code 1962, § 13-42; Code 1969, § 17-72; Ord. of 2-1966)  
Chapter 18 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Zoning, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2280 et seq.; regulations to be uniform, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2282. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - TITLE, APPLICABILITY, PURPOSE 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Vienna." 
(Code 1969, § 18-1)  
Sec. 18-2. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to the incorporated territory of the Town. 
(Code 1969, § 18-2)  
Sec. 18-3. - Purpose. 
The zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan to promote, in accordance with the present and future needs, the safety, morals, order, convenience, aesthetic appearance and welfare of the community. This chapter is intended, among other purposes, to provide for adequate light, safety and ample parking facilities, and to prevent undue concentration of population. 
(Code 1969, § 18-3)  
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 18-4. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases used herein are defined as follows. The words "used for" include "designed for" and vice versa; words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural number and vice versa; the word "structure" includes the word "building"; the word "dwelling" includes the word "residence"; the word "lot" includes the word "plot"; and the word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
Accessory building means a subordinate building or a portion of the main building, the use of which is incidental to that of the principal use of the main building. 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having as a substantial and significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment trading in such books, magazines, and other periodicals which limits its customers to persons over 18 years of age. For the purpose of this definition: 
(a)  The term "specified sexual activities" means: 
1.  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
2.  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; 
3.  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast; and 
(b)  The term "specified anatomical areas" means: 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
(a)  Human genitals, pubic region; 
(b)  Buttock; and 
(c)  Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
2.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein, or an establishment used for presenting such materials which limits its customers to persons over 18 years of age. For the purpose of this definition: 
(a)  The term "specified sexual activities" means: 
1.  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
2.  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; 
3.  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast; and 
(b)  The term "specified anatomical areas" means: 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
(a)  Human genitals, pubic region; 
(b)  Buttock; and 
(c)  Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
2.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Adult-oriented motion pictures, videotapes, discs, cassettes, or photographs means any motion picture, slide, videotape, cassette, or disc, or photographs of any type distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for adult bookstores or adult mini-motion picture theaters. 
Aggregate caliper inches means a measure of the total combined caliper inches for a group of trees. 
Alley means a minor public street which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties having principal frontage on another street. 
Alternative parking plan means a plan proposed by an applicant as part of a rezoning to the MAC Zone that seeks to provide a reduced amount of off-street parking or deviate from the district's off-street parking location or configuration requirements based on site conditions or anticipated parking demand. 
Amusement enterprise means any commercial establishment having or offering for public patronage or operation one or more mechanical or electronic amusement devices, regardless of whether the offering of such devices constitutes the primary use of such establishment or an accessory use. 
Architectural front means the façade of a building designed to serve as the primary entrance to the building, distinguished from the other facades by more elaborate architectural detail. The architectural front entry is not determined upon custom or use but rather upon the exterior and interior design of the building. 
Assessed value means value of the property as determined by the Fairfax County Tax Assessor. 
Assisted living facility means a facility for persons who are unable to live independently that provides: (a) private living quarters, which may include kitchen facilities limited to a sink, refrigerator and/or microwave, (b) supervision and general care, including but not limited to the provision of meals, housekeeping, health care, and (c) assistance with moderate activities of daily living. This term shall not include group homes or congregate living facilities. 
Apartment hotel means a building or portion thereof designed for or containing both individual guest rooms or suites of rooms and dwelling units. 
Automobile graveyard means any lot or place which is exposed to the weather and upon which more than five motor vehicles of any kind, incapable of being operated, and which it would not be economically practical to make operative, are placed, located or found. 
Basement means a portion of a building, partly underground, which has more than one-half its height measured from finished floor to finished ceiling above the average grade of the adjoining ground, and not deemed a story unless the ceiling is six feet or more above the average grade. 
Bay means a row of parking spaces in a parking lot. 
Bed and breakfast inn (also referred to as "inns") means a structure in which eight or fewer rooms are set aside for transient guests. Such rooms shall not have separate utilities, provisions for cooking or dormitories for sleeping and must be located within the principal structure. 
Bicycle parking space means a structure or facility used specifically for the storage of a bicycle so that it can be secured, including, but not limited to, bicycle racks, lockers and cages. For the purpose of this definition, a rack shall be considered two bicycle parking spaces. Long-term bicycle parking spaces shall be located in sheltered or weather-protected area. 
Billboard means any structure used as an outdoor display for the purpose of making anything known about something not attached to or which is remote from said display. 
Bio-retention device means a stormwater infiltration device consisting of an excavated basin that is refilled with engineered soil and mulch that allows stormwater run-off to collect and percolate through the engineered soil where it is treated prior to infiltrating into the surrounding undisturbed soil. 
Blighted property means any buildings or improvements or combination thereof which, by reason of dilapidation, obsolescence, overcrowding, faulty arrangement of design, lack of ventilation, light and sanitary facilities, excessive land coverage, deleterious land use or obsolete layout, or any combination of these or other factors, are detrimental to the safety, health, morals, or welfare of the community. 
Boardinghouse means a building other than a hotel where lodging, meals, or lodging and meals, are provided for three or more, but not exceeding nine guests, on a non-transient basis. 
Building height means the maximum vertical dimension measured from the average finished lot grade at the front of the principal building to the highest point of the roof. For accessory buildings, the height shall be measured from the lowest point of grade elevation adjacent to any wall of the structure to the highest point of the roof. 
Building line means a line parallel to the street which establishes the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the nearest part thereto of any permitted building. 
Building mass means the visual form of a building that includes the exterior walls, projections, recesses, roof features, and any attachments. 
Canopy means a permanent structure other than an awning made of cloth, metal or other material attached or unattached to a building for the purpose of providing shelter to patrons or automobiles, or as a decorative feature on a building wall. A canopy is not a completely enclosed structure. 
Canopy tree (shade or large tree) means a tree that has an expected height at maturity greater than 30 feet and which produces significant shade because it has a crown that is oval, round, vase-shaped, or umbrella-shaped. 
Cardinal direction means one of the four principal directions on a compass; that is, north, south, east, or west. 
Carport means any space outside a building and contiguous thereto, wholly or partly covered by a roof, and used for the shelter of motor vehicles. An unenclosed carport is a carport with no side enclosure (other than the side of the building to which the carport is contiguous) that is more than 18 inches in height, exclusive of screens. 
Clear zone means a portion of a public sidewalk or trail that is maintained free of street furniture, plantings, or other structures that is intended for the clear movement of pedestrians. 
Commercial group building development means a series of attached commercial units developed in groups or clusters and separated from one another by continuous vertical party walls without openings from basement to roof and having diversified architectural facades, roofs and treatment of materials, and all sharing in common immediately adjoining off-street parking and other common facilities and elements required by this chapter, whether developed pursuant to the Horizontal Property Act of the commonwealth or not. 
Commercial parking lot means a surface parking lot established to provide off-street parking to private vehicles for a fee. 
Commercial vehicle means a vehicle maintained or operated by a commercial establishment that is often parked or stored on the same lot as the commercial establishment. 
Compact development means development that is often characterized by mixed uses of land, a variety of different housing types, smaller lots with buildings in close proximity to one another, elevated densities or intensities, and an emphasis on alternative modes of transportation that allows residents and visitors to work, shop, and recreate with decreased reliance on automobiles 
Cornice means any horizontal member, structural or nonstructural, of any building, projecting outward from the exterior walls at the roof line, including eaves and other roof overhang. 
Cost refers to cost of development. 
Court means an open, unoccupied space, other than a yard on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, and which is bounded on two sides by such building or buildings. 
Cupola means a domelike structure on top of a roof or dome, often used as a lookout or to admit light and air. 
Curb grade means the elevation of the established curb in front of the building measured at the center of such front. 
Customer utility service means all of those wires, conduits, pipes, cables and appurtenant equipment located between the pole and the wall of the building occupied by a customer in the case of an electric power, telephone, telegraph or cable television system; and all of those conduits, pipes, and appurtenant equipment located between the street main and the wall of the building occupied by a customer in the case of a gas, water, steam, petroleum or sewer system. 
Deck means a floor area extending from the outside wall of a building above ground level, whether or not its supports rest on the ground, and not sheltered by a roof or enclosed by other than a protective railing on those sides other than the side adjacent to the building wall. 
Deferred parking means a condition on a development site where the development is constructed and operated for an initial term (usually around 12 months) without providing 100 percent of the required off-street parking. Land area is reserved for the provision of additional parking, and a study is prepared after the initial term to determine if the additional parking is needed. 
Destination retail means a retail sales establishment that attracts customers not because of its location, but rather because of the range of unique products or services provided, the shopping experience, or other attributes. 
Detention basin means a low lying area that is designed to temporarily hold a set amount of water while slowly draining it to surrounding soil or to another location. 
Drive aisle means a vehicular accessway within a parking lot or parking structure. 
Drive-through facility means, except as provided below, any facility where goods are sold or services provided to a person riding on or seated within a motor vehicle; or where services or inspections are performed on motor vehicles that stand or wait in line immediately prior to the service being performed. Drive-through facilities include, but are not limited to, uses such as car washes, motor vehicle lubrication and oil change facilities, and motor vehicle inspection stations as well as facilities, such as financial institutions, dry cleaners and restaurants, with one or more drive-through windows. Uses excepted from this definition include: 
(1)  Inspections utilizing not more than one bay at a motor vehicle service station; 
(2)  Fuel service components of motor vehicle service stations; and 
(3)  The on-site parking of motor vehicles prior to servicing at motor vehicle service facilities. 
Dwelling means a building designed or used as the living quarters for one or more families (or family equivalent). 
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms in a dwelling providing complete living facilities for one family (or family equivalent), including cooking facilities. 
Dwelling, single-family, means a detached building designed or used exclusively for occupancy by one family (or family equivalent). 
Dwelling, two-family, means a building containing two dwelling units, arranged one above the other or side by side. 
Dwelling, multiple-family means a building or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by three or more families (or family equivalent) living independently of each other. The term "multiple-family dwelling" does not include hotels, tourist camps, cabins or courts, trailer camps, motels or similar premises. Groups of three or more townhouses, owned as condominiums or offered for rent, may be considered as multiple-family dwellings. 
Dwelling, row, means one of a series of three or more attached one-family dwellings of substantially similar appearance separated from one another by a single partition wall without opening extended from basement to roof. 
Electric vehicle charging station means a parking space supplemented by an electrical source configured to deliver electrical energy to battery-powered vehicles. 
Elevation, architectural means a scaled drawing of the side, front, or rear of a structure intended to illustrate how the building will look or function. 
Enclosure. 
(1)  Total enclosure (wholly, completely, or fully) means complete coverage with roof, opaque walls, and/or walls of glass, plastic, fiberglass and/or similar solid type building material. 
(2)  Partial enclosure means walls or fencing of opaque character and/or walls of glass, fiberglass, and/or similar solid type building material, with or without a roof, which does not enclose an area. 
(3)  Open enclosure means enclosure of an area with fencing or other material which generally does not restrict view, but which prevents entry to an area. 
Entablature means the portion of a building located between the columns and the eaves, often comprised of an architrave, frieze, and a cornice. 
Façade means the entire exterior wall of a building facing a lot line measured from the grade to the eave or highest point of a flat or mansard roof. Façades may be on the front, side, or rear elevation of the building. 
Face of curb means the portion of a curb closest to the gutter or street paving. 
Family means one or more persons related by blood or marriage occupying a single housekeeping unit and using common cooking facilities; where such persons are related by blood or marriage, not more than two boarders or lodgers shall be permitted. 
Family equivalent means two or more individuals not related by blood or marriage, not exceeding four persons. 
Finished lot grade means the finished surface of ground abutting a building or structure. For single-family detached dwellings, not including subdivisions, the finished lot grade may deviate from the pre-existing lot grade by no more than three vertical feet at any point along the pre-existing lot grade around the footprint of the building or structure, such that all over-lot grading shall be in accordance with the natural lay of the land. The director of public works may waive the three-foot lot deviation requirement, if deemed to be for good cause and not contrary to the public interest. 
Footcandle means the amount of light that falls onto a surface as emitted by an exterior lighting device. 
Front building wall means the portion of a building that is closest to the sidewalk. 
Green roof means a roof of a building that is partially or completely covered with vegetation and a growing medium, planted over a waterproofing membrane. It may also include additional layers such as a root barrier and drainage and irrigation systems. 
Guest house means living quarters within a detached accessory building located on the same premises with the principal building for use by temporary guests of the occupants of the principal building and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling. 
Guest room means a room which is designed or intended for occupancy by one or more guests but in which no provision is made for cooking and not including dormitories for sleeping purposes only. 
Home occupation means any accessory use of a dwelling unit in addition to occupancy. (See section 18-173 for supplemental regulations.) A boardinghouse, tourist home, or real estate office shall not be deemed a home occupation. 
Hotel means any building or portion thereof which contains guest rooms which are designed or intended to be used, let, or hired out for occupancy on a transient basis and which together are intended to provide for accommodations for compensation to ten or more individuals at any given time. A hotel will be considered a commercial establishment. 
Human-scale design means features of a building or built environment that are sized and configured in accordance with the typical human frame. Human-scale details and features are most often configured for observation ad recognition by people who are walking or using some alternative forms of transportation. 
Impervious surface means buildings; parking areas; driveways; streets; sidewalks; areas of concrete, asphalt, gravel, or other compacted aggregate; and areas covered by the outdoor storage of goods or materials which do not absorb water. 
Independent living facility means a residential development that is limited to occupancy by elderly persons and/or by persons with handicaps, as defined in the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988. Such a facility shall provide: (a) dwelling units with complete kitchen facilities, (b) supportive services, such as meals, personal emergency response systems, recreation and transportation services, and (c) design features, such as wider doorways and hallways, accessible-ready bathrooms and lower light switches. 
Indoor recreation means a private indoor (entirely within an enclosed structure) use providing for sport and recreation activities that are operated or carried on primarily for financial gain. Examples of indoor commercial recreation uses include, but are not limited to, fitness centers, bowling alleys, dancehalls, skating rinks, indoor commercial swimming pools, and racquet and tennis clubs. 
Junkyard means any land or building used for the abandonment, storage keeping, collecting, or baling of paper, rags, scrap metals, other scrap or discarded materials, or for the abandonment, demolition, dismantling, storage, or salvaging of automobiles or other vehicles not in running condition, machinery, or parts thereof. 
Landscape strip means an area which includes plantings of grass, ornamental shrubs, trees or other ornamental ground cover that is intended to provide a visual separation between different uses, including, but not limited to, parking areas, buildings and sidewalks. 
Landscaping means the planting of grass, ornamental shrubs, trees or other ornamental ground cover. 
Landscaping island means an area of pervious surface within an off-street parking lot that is intended for the placement of vegetation or stormwater run-off management devices. An "island" shall refer to either a single loaded parking bay island at minimum of 180 square feet or a double loaded parking bay island at 360 square feet. 
Live/work dwelling means, for the purposes of the Maple Avenue Commercial zone only, a structure or portion of a structure combining a residential living space for one or more persons with an integrated work space principally used by one or more of the residents. 
Lot means land occupied or to be occupied by a building or unit group of buildings and accessory buildings together with such yards and area as required by this chapter and having its principal frontage upon a public street, or upon a pedestrian right-of-way in a townhouse development. 
Lot, corner, means a lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets, having an angle of intersection of not more than 135 degrees. 
Lot, front of, means that side of a lot which fronts on a street. In case of a corner lot, the shortest side fronting on a street shall be considered to be the front of the lot, except when the zoning administrator determines for reasons of safety or continuity that the front should be on the long side, then this shall be considered the front. When sides fronting on the street are of equal lengths, the lot shall be considered to front on that street having the greater total of front footage of lots within the same block; provided, however, that where the board of zoning appeals has specifically designated the front of the lot in accordance with section 18-254.1, such designation shall thereafter prevail. The architectural front of the house shall be on the same side as the determined front of the lot. 
Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot, through, means a lot, other than a corner lot, having frontage on two streets. 
Lot area means the total horizontal area within the boundary lines of a lot. Except as herein provided, no alley, public way, public land or area proposed for future street purposes shall be included within the area of a lot. 
Lot depth means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the median between the two side lot lines. 
Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot. 
Lot midline means that line which is one-half the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, as measured along a line parallel with the front street line. 
Manufactured home means a structure subject to federal regulation, which is transportable in one or more sections; is eight body feet or more in width and 40 body feet or more in length in the traveling mode, or is 320 or more square feet when erected on site; is built on a permanent chassis; is designed to be used as a single-family dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities; and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. For the purpose of these provisions, a mobile home, as defined in the Council of American Building Officials, chapter 2, Building Definitions, section 202, shall be considered a manufactured home. 
Manufactured home, public use, means a manufactured home used by public safety personnel and dedicated to public safety uses. 
Marquee means a permanent roof-like structure other than a roof attached to, supported by, and projecting from a building, providing protection from natural elements over the ground, sidewalk or walkway. 
Massage therapist means one who practices massage therapy and complies with the application, investigation and training requirements of sections 22-5, 22-6, and 22-7, and the sanitation, hygiene and environment requirements applicable to health clubs as set forth in sections 22-10, 22-11, and 22-12; except such operation commenced in a residential zone shall not be required to comply with section 22-12. 
Massage therapy means a profession in which the practitioner applies massage techniques, and may apply adjunctive therapies, with the intention of positively affecting the health and well-being of the client. Massage therapy may be applied in response to physician prescription, but does not include diagnosis, except to the extent of determining whether massage therapy is indicated. 
Mechanical or electronic amusement device means any machine or device which upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc may be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement through the manipulation of the device whereby a score is established, the object of which is to secure a special number of numbers or a high total score. It shall include, but not be limited to, such devices as video games, marble machines, pinball machines, skillball, football, baseball, target shooting and all games, operations, or transactions similar thereto under whatever name indicated whether operated mechanically or electrically or through a combination thereof. 
Mezzanine means an intermediate, habitable level of space located between two floors and partially open to the floor below. 
Mixed-use means development that includes a mixture of residential and nonresidential use types. 
Motel means a building or portion thereof, or a group of buildings of similar design which provides sleeping accommodations in 20 or more separate units or rooms, each such unit or room to be separated from the other with permanent masonry walls and each such individual unit to provide direct access to a common corridor, or area, and to include private bath and/or shower, water closet and washbasin facilities. A motel shall not be deemed to include any establishment which provides residential living accommodations on a more or less permanent basis such as an apartment hotel. No more than 20 percent of all units may be constructed with cooking facilities. 
Motor bus means any motor-driven vehicle other than a private family passenger automobile, whether publicly owned or privately owned, which is designed to carry passengers and is operated for hire or compensation in the carrying of passengers either according to a fixed route, by schedule, or for charter; or used for transporting children to or from public and/or private schools. 
Multi-modal transportation impact analysis means the study of development-related existing, and future conditions of travel demand and supply to include analysis of vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle traffic, transit, and parking in a defined study surrounding the proposed development site. 
Nonconforming building means any building or structure lawfully existing prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived which does not conform to the area, bulk, yard, density, or off-street parking regulations of this chapter for the zone in which it is located. 
Nonconforming use means a use which lawfully occupied a building, structure, or land prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived which does not conform to the use regulations of this chapter for the zone in which it is located. 
Off-site parking means off-street parking that serves a particular use without being on the same lot of the use it serves. 
Open space means land and/or water area which has been specifically designed or set aside for conservation, place-making or recreational purposes. 
Parcel means any tract of land, capable of subdivision into lots under this chapter. 
Parking area, private, means an open area, other than a street or alley, used for the parking of the automobiles of occupants of a dwelling. 
Parking area, public or customer, means an open area, other than a private parking area, street or alley, used for the parking of automobiles and available for public or quasi-public use. 
Parking lot cross-access means vehicular access provided between the vehicular use areas of two or more development sites or parcels of land intended to allow travel between the sites without the use of a public or private street. 
Parking shuttle means, typically a bus or other vehicle that provides patrons free, regularly-scheduled service between a parking area and the building or use served by that parking. 
Parking space, automobile, means space within a building or a private or public parking area for the parking of one automobile. 
Patio means a surfaced, court-like area at ground level outside the main wall of a building, which area is not sheltered by a roof. 
Pedestrian pathway means interconnected paved walkways that provide a pedestrian passage through blocks running from street to street, vehicular use areas, or other locations. 
Pedestrian-oriented (pedestrian-friendly) means development forms that are sized, spaced, and configured to allow easy physical and visual access by persons travelling on foot. 
Photovoltaic panel means a collection device that converts radiant energy from the sun into electricity. 
Planning commission means the planning commission of the Town of Vienna, Virginia, the members of which shall be appointed for terms of two years or to fill the unexpired term of a vacant seat on the commission, and shall exercise all powers conferred upon it by the Code of Virginia and the Town Charter. 
Porch means an open or enclosed area outside an exterior wall of a building and covered by a roof which may be attached to a side wall or common with the main roof of the building and is used for purposes other than the sheltering of motor vehicles. 
Portable storage container means a portable, weather-resistant receptacle designed and used for the storage or shipment of household goods, wares or merchandise. 
Portico means a porch or walkway with a roof supported by columns, often leading to the entrance of a building. 
Pre-existing grade means the elevation of the lot that exists prior to the issuance of any grading, demolition, or building permit, or any other activities associated with the removal or rebuilding of the existing principal structure. 
Primary entrance means the place of ingress and egress to a building, parcel, or development used most frequently by the public. 
Principal building means a building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is located. 
Principal street, in the case where two existing streets are in question, is that street having the heavier volume of traffic as determined by the chief of police. The planning commission shall make this determination in the case of a proposed street. 
Private garage means a detached accessory building or portion of a principal building for the parking or temporary storage of automobiles by the occupants of the premises, and in which no business, occupation, or service for profit is in any way conducted. No commercial vehicle except one of not more than one-half-ton capacity which belongs to, or is in the care and custody of the occupants of the premises shall be parked, or stored, temporarily or otherwise, in a private garage. 
Public means any land use, property, or structure owned by a political subdivision and dedicated to public use. 
Public art means work in any media that have been planned and implemented with the specific intention of being sited, staged or viewed in publicly-accessible spaces. 
Public engagement plan means a plan that establishes the principles, processes and milestones for public engagement related to a development proposal to address the needs of community stakeholders and to engage people in the decision making process. 
Public garage means a building other than a private garage where automobiles are parked or stored. 
Rain garden means a planted depression that allows rainwater runoff from impervious urban areas like roofs, driveways, walkways, parking lots, and compacted lawn areas the opportunity to be collected in a single location and absorbed. 
Recreational use means of or relating to relaxation by the physical participation of persons in activities of a sporting or quasi-sporting nature usually conducted in, on or about track, court, field, or pool-like areas or field houses as distinguished from those types of recreation provided through exhibits or theatrical functions or by amusement enterprises as they are otherwise defined in this Code. 
Recycling station means a space or container allocated for collecting and loading of recyclable material that can physically comply with expected collection of a building's use. 
Remodeling means a change in the structure or layout of an existing building or space. 
Restaurant means a commercial establishment, located inside an enclosed building, where meals are primarily prepared to order and served individually for consumption within such building to patrons seated at tables or counters, or in booths. A snack bar or refreshment stand at a nonprofit community swimming pool, playground, playing field, park or similar recreational activity shall not be deemed to fall within the definition of a restaurant. 
Restaurant, carry-out, means any establishment, other than a drive-in restaurant, at which prepared food, beverages or refreshments are sold primarily for consumption off the premises. 
Restaurant, drive-in, means any structure or establishment merchandising or dispensing food, beverage, or refreshments at which the customer is served either: 
(a)  While sitting in a motor vehicle; or 
(b)  At an interior or exterior sales window, counter or serving area, and at which the food, beverage or refreshments are sold for consumption either inside the said structure or in motor vehicles on the premises but outside the said structure. 
Retention pond means a pond or depression designed to hold a specific amount of stormwater run-off indefinitely. 
Roof rake means the vertical face of the sloping end of a roof eave. 
Semi-public means any nonprofit land use, property, or structure of an institutional or civic nature including community buildings not owned and/or operated by a public agency. 
Setback plane means an imaginary line that starts at the side or rear lot line and travels upward and inward at a constant angle. The setback plane preserves light and air between buildings by forcing the upper stories to step back from the lot line. 
Shared parking means a parking management strategy in which parking spaces are shared by more than one user, and which allows parking facilities to be used more efficiently. Shared parking recognizes that parking spaces are only used during certain times by particular uses in schedules that follow predictable patterns. 
Shopping center means a group of not less than four contiguous retail stores or a building of contiguous retail stores having a total ground floor building area of not less than 10,000 square feet, with immediately adjoining off-street parking facilities as required by this chapter. 
Sight triangle means the theoretical triangle at an intersection which must be clear from obstructions to allow clear views between vehicle and/or pedestrians. 
Sign means any words, numerals, figures, devices, designs or trademarks by which anything is made known, such as are used to designate an individual, a firm, profession, business, or a commodity and which are visible from any public street. This definition shall not include temporary merchandise signs displayed inside of a building. 
Sill means a shelf or slab of stone, wood, or metal at the foot of a window or doorway. 
Single-loaded bay means a single row of off-street parking spaces and the associated accessway used to access them. 
Stoop means a small staircase typically, but not necessarily, constructed of concrete and/or masonry, ending in a platform, and utilized primarily as an access to a building. 
Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor directly above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between such floor and ceiling next above it. 
Street means a public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Street line means a dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a contiguous street. 
Street width means the total width of the strip of land dedicated or reserved for public travel including roadways, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and planting strips. 
Structural alterations means any change in supporting members of a building such as bearing walls or partition columns, beams or girders or any substantial change in the roof or the exterior walls. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground, or is attached to something having a location on the ground, including, but not limited to, patios and decks. Tents used exclusively for recreational or camping purposes, and customary garden accessories such as fences, trellises, grapevine supports, etc., are not included in this definition. The provisions of this definition relating to patios and decks shall not apply to chapter 6, article 6 of this Code. Additionally, patios and decks shall not be considered structures for the purpose of architectural review in any residential zone. 
Telecommunications facility means telecommunications antennas and associated equipment that may or may not include a tower, dish or other supporting structure, designed to send and receive data signals. 
Tent means any enclosure or shelter which is constructed of canvas or pliable material supported in any manner except by the contents it protects. 
Terrace means a surfaced, court-like area outside the main wall of a building, raised above the adjoining ground either by earth with sloping sides or an independent foundation. 
Townhouse means one of a series of attached, single-family dwelling units developed in groups or clusters and separated and attached to/from one another by continuous vertical party walls without openings from basement to roof, and having diversified architectural facades, roofs and treatment of materials. 
Trailer means any vehicle or structure that: 
(a)  Is designed and constructed in such a manner as will permit: 
(i)  Occupancy thereof as sleeping quarters for one or more persons; or 
(ii)  The conduct of any business or profession, occupation or trade (or use as a selling or advertising device), including public purposes that may be allowed by this chapter; and 
(b)  Is or may be mounted on wheels and transported on highways or city streets, propelled or drawn by its own or other motive power, excepting a device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
Trailer, public use, means a trailer used by the Town or the county public schools and dedicated to providing services to the public. 
Transportation demand management means the application of strategies and policies to reduce travel demand of single-occupancy private vehicles, or to redistribute this demand in space or in time. 
Tree canopy or tree cover means all areas of coverage by plant material exceeding five feet in height. 
Understory tree means a tree that has an expected height at maturity of no greater than 30 feet. 
Unit means one building in a series of attached commercial units located in a commercial group building development. 
Unit group building means two or more buildings (other than dwellings) grouped upon a lot and held under a single ownership, such as universities, hospitals and institutions. 
Use means the purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which either land or a building is or may be occupied or maintained. 
Variance means, in the application of a zoning ordinance, a reasonable deviation from those provisions regulating the shape, size, or area of a lot or parcel of land, or the size, height, area, bulk, or location of a building or structure when the strict application of the ordinance would unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property, and such need for a variance would not be shared generally by other properties, and provided such variance is not contrary to the purpose of the ordinance. It shall not include a change in use, which change shall be accomplished by a rezoning or by a conditional zoning. 
Vehicular use area means the portion of a site or development dedicated to vehicular ingress and egress, off-street parking, parking aisles, internal travel ways, fire lanes, and other areas dedicated to vehicular use, but not necessarily including vehicular storage areas. 
Video arcade means any commercial establishment having or offering for public patronage or operation one or more electronic or electric video games, television-like game devices, or mechanical or electronic amusement devices of any kind. 
Visually permeable means a building material that allows light or vision to pass through it. 
Window wall means an exterior building wall comprised of glass that occupies the majority of one or more building stories. 
Xeriscape means a style of landscape design and type of vegetation requiring little or no irrigation or other maintenance. 
Yard means an open space, other than a court, on the same lot with a principal building or group of principal buildings, which open space lies between the building or outer building of a group and the nearest lot or street line. 
Yard, front, means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, between the nearest principal building and the front lot line. The depth of the required front yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest part of the principal building to the nearest point of the front line. 
Yard, rear, means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, between the nearest rear principal building and the rear lot line. The depth of the required rear yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest part of the principal building to the nearest part of the rear lot line. 
Yard, side, means a yard between a principal building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard, or front lot line, where no front yard is required, to the rear yard. The width of the required side yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest point of the side line toward the nearest part of the principal building. 
Zoning administrator means the Town official designated by the Town Council to administer this chapter. 
Zoning map means the official zoning map for the Town, together with all amendments thereto. 
(Code 1969, § 18-4; Ord. of 1-1967; Ord. of 1-1969; Ord. of 4-1969; Ord. of 8-1970; Ord. of 2-1971; Ord. of 12-6-1971; Ord. of 10-16-1972; Ord. of 4-22-1974; Ord. of 6-9-1975; Ord. of 6-6-1977; Ord. of 4-7-1980; Ord. of 4-20-1981; Ord. of 6-15-1981; Ord. of 7-20-1981; Ord. of 3-15-1982; Ord. of 11-1-1982; Ord. of 2-3-1983; Ord. of 4-4-1983; Ord. of 4-17-1989; Ord. of 9-25-1989; Ord. of 11-8-1994; Ord. of 7-10-1995; Ord. of 1-6-1997; Ord. of 4-5-1999; Ord. of 10-7-2002; Ord. of 6-2-2003; Ord. of 1-24-2005; Ord. of 3-2005; Ord. of 5-2009; Ord. of 3-11-2011 ; Ord. of 4-4-2011(1); Ord. of 10-20-2014 ; Ord. of 8-24-2015 , § 1; Ord. of 9-11-2017 ; Ord. of 12-11-2017(1) ; Ord. of 8-20-2018 , § 1)  
ARTICLE 3. - ZONE CATEGORIES AND BOUNDARIES 
 
Sec. 18-5. - Zone categories. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the Town is hereby divided into the following zones: 
RS-16 	Single-family detached residential 
RS-12.5 	Single-family detached residential 
RS-10 	Single-family detached residential 
RM-2 	Multifamily, low density 
RTH 	Townhouse 
T 	Transitional 
C-1 	Local commercial 
C-1A 	Special commercial 
C-1B 	Pedestrian commercial 
C-2 	General commercial 
CMP 	Industrial park 
CM 	Limited industrial 
PR 	Parks and recreational 
PC 	Parks and conservation 
 
(Code 1969, § 18-5)  
Sec. 18-6. - Determination of zone boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any of the zones established in section 18-5 and as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  Zone boundaries are intended to follow street, alley, lot, or property lines, unless such zone boundary lines are fixed by dimensions, as shown on said zoning map. 
B.  Where some boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines and are not more than ten feet distant therefrom, such lot lines shall be such boundaries. 
(Code 1969, § 18-6)  
Sec. 18-7. - Zoning map. 
The locations and boundaries of the zones shall be as shown on the official zoning map for the Town, approved May 29, 1959, together with all amendments thereto subsequently adopted. This map, with all explanatory matter thereon, shall be deemed to accompany, be, and is hereby made a part of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-7)  
ARTICLE 4. - GENERAL REGULATIONS AS TO USES, HEIGHT, AND AREA 
 
Sec. 18-8. - Minimum requirements. 
In interpreting and applying this chapter, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements for the protection of the health, morals, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town. Except as hereinafter provided, the general regulations set forth in this article shall apply. 
(Code 1969, § 18-8)  
Sec. 18-9. - Uses. 
No land or building shall be used or designed to be used for any purpose other than is permitted in the zone in which such a building or land is located. Manufactured homes are hereby prohibited and any manufactured homes currently in the Town are hereby declared to be a nonconforming use and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-9; Ord. of 6-2003)  
Sec. 18-10. - Height. 
No building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed in height the limit hereinafter designated for the zone in which such building or structure is located. 
(Code 1969, § 18-10)  
Sec. 18-11. - Area. 
A.  No building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed, structurally altered, enlarged or moved, encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity with all area and building location regulations hereinafter designated for the zone in which such building or open space is located. Notwithstanding the preceding, upon application and demonstration of need to the zoning administrator, one exterior ramp meeting Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 Standards for Accessible Design as amended (28 CFR part 36, section 4-8, Ramps) may be installed on a structure in the RS-10, RS-12.5 and RS-16 zones for a period not to exceed five years. Any such ramp approved by the zoning administrator shall not extend to a point closer than ten feet from the front and rear property lines and five feet from the side property line. Any permit issued under this section is non-transferable; however, renewal permits for such ramps may be issued by the zoning administrator. 
B.  No yard or other space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building, and no yard or other open space on one lot shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a building on any other lot. 
C.  No lot or parcel of land, with or without buildings at the time the ordinance from which this chapter is derived became effective, shall be subdivided, resubdivided, or reduced in any manner below the minimum lot width and lot area required by this chapter. 
D.  Every building hereafter erected shall be located on a lot; and, except, as herein provided, there shall be no more than one principal building on one lot. 
(Code 1969, § 18-11; Ord. of 4-4-2011(2))  
ARTICLE 5. - RS-16 SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENTIAL ZONE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 18-12. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in all RS-16 zones: 
(a)  Single-family detached dwelling. 
(b)  Accessory buildings, including barns and other bona fide farm buildings, and private garages. 
(c)  Agricultural operations, including floriculture, horticultural and nurseries, provided all structures and buildings used in connection therewith are at least 100 feet from the nearest property line; poultry and dairy farming and horse breeding on parcels of at least ten acres in area, provided all animals and buildings and structures used in connection therewith are located at least 100 feet from the nearest property line. 
(d)  Customary home occupations. (See section 18-173.) 
(e)  The keeping of horses and/or ponies primarily owned and kept for the personal use of the occupant on the land on which they are maintained on parcels of at least two acres in area, provided: 
1.  All buildings and structures used in connection with the keeping of horses or ponies shall be located at least 100 feet from all of the property lines of the owner or keeper. 
2.  All bulk feed and other supplies, equipment and materials used in connection with the keeping of horses or ponies shall be located in such buildings or structures located at least 100 feet from all of the property lines of the owner or keeper. 
3.  Not more than one pony or horse per acre shall be kept and all such property on which such ponies or horses are kept shall be fenced in a manner which will prevent any or all of them from straying closer than ten feet from any property line of the owner or keeper. 
(Code 1969, § 18-12; Ord. of 4-1969)  
Sec. 18-13. - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may also be permitted in all RS-16 zones subject to securing a use permit as provided in section 18-209: 
(a)  Churches and other places of worship. 
(b)  Colleges and schools (private, elementary and high) of a noncommercial nature. 
(c)  Golf courses, country clubs, private clubs, including community buildings and similar recreational uses not owned and/or operated by a public agency (does not include golf driving ranges). 
(d)  Institutional homes and institutions of an educational or philanthropic nature, except those of a correctional nature or for mental cases. 
(e)  Certified massage therapists in the RS-16, RS-12.5 and RS-10 zones only, subject to the same restrictions applicable to home occupations as set forth in section 18-173, and who further comply with the application, investigation and training requirements of sections 22-5, 22-6, and 22-7, and the sanitation and hygiene requirements applicable to health clubs as set forth in sections 22-10 and 22-11. 
(f)  Nursery and kindergarten schools (private). 
(g)  Public buildings and uses. 
(h)  Public parks, playgrounds and other recreational uses. 
(i)  Public utilities and services, including the following: electric utility substations with non-rotating equipment; water and sewage pumping stations; above-ground transmission lines not exceeding 33KV; telephone exchanges (but excluding service and service storage yards); provided that utilities shall be housed in a structure in keeping with the character of the neighborhood in which it is located. 
(j)  Transitional parking. Where the side or rear yard of any lot or parcel of land located in a C-1, C-1A, or C-2 abuts land in any residential zone, automobile parking required in connection with the particular use of such commercial land may, upon the granting of a use permit pursuant to article 21 of this chapter, be permitted as a transitional parking use on that such land zoned for residential use, provided, however, that such transitional parking: 
1.  Shall not extend more than 200 feet into any such abutting residential zone; 
2.  Shall not extend into the required front yard setbacks or properties on adjacent streets; 
3.  Shall not extend beyond the front and side yard setbacks of the residentially zoned lot or lots on which it is located; 
4.  Shall not provide more than 40 percent of the parking space required by the commercial use for the benefit of which said transitional parking lot is requested, and shall conform with the provisions of article 16 of this chapter, except as otherwise expressly provided; 
5.  Shall not provide any ingress and egress across adjacent residentially zoned property. 
(Code 1969, § 18-13; Ord. of 10-20-1980; Ord. of 7-6-1981; Ord. of 11-8-1994; Ord. of 2-28-2000)  
Sec. 18-14. - Transitional uses. 
No transitional uses are permitted in the RS-16 zone. 
(Code 1969, § 18-14)  
Sec. 18-15. - Area requirements. 
The following area requirements shall apply in the RS-16 zone: 
A.  Lot area. All lots other than in approved subdivisions shall have a minimum area of 16,000 square feet. 
B.  Lot width. All lots shall provide a minimum width of 50 feet at the street right-of-way line, 65 feet at the front building line and 90 feet at the lot midline. 
C.  Front yard. The building line shall not be less than 60 feet measured from the centerline of the street, when fronting upon a street of less than 50 feet in width and not less than 35 feet measured from the street line fronting upon a street of 50 feet or more in width. In case of a through lot, the building line on any street shall be determined in the aforesaid manner, or as hereinafter required. 
D.  Side yard. Side yards shall be a minimum of 15 feet each in width. Buildings other than dwellings and their accessory buildings shall have a side yard on each side of the building of not less than 30 feet in width. A corner lot shall have a side yard along its street side at least 25 feet in width. 
E.  Rear yard. The rear yard shall be a minimum of 35 feet in depth. Decks may encroach into a rear yard, provided that no deck may cause the reduction of any rear yard to less than 25 feet in depth. 
F.  Lot coverage. Not more than 25 percent of a lot shall be covered by buildings, accessory buildings, automobile parking spaces and access, sport courts, tennis courts, patios and terraces. Decks, as regulated in section 18-169, may not cover more than five percent of the total area of a lot. 
(Code 1969, § 18-15; Ord. of 6-6-1988; Ord. of 4-17-1989; Ord. of 8-19-1991; Ord. of 10-7-2002)  
Sec. 18-16. - Height limit. 
Maximum height of buildings in the RS-16 zone shall be 2½ stories, but shall not exceed 35 feet. 
(Code 1969, § 18-16)  
Sec. 18-17. - Fences. 
(a)  Any fence from the rear lot line to and including the front line of the building shall be no more than six feet high, except that on a corner lot the fence along the side yard fronting on a street shall be not more than four feet high, and the fence along the rear line, from the front of the adjacent house to its street line shall not exceed four feet in height. Any fence located between the front of the house and the front property line shall be not more than four feet high. 
(b)  Any fence or screen constructed in any residential zone shall have the finished side facing the street or adjacent or abutting properties. The use of barbed wire is not permitted in any residential zone. 
(Code 1969, § 18-17; Ord. of 8-30-1976)  
Sec. 18-18. - Accessory building and private parking area requirement. 
Regulations for accessory buildings and private parking are specified in article 17 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-18)  
Sec. 18-19. - Off-street parking areas. 
Regulations for off-street parking areas are specified in article 16 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-19)  
Sec. 18-20. - Nameplate and signs. 
(a)  Regulations for nameplates and signs are specified in article 19 of this chapter. 
(b)  General regulations. For general regulations, see article 4 of this chapter. 
(c)  Supplemental regulations. For supplemental regulations, see article 18 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-20)  
ARTICLE 6. - RS-12.5 SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENTIAL ZONE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 18-21. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the RS-12.5 zone shall be all uses permitted in the RS-16 zone. 
(Code 1969, § 18-21)  
Sec. 18-22. - Conditional uses. 
Conditional uses in the RS-12.5 zone shall be all conditional uses permitted in the RS-16 zone. 
(Code 1969, § 18-22)  
Sec. 18-23. - Transitional uses. 
There shall be no transitional uses in the RS-12.5 zone. 
(Code 1969, § 18-23)  
Sec. 18-24. - Area requirements. 
The following area requirements shall apply in the RS-12.5 zone: 
A.  Lot area. All lots other than in approved subdivisions shall have a minimum area of 12,500 square feet. 
B.  Lot width. All lots shall provide a minimum width of 50 feet at the street right-of-way line, 65 feet at the front building line, and 80 feet at the lot midline. 
C.  Front yard. The building line shall not be less than 55 feet measured from the centerline of the street, when fronting upon a street of less than 50 feet in width; and not less than 30 feet measured from the street line fronting upon a street of 50 feet or more in width. In case of a through lot, the building line on any street or streets shall be determined in the aforesaid manner, or as hereinafter required. 
D.  Side yard. Side yards shall be the same as specified for the RS-16 zone. 
E.  Rear yard. Rear yards shall be the same as specified for the RS-16 zone. 
F.  Lot coverage. Lot coverage shall be the same as specified for the RS-16 zone. 
(Code 1969, § 18-24; Ord. of 6-6-1988)  
Sec. 18-25. - Height limit. 
Maximum height of buildings in the RS-12.5 zone shall be 2½ stories, but shall not exceed 35 feet. 
(Code 1969, § 18-25)  
Sec. 18-26. - Fences. 
Regulations for fences are specified in section 18-17. 
(Code 1969, § 18-26)  
Sec. 18-27. - Accessory building and private parking area requirements. 
Regulations for accessory buildings and private parking areas are specified in article 17 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-27)  
Sec. 18-28. - Off-street parking areas. 
Regulations for off-street parking areas are specified in article 16 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-28)  
Sec. 18-29. - Nameplates and signs. 
(a)  Regulations for nameplates and signs are specified in article 19 of this chapter. 
(b)  General regulations. For general regulations, see article 4 of this chapter. 
(c)  Supplemental regulations. For supplemental regulations, see article 18 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-29)  
ARTICLE 7. - RS-10 SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENTIAL ZONE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 18-30. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses in the RS-10 zone shall be all uses permitted in the RS-16 zone. 
(Code 1969, § 18-30)  
Sec. 18-31. - Conditional uses. 
Conditional uses in the RS-10 zone shall be all conditional uses permitted in the RS-16 zone. 
(Code 1969, § 18-31)  
Sec. 18-32. - Transitional uses. 
There shall be no transitional uses in the RS-10 zone. 
(Code 1969, § 18-32)  
Sec. 18-33. - Area requirements. 
The following area requirements shall apply in the RS-16 zone: 
A.  Lot area. Minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet. 
B.  Lot width. All lots shall provide a minimum width of 45 feet at the street right-of-way line, 60 feet at the front building line, and 75 feet at the lot midline. 
C.  Front yard. The building line shall not be less than 50 feet measured from the centerline of the street, when fronting upon a street of less than 50 feet in width; and not less than 25 feet measured from the street line fronting upon a street of 50 feet or more in width. In case of a through lot, the building line on any street or streets shall be determined in the aforesaid manner or as hereinafter required. 
D.  Side yard. Side yards shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width. Buildings other than dwellings and their accessory buildings shall have a side yard on each side of the building of not less than 40 feet in width. A corner lot shall have a side yard along its street side at least 25 feet in width. 
E.  Rear yard. Rear yards shall be the same as specified for RS-16 zone. 
F.  Lot coverage. Lot coverage shall be the same as specified for RS-16 zone. 
(Code 1969, § 18-33)  
Sec. 18-34. - Height limit. 
The height limit of buildings in the RS-10 zone shall be the same as specified for the RS-16 zone. 
(Code 1969, § 18-34)  
Sec. 18-35. - Fences. 
Fence regulations are specified in section 18-17. 
(Code 1969, § 18-35)  
Sec. 18-36. - Accessory building and private parking area requirements. 
Regulations for accessory buildings and private parking areas are specified in article 17 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-36)  
Sec. 18-37. - Off-street parking area. 
Regulations for off-street parking areas are specified in article 16 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-37)  
Sec. 18-38. - Nameplates and signs. 
(a)  Regulations for nameplates and signs are specified in article 19 of this chapter. 
(b)  General regulations. For general regulations, see article 4 of this chapter. 
(c)  Supplemental regulations. For supplemental regulations, see article 18 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-38)  
ARTICLE 8. - RTH TOWNHOUSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The following regulations shall apply in all RTH zones. For general regulations, see article 4 of this chapter. For supplemental regulations, see article 18 of this chapter; however, if the regulations in article 8 conflict with those in article 18, the regulations in article 8 shall govern. 
 
Sec. 18-39. - Statement of purpose. 
(a)  Every type of residential land use requires an appropriate relationship between lot area and density of population and sufficient open space surrounding living quarters to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to ensure privacy; to lessen congestion in the streets; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the over-crowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to preserve the appearance of the community; to facilitate adequate provision for transportation, drainage and other public requirements; to conserve the value of buildings and encourage the most appropriate use of land. The importance of such safeguards increases with land uses which involve higher concentration of population. 
(b)  In enacting the ordinance from which this article is derived, it is the purpose of the Town Council to provide for controlled development of closely spaced, high quality, single-family residential buildings with individual design characteristics and appearances; thereby permitting a higher density use of land, without departing substantially from the predominantly single-family residential character of the existing development in the Town. In order to encourage more attractive site planning and building appearances, the controls provided in this article are flexible in nature, as provided in article 25 of this chapter. It is not the intent of this article to permit the erection of apartment buildings of any type whatsoever. 
(Code 1969, § 18-39)  
Sec. 18-40. - Uses permitted. 
The following uses are permitted in the RTH zone: 
A.  Townhouse group developments shall be permitted subject to approval of a site plan of each development by the Town Council in accordance with section 18-43. 
B.  Townhouse cluster development shall be permitted subject to approval of a site plan of each development by the Town Council in accordance with section 18-43. 
(Code 1969, § 18-40)  
Sec. 18-41. - Conditional uses. 
There are no conditional uses in the RTH zone. 
(Code 1969, § 18-41)  
Sec. 18-42. - Transitional uses. 
There are no transitional uses in the RTH zone. 
(Code 1969, § 18-42)  
Sec. 18-43. - Site plan approval. 
Site plan approval shall be as required by article 25 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-43)  
Sec. 18-44. - General specifications. 
The following general specifications shall apply to the RTH zone: 
A.  The total number of lots shall not cover more than 80 percent of the gross acreage of the development. 
B.  All area and height and parking requirements for townhouse group development and cluster development may be varied, contingent upon an approved site plan. 
C.  A minimum ten percent of the gross acreage of each townhouse development shall be provided in one contiguous parcel of land for common open space, of such location, condition, size and shape to be usable for recreation. Floodplain land shall not be included in said ten percent unless it is of unusual shape and natural beauty, but in any event, the location of said common open space shall be approved by the Town Council. 
D.  Common spaces. 
1.  The common open space and any common parking lot, including any required screening, shall be conveyed to a nonprofit corporation, organized and operated under the laws of the commonwealth. The owner or developer shall present, with the site plan required by article 25 of this chapter, copies of the articles of incorporation of such corporation, its bylaws and an adequately financed plan with effectuating agreements and covenants acceptable to the Town assuring the development and maintenance of the common open space and common parking lots. 
2.  All newly constructed common parking lots, roadways, streets and drives shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements as set forth in the document entitled "Town of Vienna, Virginia Construction Specifications and Construction Details" in effect upon the date of site plan approval. 
3.  The membership of such nonprofit corporation shall consist of all the individual lot owners of the development. 
E.  Common open space, excluding that contained in lots and streets, shall after development in accordance with the site plan, not be denuded, defaced or otherwise disturbed in any manner without the written approval of the Town Council. All common open space including, but not limited to, paved parking areas and driveways, shall be maintained in accordance with standards and regulations from time to time issued by the director of public works with the approval of the Town Council. 
F.  Minimum gross floor area. Gross plan area shall be interpreted as a measure of usable living area exclusive of attic, garage and basement which is more than 50 percent underground. Each townhouse dwelling unit in a series shall have a minimum gross floor area of 1,200 square feet with the average gross floor area within a series to be not less than 1,400 square feet. 
G.  Minimum area permitted, townhouse group development: One contiguous acre, maximum number of lots per gross acre not to exceed eight. Minimum lot size per dwelling unit: 2000 square feet with an average of 2400 square feet of lot area plus 600 square feet incorporated into additional rear yard area which forms a common greenway or pedestrian way at the rear of the development. 
H.  Minimum area permitted, townhouse cluster development: Five contiguous acres, maximum number of lots per gross acre not to exceed ten. Townhouses in a cluster development shall be constructed on lots consisting of a minimum of 2,000 square feet, with an average of 2,400 square feet. 
I.  No more than ten dwelling units shall be constructed in a contiguous series of townhouses. 
J.  Facades, roofs and treatment of external materials shall be submitted as a condition of site plan approval. Not more than two abutting dwelling units and not more than one third of any abutting series of dwelling units shall have the same architectural design or treatment of materials. 
(Code 1969, § 18-44; Ord. of 11-1967; Ord. of 6-18-1979; Ord. of 3-15-1993)  
Sec. 18-45. - Lot width. 
For each dwelling unit in a townhouse development there shall be a minimum lot width of 20 feet for interior lots, 30 feet for end lots, and 40 feet for corner lots. 
(Code 1969, § 18-45)  
Sec. 18-46. - Yard requirements. 
See section 18-44 for yard requirements. 
(Code 1969, § 18-46)  
Sec. 18-47. - Front yard. 
The front yard shall be a minimum of 20 feet and average of 25 feet from the front lot line with not more than two abutting townhouses having the same front yard setbacks. 
(Code 1969, § 18-47)  
Sec. 18-48. - Side yard. 
(a)  For end lots, side yards shall be ten feet. 
(b)  For corner lots, side yards shall be 20 feet. 
(Code 1969, § 18-48)  
Sec. 18-49. - Rear yard. 
The minimum rear yard shall be 40 feet. Decks may encroach into a rear yard, provided that no deck may cause the reduction of any rear yard to less than 28 feet in depth. 
(Code 1969, § 18-49; Ord. of 10-7-2002)  
Sec. 18-50. - Height limit. 
The maximum height of each dwelling unit shall be 2½ stories, but shall not exceed 35 feet. 
(Code 1969, § 18-50)  
Sec. 18-51. - Accessory building and private parking area requirements. 
Accessory buildings and private parking areas shall not be permitted except that on any one lot there may be maintained one tool storage shed not exceeding seven feet in height nor covering more than 64 square feet in area. The rear yard of any townhouse in which any such accessory building is located shall be screened from all adjacent properties by a solid ornamental screening type fence or solid brick or ornamental masonry wall six feet in height. 
(Code 1969, § 18-51; Ord. of 4-1971)  
Sec. 18-52. - Off-street parking area. 
Regulations for off-street parking areas are specified in article 16 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-52)  
Sec. 18-53. - Nameplates and signs. 
Regulations for nameplates and signs are specified in section 18-185. 
(Code 1969, § 18-53)  
Sec. 18-54. - Public utilities. 
All utilities requiring transmission by wires shall be placed underground or under surface except pad-mounted transformers which shall be properly screened. 
(Code 1969, § 18-54)  
ARTICLE 9. - RM-2 MULTIFAMILY, LOW DENSITY ZONE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 18-55. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the RM-2 zone: 
1.  All uses permitted in RS-16 zone. 
2.  Two-family dwellings and multiple-family dwellings, and boardinghouses. 
(Code 1969, § 18-55)  
Sec. 18-56. - Conditional uses. 
All conditional uses permitted in RS-16 zones shall be permitted in the RM-2 zone. 
(Code 1969, § 18-56; Ord. of 10-1987)  
Sec. 18-57. - Transitional uses. 
There are no transitional uses in the RM-2 zone. 
(Code 1969, § 18-57)  
Sec. 18-58. - Area requirements. 
A.  General requirements. 
1.  All single-family detached dwellings shall adhere to the area requirements as specified for the RS-10 zone (see section 18-33). 
2.  All two-family dwellings for purposes of computing area requirements shall be considered as occupying one lot and each such lot shall adhere to the area requirements as specified for the RS-10 zone except the area need not exceed 8,000 square feet. 
B.  Lot area. Every lot shall have a minimum area of 8,000 square feet. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit for multifamily dwellings, including resident employees' dwelling units, shall be 2,000 square feet. 
C.  Lot width. Lot widths shall be a minimum of 70 feet. The minimum width at the street line shall be 40 feet. 
D.  Front yard. Front yards shall be the same as those specified for the RS-16 zone. 
E.  Side yard. Side yards shall be a minimum of 15 feet each in width. Buildings other than dwellings and their accessory buildings shall have a side yard on each side of the building of not less than 25 feet in width. Corner lots shall have a side yard along the street side of at least 25 feet in width. 
F.  Rear yard. Rear yards shall be a minimum of 35 feet in depth. 
G.  Court requirements. No court shall be enclosed by walls on all four sides. A court shall have a width equal to or greater than the height of the adjoining building but in no case shall said width be less than 20 feet. The depth of the court shall not be more than 1½ times its width. 
H.  Multiple-family dwellings. For those projects of more than one building, the front, side, and rear yard requirements for this section shall apply along the boundary lines of the project. The minimum distances between the principal buildings within the project area shall be as follows: 
1.  Where buildings are front to front, or front to rear, two times the height of the taller building, but not less than 70 feet; 
2.  Where buildings are side to side, one times the height of the taller building, but not less than 20 feet; and 
3.  Where buildings are front to side, rear to rear, 1½ times the height of the taller building but not less than 55 feet; provided that where roadways are located between said buildings, the width of such roadway shall be in addition to the above minimum distances between buildings. 
I.  Lot coverage. Lot coverage shall be the same as that specified for RS-16 zone. 
J.  Site plan approval. Site plan approval shall be as required by article 25 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-58)  
Sec. 18-59. - Height limit. 
The maximum height of buildings in the RM-2 zone shall be three stories, but shall not exceed 35 feet above average grade. 
(Code 1969, § 18-59)  
Sec. 18-60. - Accessory building and private parking area requirements. 
Regulations for accessory buildings and private parking areas are specified in article 17 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-60)  
Sec. 18-61. - Off-street parking area. 
Regulations for off-street parking areas are specified in article 16 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-61)  
Sec. 18-62. - Nameplates and signs. 
(a)  Regulations for nameplates and signs are specified in article 19 of this chapter. 
(b)  General regulations. For general regulations, see article 4 of this chapter 
(c)  Supplemental regulations. For supplemental regulations, see article 18 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-62)  
ARTICLE 10. - T TRANSITIONAL ZONE REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— The following regulations shall apply in all T zones. For general regulations, see article 4 of this chapter. Whenever the provisions of this article 10 are more restrictive than, or in conflict with, those of any other article, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
 
Sec. 18-63. - Statement of purpose. 
(a)  Screening between residential and commercial areas of the Town is normally achieved by masonry walls as required by section 18-172. The purpose of the transitional zone is to provide a buffer between residential and commercial areas in limited cases in which zone professional office uses will be permitted that are fully compatible with single-family residential land use. Such uses must, in all cases, promote the appearance, peace, quiet and desirability of the adjacent residential areas. 
(b)  All buildings in the transitional zone shall conform in all material aspects of their external appearance to the dwellings in the adjacent residential zone, especially as to height, size, architecture, treatment and use of materials and landscaping. 
(Code 1969, § 18-63; Ord. of 4-2-1979)  
Sec. 18-64. - Limitation on location. 
Only those land areas in a residential zone (RS-16, RS-12.5, RS-10, RM-2 or RTH), the side or rear lot line of which coincides with the boundary of a commercial or limited industrial zone (C-1, C-1A, C-2 or CM), shall be eligible for reclassification to the T (transitional) zoning category. Such reclassification procedures shall conform to the provisions of article 24 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-64; Ord. of 12-17-1979; Ord. of 7-20-1981)  
Sec. 18-65. - Limitation on depth of zones. 
Only that land lying within 200 feet of the nearest boundary of a C-1, C-1A, C-2 or CM zone shall be eligible for reclassification to the T (transitional) zoning category; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to confer upon any parcel of land so located within 200 feet of a C-1, C-1A, C-2 or CM zone, or upon the owner thereof any special right to such land being reclassified to the T (transitional) category; it is intended that the 200 feet criterion shall be one of limitation and not of entitlement. 
(Code 1969, § 18-65; Ord. of 4-2-1979)  
Sec. 18-66. - Permitted uses. 
A.  The principal offices of medical and dental professionals licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia, attorneys-at-law, architects, real estate brokers, insurance brokers, accountants, consulting engineers, land appraisers, stock brokers, mortgage brokers, teachers and professors offering instruction only, public stenographers, and purely administrative office activities; provided that any such professional or administrative office activities do not involve the storage and parking on the premises of commercial vehicles including trucks, buses, taxis and related equipment, except passenger automobiles required by persons engaged in such office activities. 
B.  Certified massage therapists as defined in this Code. 
(Code 1969, § 18-66; Ord. of 3-20-1995; Ord. of 8-20-2012(1), § 1)  
Sec. 18-67. - Conditional uses. 
None. 
(Code 1969, § 18-67; Ord. of 11-8-1994; Ord. of 8-20-2012(1), § 2)  
Sec. 18-68. - Area requirements. 
The following area requirements shall apply in the T zone: 
A.  Lot area. The lot area shall be the same as that specified for the least restrictive abutting residential zone. 
B.  Lot width. The lot width shall be the same as that specified for the least restrictive abutting residential zone. 
C.  Side yard. The side yard shall be the same as that specified for the least restrictive abutting residential zone. 
D.  Front yard. The front yard shall be the same as that specified for the least restrictive abutting residential zone. 
E.  Lot coverage. The lot coverage shall be the same as that specified for the least restrictive abutting residential zone. 
F.  Height limit. The height limit shall be the same as that specified for the least restrictive abutting residential zone. 
(Code 1969, § 18-68)  
Sec. 18-69. - Off-street parking area. 
The provisions of article 16 of this chapter shall apply to off-street parking in the T zone, except that when deemed appropriate by the planning commission, access driveways and access driveway throats less than 25 feet in width, but not less than 18 feet in width may be permitted. All parking areas in the T zone shall be located at the rear of the principal building and shall comply with the provisions of section 18-136 applicable to parking areas adjoining a residential zone or extending into a residential zone as a transitional use; provided that no lighting standards shall be more than six feet in height and shall not illuminate the parking area at a level greater than that which would be achieved by the use of a single 100 watt incandescent lamp for each four parking spaces provided. 
(Code 1969, § 18-69)  
Sec. 18-70. - Special regulations. 
A.  Every activity, operation or undertaking connected with any business in the T zone except the parking of passenger automobiles shall be wholly conducted within a totally enclosed building which shall conform in all material aspects of its external appearance to the single-family dwellings in the abutting residential zone; especially as to height, size, architecture, treatment and use of materials and landscaping. 
B.  No business in the T zone shall display or create outside of its principal building any evidence of the business use of the premises except the nameplate identification sign permitted by section 18-182. 
C.  No internal combustion engines shall be used in connection with such business, and no electric motors larger than one horsepower shall be used other than for normal domestic uses. 
D.  The business shall emit no sound, vibration, electromagnetic radiation, odor, fumes, gases, smoke, illumination, or noise in excess of that which would be incident to a normal single-family residence. 
E.  No stock of merchandise for sale shall be kept on the premises. No sales shall be made from the premises except those incident to professional services permitted in the T zone. 
F.  No deliveries of supplies or equipment shall be made between 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. to or from the premises. 
G.  No vehicles other than passenger automobiles or passenger station wagons shall be used in connection with any business conducted in the T zone, and there shall be no repair or servicing on the premises of any motor vehicles. 
H.  No business activity shall be conducted which would adversely affect the use, development or enjoyment of adjoining or neighboring residential properties. 
I.  All trash receptacles shall be covered and housed in a completely enclosed structure. 
(Code 1969, § 18-70)  
Sec. 18-71. - Site plan approval. 
A.  Site plan approval shall be as required by article 25 of this chapter. 
B.  General regulations. For general regulations, see article 4 of this chapter. 
C.  Supplemental regulations. For supplemental regulations, see article 18 of this chapter. (Article revised 3-1969) 
(Code 1969, § 18-71)  
ARTICLE 11. - C-1 LOCAL COMMERCIAL ZONE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 18-72. - Permitted uses. 
A.  The following uses shall be permitted in the C-1 zone: 
General business enterprises consisting of sales. 
Home installation services associated with sales. 
Limited repairing, manufacturing, processing or assembly. 
Offices. 
Recreation. 
Restaurants. 
Restaurants, carry-out. 
B.  The uses permitted within the C-1 zone must meet all of the following criteria in addition to all other requirements specified in this article except those hereinafter expressly prohibited and those designated with special conditional limitations: 
1.  The entire operation of the business or activity shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building. 
2.  No sales or services of any kind, type or nature, comprising or relating to the business shall be conducted on the premises outside of a wholly-enclosed building. Nor shall any sales be permitted for consumption on the premises outside of a wholly-enclosed building, with the exception of restaurants, subject to limitations listed under incidental uses. 
3.  No storage or display of merchandise, equipment, or other material will be wholly-permitted outside of an enclosed building, regardless of whether the storage or display area is a public thoroughfare or is privately owned. 
4.  Repairing, processing, manufacturing, washing, drying, dry cleaning, fabricating, forming, finishing or assembly shall be limited to those which are incidental to home consumption or use and services to other commercial enterprises when such services are not performed for or do not result in the resale by the recipient thereof. Such a use, however, shall not be permitted if there is any emission of smoke, odor or noise which is detectable outside of the building beyond the boundaries of the lot on which the building housing such use is located. 
5.  Office buildings, with the exception of the ground floor, shall be occupied solely for professional use or the administrative activities accessory to other than professional uses. No such activity in office buildings shall be considered as a permitted use if it involves storage or parking on the premises of trucks, buses, taxies, equipment, or other commercial vehicles other than passenger automobiles incidental to the professional use or required for the use of persons engaged in the purely administrative activities accessory to the non-professional use. 
6.  No business shall be considered as a permitted use if it involves the killing of poultry or other livestock or the processing of animal products. This restriction shall not include the cutting and preparation of animal products when performed for retail sale on the premises as food for consumption; and the killing or cutting of animals, other than human, incidental to medical practice or medical research. 
7.  Where a building contains office space as well as other commercial enterprises, the applicable criteria in this section for office buildings shall apply to that portion of the building consisting of offices and the other criteria shall apply to the other commercial enterprises. 
C.  Incidental uses. 
1.  In any restaurant, there shall be permitted as an additional incidental use thereto the operation of a bona fide, licensed catering service or a carry-out service, as herein defined, provided either or both such service is conducted wholly within the enclosed structure in which the restaurant is located. 
2.  In any restaurant: 
a.  Meals may be served for consumption on a roof garden of such building or at sidewalk tables directly adjoining such building, subject to the provisions of article 21 of this chapter; and 
b.  Live entertainment and patron dancing may be permitted subject to article 21 of this chapter. 
D.  Commercial group building development. Commercial group building development which shall comply fully with the provisions of section 18-173.1. 
E.  Certified massage therapists as defined in this Code. 
(Code 1969, § 18-72; Ord. of 2-1971; Ord. of 4-22-1974; Ord. of 12-11-2017(2) )  
Sec. 18-73. - Special conditional limitations. 
Residential apartment use shall be permitted where: 
1.  The apartment is located in a building which is principally occupied and used for other uses permitted in section 18-72; 
2.  Such apartments are located on a floor above the street floor of said building; and 
3.  Provided the apartment and buildings in which any such apartments are located shall in addition to the requirements hereof meet all other requirements of law applicable to apartment dwellings. 
(Code 1969, § 18-73; Ord. of 2-1971)  
Sec. 18-73.1. - Conditional uses. 
The following conditional uses shall be permitted in the C-1 zone: 
A.  Bed and breakfast inns. 
B.  Drive-through facilities complying with the application and submittal requirements as set forth in section 18-210. 
(Code 1969, § 18-73.1; Ord. of 4-1-1991; Ord. of 11-8-1994; Ord. of 7-10-1995; Ord. of 2-28-2000)  
Sec. 18-74. - Use permit required. 
A.  Each separate use conducted within a building in the C-1 zone and each accessory use to any such primary use conducted in a building in this zone shall require a separate use permit before such separate primary or accessory use shall be engaged in. 
B.  Restaurants offering live entertainment, including patron dancing, shall be subject to the granting of a conditional use permit. 
C.  Consumption of meals on a roof garden of an enclosed building in which a restaurant is located, or at sidewalk tables directly adjoining such building, shall be subject to the granting of a conditional use permit. 
D.  Motel, hotel and tourist homes. 
E.  Hospitals, sanitariums, clinics and animal hospitals complying with the requirements of section 18-210(O). 
(Code 1969, § 18-74; Ord. of 2-1971; Ord. of 12-6-1971; Ord. of 6-1980)  
Sec. 18-75. - Change of zone. 
Following the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived by the Town Council, no application by any property owner for the rezoning of land in the Town to this zoning classification shall be entertained by the Town Council unless and until such application is accompanied by: 
1.  A detailed written description of the intended use to which such land is to be put; and, 
2.  A site plan of the structure intended to be placed on such land to accomplish the intended use. Such site plan shall conform in all respects to the provisions of article 25 of this chapter. 
3.  Such other assurances that the proposed land use will be accomplished by the applicant as the Town Council may reasonably require. 
(Code 1969, § 18-75)  
Sec. 18-75.1. - Area requirements. 
The following area requirements shall apply in the C-1 zone: 
A.  For buildings hereafter erected and used exclusively for dwelling purposes, see section 18-149. 
B.  Front yard. The front yard shall be measured from the building line to the front property line and shall be not less than 15 feet. Structures in existence at the time of the adoption of this amendment and which previously complied with then existing front yard requirements, shall not hereafter be deemed to be nonconforming solely by virtue of their noncompliance with the front yard requirements of this section. 
C.  All new structures requiring a building permit undertaken subsequent to the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived and all structural renovation, expansion, addition or change to existing structures, requiring a building permit, and undertaken subsequent to the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, whether such structure is conforming or nonconforming on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, where such renovation, expansion, addition or change may reasonably be expected to result in an increase of 50 percent or more in usable floor area of such structure shall be required to conform in every way to the front yard requirements of this section as well as other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Side yard. No side yard is required, except that if the lot adjoins a lot in a residential zone along its side lot line, there shall be a side yard of at least eight feet; and further, each commercial or industrial building with any side wall containing windows or other openings which does not side on a street or alley, shall provide along such wall a side yard of not less than five feet and one foot additional for each story above the first story. 
E.  Rear yard. Rear yards shall be a minimum of 25 feet in depth. 
F.  These area requirements may be modified by the council in accordance with the provisions of section 18-256. 
G.  At least 25 percent of the front yard shall be landscaped. 
1.  Landscaping shall be in accordance with a plan approved by the Town Council after receiving reports and recommendations from the planning commission and the Board of Architectural Review. Landscape maintenance shall be subject to the provision set forth in section 18-173.14. 
2.  An approved landscape plan may be revised with the approval of the Board of Architectural Review. 
(Code 1969, § 18-75.1; Ord. of 11-1-1982; Ord. of 1-3-1983; Ord. of 2-28-1994)  
Sec. 18-75.2. - Height limit. 
The maximum height of any structure in the C-1 zone erected following the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be three stories above ground level, but shall not exceed 35 feet above ground level. (Structures in existence at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived that exceed the above height limit will not be considered nonconforming as to the height limit provision.) 
(Code 1969, § 18-75.2)  
Sec. 18-75.3. - Accessory building and private parking area requirements. 
Accessory building and private parking area requirements for dwellings erected in the C-1 commercial zone shall be as specified in article 17 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-75.3)  
Sec. 18-76. - Off-street parking area. 
A.  Regulations for off-street parking areas are specified in article 16 of this chapter. 
B.  The parking of vehicles belonging to and which are part of the business activity within a building, other than vehicles configured as private passenger cars, may be in an enclosed or partially enclosed building or in the open. Provided, however, that the partially enclosed building or open area shall be so located as to not be visible from the principal street on which the premises face and screened from and adjacent or abutting residential area by an ornamental masonry wall which shall be no less in height than the greatest height of the vehicles to be parked. 
(Code 1969, § 18-76; Ord. of 3-29-1972)  
Sec. 18-77. - Nameplates and signs. 
Regulations for nameplates and signs are specified in article 19 of this chapter, except that freestanding signs as well as standards, banners, flags, streamers and similar devices used for advertising purposes, shall not be permitted in the C-1 zone. 
(Code 1969, § 18-77)  
Sec. 18-78. - Site plan approval. 
(a)  Site plan approval shall be as required by article 25 of this chapter. 
(b)  General regulations. For general regulations, see article 4 of this chapter. 
(c)  Supplemental regulations. For supplemental regulations, see article 18 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-78)  
Sec. 18-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 12. - C-1A SPECIAL COMMERCIAL ZONE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 18-80. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in the C-1A zone: 
A.  All uses permitted in C-1 zones, provided that such uses, when located in the C-1A zone, conform to all provisions of the C-1A zone as well as all specific requirements and limitations provided for such particular use in the C-1 zone. 
B.  The following specified retail stores, shops or businesses shall be permitted, provided that: 
1.  There shall be no manufacturing, compounding, processing, or treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental and essential to a retail store or business and where all such products are sold at retail on the premises; 
2.  Such uses, operations, products that are not objectionable due to odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise, vibrations, or other similar causes; 
3.  Such stores, shops or businesses shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building. 
Auto glass shop. 
Automobile parking lot (public), provided it is developed in accordance with provisions of sections 18-135, 18-136 and 18-137. 
Bowling alley. 
Business college operated as a commercial establishment. 
Blueprinting and photostatting office. 
Catering establishment. 
Certified massage therapist, as defined in this Code. 
Cleaning establishment (limited to retail on premises). 
Department and variety stores. 
Frozen food lockers, excluding wholesale storage. 
Hospitals and sanitariums. 
Newsstands. 
Plumbing shops, if clearly retail. 
Public service, including fire or police station, telephone exchange and the like, as defined and regulated in section 18-13. 
Sign painting shop. 
Theater. 
Loan or credit offices. 
Laboratories. 
Self-service laundries. 
C.  Uses customarily incident to any of the above uses and accessory buildings. 
(Code 1969, § 18-80; Ord. of 2-1971; Ord. of 2-28-2000)  
Sec. 18-81. - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may also be permitted in the C-1A zone subject to securing a use permit as provided for in section 18-209: 
A.  Amusement enterprises or video arcades, if conducted wholly within an enclosed building, provided such building contains at least 1,000 square feet of floor space open to the public and the floor area occupied by mechanical or electronic amusement devices does not exceed five percent of that floor area open to the public. 
B.  Auditoriums and halls. 
C.  Auto sales, new and secondhand; provided, however, that secondhand auto sales will be allowed only where such sales will be made as a normal part of the business of a franchised dealer in new automobiles, and where such secondhand autos are kept upon and sold from the same premises as those upon which the new automobile agency is located. 
D.  Bed and breakfast inns and hotels. 
E.  Drive-through facility complying with the application and submittal requirements as set forth in section 18-210. 
F.  Farm or gardening implement sales and service. 
G.  Taxi stand (only private property). 
(Code 1969, § 18-81; Ord. of 4-4-1983; Ord. of 11-8-1994; Ord. of 7-10-1995)  
Sec. 18-82. - Area requirements. 
The following area requirements shall apply in the C-1A zone: 
A.  For buildings hereafter erected and used exclusively for dwelling purposes, see section 18-149. 
B.  Front yard. The front yard shall be measured from the building line to the front property line and shall be not less than 15 feet. Structures in existence at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived and which previously complied with then existing front yard requirements, shall not hereafter be deemed to be nonconforming solely by virtue of their noncompliance with the front yard requirements of this section. 
C.  All new structures requiring a building permit undertaken subsequent to the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived and all structural renovation, expansion, addition or change to existing structures, requiring a building permit, and undertaken subsequent to the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, whether such structure be conforming or nonconforming on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, where such renovation, expansion, addition or change may reasonably be expected to result in an increase of 50 percent or more in usable floor area of such structure shall be required to conform in every way to the front yard requirements of this section as well as all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Side yard. No side yard is required, except that each commercial or industrial building with any side wall containing windows or other openings which does not side on a street or alley, shall provide along such wall a side yard of not less than five feet and one foot additional for each story above the first story. 
E.  Rear yard. Rear yards shall be a minimum of ten feet. 
F.  At least 25 percent of the front yard shall be landscaped. 
1.  Landscaping shall be in accordance with a plan approved by the Town Council after receiving reports and recommendations from the planning commission and the Board of Architectural Review. Landscape maintenance shall be subject to the provisions as set forth in section 18-173.14. 
2.  An approved landscape plan may be revised with the approval of the Board of Architectural Review. 
(Code 1969, § 18-82; Ord. of 11-1-1982; Ord. of 1-3-1983; Ord. of 2-28-1994)  
Sec. 18-83. - Height limit. 
The maximum height of any structure in the C-1A zone erected following the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be three stories above ground level, but shall not exceed 35 feet above ground level. Structures in existence at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived will not be considered nonconforming as to the height limit provision. This amendment shall not affect the rights of any persons who have filed, prior to the enactment of the ordinance from which this section is derived, preliminary or final site plans for the construction of structures in excess of the height limit provided by this article on property presently zoned C-1A or C-2. 
(Code 1969, § 18-83; Ord. of 4-18-1977; Ord. of 6-6-1977)  
Sec. 18-84. - Accessory building and private parking area requirements. 
Regulations for accessory buildings and private parking areas are specified in article 17 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-84)  
Sec. 18-85. - Off street parking area. 
Regulations for off-street parking areas are specified in article 16 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-85)  
Sec. 18-86. - Nameplates and signs. 
Regulations for nameplates and signs are specified in article 19 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-86)  
Sec. 18-87. - Site plan approval. 
(a)  Site plan approval shall be as required by article 25 of this chapter. 
(b)  General regulations. For general regulations, see article 4 of this chapter. 
(c)  Supplemental regulations. For supplemental regulations, see article 18 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-87)  
ARTICLE 12.1. - C-1B PEDESTRIAN COMMERCIAL ZONE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 18-87.05. - Purpose; intent. 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  The purpose of the C-1B Pedestrian Commercial Zone is to legislatively recognize the distinctive character of the original old Vienna commercial district and to provide for the protection and preservation of the traditional image and history of that unique area as it presently exists and to encourage and enhance future development, utilizing that character and heritage as symbolized by excellence in design, architecture and that period development of the Town in early years while blending private with public development and maintenance of that valuable distinct character. 
2.  In furtherance of the above purposes, the Town has expended substantial sums in capital improvement programs to enhance the utilities, landscaping, streetscaping, public ways and general municipal character of the district in harmony with that character and heritage. 
3.  The Town acknowledges by legislative recognition that, because of the unique traditional nature of the particular district, accomplishment of the intended goals of this article may not always be achieved or be achievable within the strict requirements of this chapter. 
4.  Strict application of the terms of this chapter in general could effectively prohibit achievement of those goals and prevent the most practical, efficient and aesthetic development of area sites in furtherance of the purposes of this article. Therefore, certain modifications, waivers and variations are required to accomplish the intended well-planned development necessary to achieve the desired character. 
B.  Declaration of intent. 
1.  The Town Council has made the legislative determination that the preservation of the existing traditional period character of the zone and the encouragement of future development within the zone in keeping with those same high standards of that Vienna character and heritage is in the best interests of the community, will promote long-term economic growth, encourage the optimum use of the real estate within the zone, attract new business, enhance the tax base of real estate and the taxable value of businesses within the area, encourage employment and commercial growth, and in general benefit the health, safety and welfare of the community as a whole. 
2.  The Town Council declares further that it is in the best interests of the community and the owners of the property within the zone that the goals of this article are best achieved voluntarily through the cooperative efforts of property owners and the Town, and that the historic nature, unique character, and heritage of the area are best preserved without mandatory legislative imposition of historic preservation regulations or districting. Rather, the goals of this article will be best achieved through the prudent exercise of site plan powers enjoyed by the Town's council when the same are merged with the application of the incentive land use principles contemplated by incentive zoning as defined in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2201, by the grant of bonuses in the form of selective site plan modifications by the Town to a developer or property owner in return for that developer or property owner providing within a development, construction or reconstruction, certain predefined design and plan features and amenities desired by the Town and legislatively adopted herein. 
(Code 1969, art. 12.1(intro. ¶))  
Sec. 18-87.1. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the C-1B zone: 
A.  All uses permitted in the C-1A zone except: 
1.  Drive-through operations, either as a primary or incidental operation, shall not be permitted in this zone. 
2.  Automobile sales and service operations shall not be permitted in this zone. 
B.  Bed and breakfast inns shall be a permitted use. 
C.  All uses permitted in this zone shall: 
1.  Be conducted wholly within an enclosed building except that restaurants may provide outdoor seating subject to site plan approval; 
2.  Have no manufacturing, compounding, processing, or treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental and essential to a retail store or business and where all such products are sold as retail on the premises; 
3.  Not be objectionable due to odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise, vibrations, or other similar causes. 
D.  Certified massage therapist shall be a permitted use. 
(Code 1969, § 18-87.1; Ord. of 4-1996; Ord. of 7-12-1999; Ord. of 2-28-2000)  
Sec. 18-87.2. - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in the C-1B zone subject to securing a conditional use permit as provided for in section 18-209: 
A.  Amusement enterprises or video arcades as defined and limited in section 18-81. 
B.  Auditoriums and halls. 
C.  Farm or gardening implement sales and service. 
D.  Hotels. 
E.  Taxi stands (only on private property). 
(Code 1969, § 18-87.2; Ord. of 4-1996; Ord. of 7-12-1999; Ord. of 2-28-2000)  
Sec. 18-87.3. - Area requirements. 
The following area requirements shall apply in the C-1B zone: 
A.  For buildings erected and used exclusively for dwelling purposes, see section 18-149. 
B.  Setbacks: 
1.  Front yard. The front yard setback shall be no less than 15 feet. Any structure in existence at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived may maintain its existing front yard setback, except that any addition, renovation, expansion or change to such structure that will result in an increase of 50 percent or more in usable floor area shall be required to conform to all front yard requirements of this section and all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
2.  Side yard. No side yard setback is required, except each commercial building with any side wall containing windows or other openings, which does not side on a street or alley, shall provide along such wall, a side yard of not less than five feet and one foot additional for each story above the first. 
3.  Rear yard. Rear yard setbacks shall be no less than ten feet. 
C.  Height. Three stories above ground but not to exceed 35 feet. 
1.  Exception for municipal parking structures: A maximum of four levels above ground but not to exceed 50 feet as measured from the primary street facing the structure, excluding any functional or decorative elements on the highest level of the structure. 
a.  Municipal parking structures shall be subject to the specific location, setback, and design requirements of the secondary regulations and bonus modification provisions in sections 18-87.4 through 18-87.6 of the Town Code. 
b.  The façades of municipal parking structures are to be in visual and spatial proportion with the design elements of the Church Street Vision. 
c.  Functional or decorative elements on the highest level of a municipal parking structure may not result in a total height, including these elements, that is more than 115 percent of the permitted building height, nor exceed ten percent of the area of the parking structure footprint. 
d.  All elements of any site plan for municipal parking structures must be approved by the Town Council, after receiving a report and recommendation from the planning commission. Prior to forwarding such recommendation to the Town Council, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing in the manner prescribed in section 18-246. Before considering any such recommendation from the planning commission, the Town Council shall hold a public hearing in the manner as prescribed in section 18-247. 
D.  Landscape. A minimum of 25 percent of the front yard shall be landscaped in accordance with a plan recommended by the planning commission and Board of Architectural Review and approved by the Town Council. Revisions to an approved plan may be approved by the Board of Architectural Review. 
E.  Off-street parking area. Regulations for off-street parking areas are specified in article 16 of this chapter. 
F.  Accessory building and private parking area. Regulations for accessory buildings and private parking areas are specified in article 17 of this chapter. 
G.  Nameplates and signs. Regulations for nameplates and signs are specified in article 19 of this chapter. 
H.  Site plan approval. The site plan control provisions of article 25 of this chapter are applicable to this article except as specifically modified or otherwise provided for in this article. 
I.  General regulations. General regulations are specified in article 4 of this chapter. 
J.  Supplemental regulations. Supplemental regulations are specified in article 18 of this chapter. 
K.  Nonconforming uses and buildings. 
1.  Nonconforming uses are governed by the provisions of article 20 of this chapter. 
2.  Nonconforming structures are governed by the provisions of article 20 of this chapter except that development, construction or reconstruction performed pursuant to the terms of section 18-87.4 shall be deemed conforming in the C-1B zone. 
3.  Conformity of structures acquired solely by this section and compliance with section 18-87.4 shall continue in effect only so long as those design and site features proffered and accepted thereunder continue in strict conformity with the approved site plan or are otherwise amended by revised site plan in compliance with this article. 
Deviation from the strict design and site features of the site plan shall constitute a surrender of the acquired status of conformity, a forfeiture of all bonuses previously granted in return for said design and site features and shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Property owners who, upon notice of violation from the zoning administrator, fail to correct deviations and restore the original, approved design and site features shall thereafter conform the property to the provisions of this section. Appeal from notice of violation of design and site feature requirements from the zoning administrator shall be in writing to the Town Council within 30 days of receipt of such notice of violation and the circuit court as provided by law. Appeals from notice of violations of this section shall be to the board of zoning appeals and the circuit court as provided by law. 
(Code 1969, § 18-87.3; Ord. of 4-1996; Ord. of 7-12-1999; Ord. of 2-28-2000; Ord. of 10-1-2012(2))  
Sec. 18-87.4. - Modification of general regulations. 
A.  The provisions of section 18-87.3.A, B, D, E, F, G, I, and J shall not apply to development, construction or reconstruction in the C-1B zone when, as an incident to that development, construction or reconstruction, adopted building design features and site plan features are voluntarily proffered by the owner or developer, and accepted by the Town in return for the grant of bonus incentives by the Town to and acceptance by the developer or owner through site plan modifications in lieu of the provisions of section 18-87.3. Upon acceptance by the parties, such features and bonuses shall run with the land. 
B.  In addition to modifications authorized by section 18-256, the Town Council is authorized to grant as modifications to site plans in the C-1B zone incentive bonuses as adopted in section 18-87.6 in return for the voluntary proffer and acceptance by an owner or developer of building design features and site plan features provided for in section 18-87.5 when the same are desired by and acceptable to the Town in furtherance of the purposes of this article. 
C.  Modifications consisting solely of those design features, site features and incentive bonuses which have been previously legislated and incorporated by the council into sections 18-87.5 and 18-87.6, respectively, shall not require recommendation of the planning commission prior to granting by the council. 
D.  All modifications shall provide a landscape site plan and for the continual maintenance thereof. 
(Code 1969, § 18-87.4; Ord. of 4-1996; Ord. of 7-12-1999; Ord. of 2-28-2000)  
Sec. 18-87.5. - Building and plan design features. 
(1)  In furtherance of the legislative intent of the C-1B zone and to project continuity in harmony of character in the area, there are hereby adopted the following building design features and site plan features which are declared acceptable for use in development in the C-1B zone in satisfaction of the provisions of section 18-87.4. 
(2)  These features were in their entirety approved by the Board of Architectural Review pursuant to the requirements of chapter 4 prior to their adoption herein and any repeal or amendment of the same in this section must undergo prior review by the board pursuant to chapter 4. 
(3)  The zoning administrator shall present all proposed amendments to this section to the Board of Architectural Review for the board's recommendation to the Town Council prior to presentation of the same to the council. The Board of Architectural Review shall report its recommendations thereon to the council within 30 days of notification by the zoning administrator, and failure to report in such time shall constitute approval of the board. 
A.  Conceptual architectural renderings. 
The renderings contained herein represent a conceptual illustration of the acceptable architecture design and development standards. In brief, adjoining buildings are to be constructed at staggered setbacks along the front property line, parking is to be open between the lots, accessed from a common drive and located behind the buildings, and the architecture shall be reminiscent of turn-of-the-century Vienna, emphasizing street level design and pedestrian oriented spaces. 
Each development shall be proportionate to the other in terms of height, scale and massing. While each building and site is developed independently and may incorporate many eclectic styles and design elements, the overall effect shall be a cohesive and comprehensive architectural area. 
These renderings are not to be interpreted as working drawings, binding illustrations or specific requirements for any building or lot. The written guideline text is the applicable medium and, in the event of conflict between elements in any rendering and the written guideline text, the written guideline text shall prevail. 
 
B.  Building design features. These design guidelines illustrate ways construction may occur which will complement and enhance the Town's character. They are not intended to dictate a particular style but rather offer guidance to the development theme desired in the C-1B Zone. Buildings and developments within the C-1B zone shall incorporate Virginia vernacular and enhance architectural styles that are reminiscent of the Town's history between 1890 and 1930. 
1.  Design goal: To coordinate the visual and architectural characteristics in the C-1B Zone, emphasize Vienna's heritage, and create a pedestrian oriented streetscape. 
2.  Design objectives: 
a.  Preserve the character of the adjacent residential neighborhoods; 
b.  Encourage reinvestment in the area by private property owners and merchants; 
c.  Provide for at-grade separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic through the use of on-street parking, centralized parking and clearly defined walkways. 
d.  Integrate and enhance pedestrian walkways between commercial properties and public parks and lands; 
e.  Maintain the character and heritage of the original historic Presbyterian Church, Freeman House and the Washington and Old Dominion (W&OD) Trail area as an enhanced public focal point and corridor gateway; 
f.  Focus commercial activities, store fronts and signage at the pedestrian level. 
3.  Design policies: 
a.  Continue the undergrounding of individual building utility connections; 
b.  Coordinate private development with the municipal Church Street streetscape project design elements; 
c.  Encourage shared and public automobile parking facilities and non-motorized transportation alternatives. 
4.  General design requirements: 
a.  Architectural styles for new buildings or the remodeling or renovation of existing buildings will be chosen from recommended characteristics shown in the conceptual architectural renderings appearing herein at [section] 18-87.5 A and Town history and enhance the character of the Church Street corridor. 
b.  Building additions shall be compatible with the conceptual architecture and provide compatible details, scale, voids, materials and colors. 
c.  The lower level of buildings shall offer a front design that is conducive to pedestrian activity and interest. 
d.  Visual interest shall be provided along the street and pedestrian ways, such as entrances, display windows, landscape areas and outdoor seating. 
e.  Primary customer entrances shall be designed and focused on the street front. Such entrances must be maintained and accessible as an entrance at all times. Any secondary entrance must mimic the materials and design of the primary entrance. 
f.  Arcades are encouraged along the first floor of corner buildings but may not be used more frequently than every three store fronts or 80 feet. 
g.  Solid walls, dull or minimal facades will not be designed along streets or pedestrian ways. 
h.  Building heights shall be compatible with adjacent buildings and the topography of the site and in compliance with the conceptual architectural renderings. 
i.  Building setbacks of in-fill structures shall be consistent with neighboring structures and in compliance with staggered setback requirements. 
j.  The width and proportion of building facades shall be compatible with the overall scale of the neighborhood. Where multiple developments are proposed, the development proposal shall create the feeling of architectural proportionality through exterior facade design. 
k.  Courtyard style arrangements of buildings are encouraged along the W&OD Trail and at other suitable locations to emphasize pedestrian access and minimize automobile importance. 
l.  Parking shall be designed to the rear of the lot when possible. When adjoining another lot with abutting parking, the lots will be integrated and opened to each other when practical. 
m.  Landscaping shall be included around the parking facilities to ease their appearance in compliance with the submitted landscape plan. 
n.  Landscape areas shall be used to enhance the buildings situation and orientation on a lot. 
o.  Safe, convenient walkways shall be identified by paver materials that coordinate with the public sidewalks within the public street right-of-way. 
p.  Lots in the C-1B zone on the southern side of Church Street shall encourage pedestrian access to Maple Avenue by sidewalks or paths through the lots, tying the commercial corridors together both visually and physically. 
q.  Signs shall be integrated into the design of the building. They shall not interfere with the architectural integrity or features of the building and meet the sign design guidelines of this section. 
r.  Exposed neon shall not be visible from the street, regardless of form, size or interior location; it shall not be used as a building detail, decorative accent or signage. 
s.  Materials used for construction will be consistent with the provisions of [section] 18-87.5 I. 
t.  Vinyl siding may not be used below the second floor on any wall or surface visible from a public way. Aluminum siding and buildings primarily of glass are prohibited. 
u.  Awnings or canopies may only be used in restaurant areas with outdoor patron seating. 
v.  Awnings and/or canopies will be made of fabric. Vinyl or plastic awnings or canopies are not permitted. 
w.  Building equipment, such as generators and air conditioning units shall be screened from view in a manner compatible with the site and using materials similar to the building and harmonious with the design. 
C.  Conceptual plan. The following rendering is a conceptual site plan with identified design elements satisfying section 18-87.5 B. It should not be interpreted as a working drawing, binding illustration or specific requirement for any building or lot. The written guideline text is the applicable medium and in the event of any conflict between elements in the conceptual site plan and the written guideline text, the written guideline text shall prevail. 
 
D.  Building setbacks and siting. Buildings shall be constructed to meet the following setbacks and siting criteria: 
Buildings shall be placed forward on a lot to create a continuous street block. Buildings shall have a relationship to adjacent buildings and facades that creates a staggered building line along the street, consistent with the following criteria. 
All setbacks shall be measured from the property line. 
1.  Front yard setbacks: 
Corner lots must have a front yard setback of at least ten feet from the street. Interior lots must alternate the front yard setbacks using one of the following: 
Five feet; 
Seven feet, eight inches; or 
Ten feet, four inches. 
The nearest two feet to the face of the building shall be used as a landscape strip or planter, except when the front yard is designed as a courtyard or patio. 
No front yard setback may be continuously extended for more than a distance of 40 linear feet, whether such distance is across a single or adjoining lot. 
2.  Side yard setbacks: Corner lots must have a side yard setback of at least five feet from the street. Interior lots may have a zero side yard along the street level, provided there are no windows on the side walls at the street level. 
 
3.  Front setback and landscape area requirement: 
a.  A five-foot brick sidewalk shall be constructed along the front property line adjoining the public planter and sidewalk to create a divided double sidewalk. A landscaped area may be used instead, if a double sidewalk is inappropriate to the intended use of the building. 
b.  Except when the front yard is designed as a courtyard or patio, a landscape strip or planter shall be constructed between the building and the above-mentioned sidewalk. For buildings with the minimum setback, the planter or landscape strip must be at least two feet in width and placed adjacent to the building. The intent of this requirement is to create a green space of varying width between the sidewalks and the building. 
Siting: 
 
NOT RECOMMENDED, 
Parking is located in front of the buildings 
 
RECOMMENDED 
Parking is located behind the buildings which are pushed forward on the lot; Parking along the side of the building is screened by a wall; Parking is shared between properties and parking lots cross property lines. 
E.  Facade proportion and street level continuity. The width and proportion of building facades (the relationship of a building's width to its height) shall be consistent with adjacent buildings. Buildings with a street front longer than 40 feet shall be architecturally designed and situated on the site to create the impression of multiple facades with staggered setbacks as set out in section 18-87.5 D. Buildings should not be set back beyond the front building setbacks established in section 18-87.5 D nor be situated to create a street front setback longer than 40 feet. 
 
RECOMMENDED, 
Compatible facade proportion 
 
NOT RECOMMENDED, 
Facade too long 
F.  Street level vitality. The street level of new and in-fill buildings, plazas, courtyards or other space and structures that face the street shall provide a primary pedestrian access and orient their design toward the street. 
 
Height 
Maximum height is 35 feet measured from the average grade of the lot. In-fill buildings shall be of a compatible height with adjacent buildings whenever possible. 
 
G.  Specific design requirements. 
1.  First-story roofs shall have a minimum slope of 6:12. 
2.  Window centerlines shall be aligned whenever possible. 
3.  Cornices shall be aligned whenever possible. 
4.  Stucco may be used no nearer than two feet, eight inches to the base of the building. The building base, up to a height of two feet eight inches above grade, should be constructed of brick or stone with a water table; split face block is acceptable upon review. 
5.  EIFS, or any like material, may only be used above the first floor. 
6.  Mansard roofs are not permitted. 
H.  Floor to area ratio. 
1.  The maximum floor to area ratio (FAR) shall not exceed 0.7 for any lot and only upon accommodating both site and building design criteria. 
2.  Floor to area ratio is defined as the ratio of total floor area on a lot divided by the total lot area (FAR = total floor area/total lot area). 
3.  Total floor area is defined as the interior space of all floors of a building minus stairways, elevators, and attics or cellars with a ceiling height of six feet or less. 
I.  Building materials. The following rendering identifies construction materials and architectural elements included in the C-1-B zone. It shall not be interpreted as a working drawing, binding illustration or specific requirement for any building or lot. The written guideline text is the applicable medium and in the event of any conflict between elements in any rendering and the written guideline text by the written guideline text shall prevail. 
 
J.  Parking and circulation requirements. 
Parking shall be designed to the rear of the lot when possible. Where parking can only be located on the side of building, it must be screened from the principal pedestrian way by a low wall that integrates into the adjoining building or by the use of low hedges or other appropriate landscaping. 
When adjoining another lot with abutting parking, the lots shall be integrated and opened to each other. In order to achieve the requirements of this section, reserved parking may be prohibited by site plan approval except for one reserved space for the owner or manager of the site. 
These requirements shall in no way be permitted to delete otherwise lawfully required handicapped spaces. 
Landscaping shall be included around the parking facilities to ease their appearance when possible. 
All lots developed as part of the C-1B zone using the approved design guidelines shall provide shared parking with other lots developed under the C-1B zone design guidelines unless prevented by an adjoining lot or lots not developed under the approved design guidelines. 
1.  Standard parking spaces: 
a.  All parking shall be provided at a net ratio of one space per 600 square feet of total floor area. 
b.  Standard parking spaces shall measure nine by 18 feet. 
c.  Parking aisles shall have a minimum width of 22 feet. 
2.  Compact parking spaces: 
a.  40 percent of provided parking spaces may be compact in size. 
b.  Compact parking spaces shall measure seven feet six inches by 16 feet. 
3.  Access ways and easements: 
a.  Access ways shall be developed within existing rights-of-way when possible, including existing, undeveloped alleys within the C-1B zone. When public rights-of-way or alleys are not available, access ways shall be established through dedicated public access easements specifying they are for public access purposes. 
b.  Access easements shall meet fire codes and standards for one- and two-way traffic as determined and identified on the access way map. 
c.  Additional public access easements may be required adjacent to existing rights-of-way or alleys to meet the fire code standards. 
4.  Lighting: Lighting standards shall be no more than ten feet in height above grade and shall be so arranged and hooded as to confine all direct light rays entirely within the boundaries of the parking areas. Lighting fixture designs shall be harmonious with the general architectural nature of the building or site. 
 
K.  Design guidelines for signs. Signs shall provide a coordinated image between signs and buildings and provide adequate exposure for the businesses. 
1.  General sign design requirements. 
a.  Signs shall be integrated into the design of the building and shall not interfere with the architectural integrity or features of the building. 
b.  Exterior signs shall face public thoroughfares or rear parking lots. 
c.  Signs may not be placed nearer to a window or door than a distance equal to the width of any molding surrounding the window or door. In the event there is no molding, the sign shall not be placed nearer to the edge of a window or door than four inches. 
d.  Multiple panel signs shall be designed to create a harmonious overall impression. 
e.  Exterior signs shall have an element of "three-dimensionality." 
2.  Content and layout. 
a.  Sign text may only include the business name as the same is stated on the business license, except that a "trading as" (T/A) or "doing business as" (DBA) identity is acceptable. Either a tag line or three descriptive or informational items are also permitted. A trademark, or logo may be incorporated into the sign design provided the same conforms as to this provision. Telephone and facsimile numbers, Internet and electronic mail (E-mail) addresses, and prices may not be displayed on any sign. 
b.  Sign design and copy shall serve the primary purpose of business identification. Colors shall be used appropriately for the architecture, business identification and design elements. Designs and colors shall not be used for product advertisement. 
c.  Store hours may only be posted on an additional unilluminated sign no larger than 1½ square feet and placed adjacent to any public entrance. 
d.  Sign layouts shall be centered within the sign area such that there is a border space around the entire sign with a width equal to ten percent of the total sign width. 
e.  Sign designs and letter forms shall be professionally prepared. 
3.  Materials. 
a.  Materials for signs will be consistent with the building architecture and section 18-87.5 I. 
b.  Signs shall be made of predominately natural materials such as wood, metal or stone. 
c.  Synthetic materials, including plastic and sign foam, may be used only when it is finished to appear as a natural material. 
d.  Unpainted plastic, molded plastic letters and vinyl leaf shall not be used. 
e.  Glass beads or sand maybe used to add texture. 
f.  Only genuine metallic leaf products in gold or silver and Palladium leaf (a.k.a. Dutch Metal) may be used. 
4.  Lighting. 
a.  Signs may be illuminated by reflected light only. 
b.  Signs may not be internally illuminated or use any exposed neon tubing. 
c.  Signs may be illuminated only by external spot lighting; such light fixtures to be architecturally part of the structure. 
5.  Open signs. 
a.  Each business may place one sign reading "open" in a store window facing a public thoroughfare or parking lot. 
d[b].  "Open" signs may not exceed 1½ square feet, may not be internally illuminated and may not be made of neon. 
6.  Window signs. Only the following window signs will be permitted: 
a.  One permanent window sign for each business, lettered on the inside of the glass with no background color, no larger than 25 percent of each window area of the window in which it is placed and made of either gold leaf, silver leaf or white individual letters. 
b.  The area of a window sign will be calculated by measuring the outer edge of the overall sign image. 
c.  Temporary window signs may not cover more than ten percent of any window area in which it is placed. Temporary window signs may not stay up for more than 30 days at one time and there may be no more than four such signs posted in any one calendar year. 
7.  Facade signs. 
a.  Facade signs may not interfere with or interrupt building details or openings and shall be designed in coordination with the structure. Facade signs include any wall mounted sign facing the front street, rear customer entrance or other public way. 
b.  A total of two square feet of facade signage is permitted for each linear foot of building frontage. Such sign area is to be shared by all tenants or tenant spaces within the building. 
c.  Facade signs may be placed flat or perpendicular against any building side that fronts a parking lot or public thoroughfare. 
d.  Facade signs must be permanently and securely attached to the building. 
e.  Facade signs must be reinforced with a continuous metal band around the outer edge of the sign. 
f.  Facade signs shall be below the trim fascia or gutter line. 
g.  Facade signs shall not eclipse the roofline. 
h.  Facade signs may be illuminated only by external spot lighting; such light fixtures to be architecturally part of the structure. 
i.  Perpendicular signs may not project more than four feet from the building facade, may not over-hang the property line, and may not interfere with pedestrian traffic or the building's architectural elements. 
8.  Canopy signs. Canopy signs may only be placed flat along the canopy valance. 
9.  Freestanding signs. 
a.  More than one freestanding sign may be erected per building but may not over-hang the property line or interfere with pedestrian traffic or the building's architectural elements. 
b.  A freestanding sign may be no larger than 24 square feet per building. 
10.  Sign prohibitions. The following signs are prohibited: 
a.  A-frame or sandwich board signs; 
b.  Billboards; 
c.  Signs which involve motion or rotation of any part, or display flashing, strobe, or intermittent lights; 
d.  Signs generating amplified sound, smoke, vapor particle emission or objectionable odors; 
e.  Standards, banners, flags, streamers and similar devices, except for national, state or local governmental flags and temporary banners approved by the zoning administrator pursuant to section 18-178 A.6; 
f.  Exposed neon visible from the street regardless of form, location or message, including signs reading "open"; 
g.  Shopping center style directory signs for multiple tenants. 
11.  Additional sign restrictions. 
a.  Signs shall not be placed or used to compete for automobile visibility. 
b.  Real estate, "for sale" and "for rent" signs may only be placed in the windows of the building to which the signs pertain. Such signs may not be placed in outdoor locations and may be up only so long as the space is for rent or sale. 
c.  Signs may not use fluorescent colors, paint additives such as "pearl" or "metal flake" reflective sheeting, or refractive metallic films, including gold leaf vinyl sheeting. 
d.  Signs may not be placed or erected upon the roof of any building. 
e.  Signs may not be plainly offensive to human sensibilities or otherwise provide a reasonably foreseeable detriment to the community. 
12.  Sign examples. The following pages provide examples of signs that illustrate the design elements, styles, colors and materials required in the C-1B zone. 
 
 
 
 
 
L.  Design guidelines for open space. 
1.  Outside display. 
a.  Vending machines. Vending machines may not be placed outside of a wholly enclosed building or shelter. 
b.  Dumpsters. Trash, recycling and any other refuse collection dumpsters shall be located at the rear of the property and either screened, enclosed or otherwise blocked from public view. Such screening or enclosure shall be designed in conjunction with the primary building, shall use similar materials and shall provide complete obscurity of the dumpster. The screen or enclosure shall have double doors. Chainlink fencing may not be used. 
2.  Sidewalks. 
a.  Sidewalks in the identified C-1B zone area shall be paved with coordinating pavers and designed to match the existing pattern established along the Church Street corridor. 
b.  Brick pavers shall be used in a coordinating pattern to widen the public sidewalk as they adjoin private sidewalks. 
c.  Sidewalks in the public right-of-way shall be constructed the full width of the lot and shall connect with existing sidewalk sections. 
d.  Sidewalks shall be clearly identified and shall connect the building entrance with the public sidewalks. 
e.  Whenever possible, sidewalk patterns and pavers shall extend between the C-1B zone area and adjoining commercial properties to provide a visual connection between the commercial areas of Town and clearly delineating pedestrian space from automobile space. 
f.  A five-foot brick sidewalk shall be constructed along the front property line adjoining the public planter and sidewalk to create a divided double sidewalk. A landscaped area may be used instead, if a double sidewalk is inappropriate to the intended use of the building. 
g.  Except when the front yard is designed as a courtyard or patio, a landscape strip or planter shall be constructed between the building and the above-mentioned sidewalk. For buildings with the minimum setback, the planter or landscape strip must be at least two feet in width and placed adjacent to the building. The intent is to create a green space of varying width between the sidewalk and the building. 
3.  Landscaping and trees. 
a.  Landscape islands shall use "mountable" curbs with a three to four inch curb rise. 
b.  Landscape islands shall be a minimum of four feet in width and edged by a "mountable" curb. 
c.  Trees shall be used to enhance the open space areas and parking lots and shall be maintained in good condition by the property owner. 
d.  Trees shall be selected so that they are resilient to pollution and drought, do not produce berries or fruit and have deep root growth so they do not upheave the sidewalks or planters. 
e.  Every landscape island five feet or more in length shall hold at least one tree and additional trees shall be planted within the island, for the full length of the island, so the ten-year canopy of each tree will touch edge-to-edge. 
f.  Tree plants shall be a minimum of four inch caliper and meet the specifications of the American Association of Nurserymen. 
g.  Forty percent of the landscape island area shall be planted with vegetation in addition to trees and shall be maintained in good condition by the property owner. 
h.  The planting of trees shall be done in accordance with either the standardized landscape specifications jointly adopted by the Virginia Nurserymen's Association, the Virginia Society of Landscape Designers and the Virginia Chapter of the American Society of Landscape Architects, or the road and bridge specifications of the Virginia Department of Transportation. 
 
4.  Lighting. Lighting standards shall be no more than ten feet in height above grade and shall be so arranged and hooded as to confine all direct light rays entirely within the boundaries of the property. Indirect and low ground-oriented lighting should be used whenever possible. Lighting fixture designs shall be harmonious with the general architectural nature of the building or site. 
5.  Retaining walls and fences. 
a.  All retaining walls, fences, and screening between zoning districts shall be constructed to the following required design using the following required materials and colors. 
b.  A six-foot-tall masonry wall is required between any lot zoned single-family residential and any commercially zoned property, including lots and public access ways in the C-1B zone. Such wall shall be constructed and maintained along the property line but on the side of the commercial land or access way. Such wall shall be constructed by the developer and maintained as part of the property. 
NOTE: The following drawing represents the required design style for a masonry wall. The drawing should not be interpreted to be structurally detailed. Any masonry screen or retaining wall should reflect the same exterior design detail but will require additional structural engineering by an appropriately licensed professional. 
 
(Code 1969, § 18-87.5; Ord. of 4-1996; Ord. of 7-12-1999; Ord. of 2-28-2000)  
Sec. 18-87.6. - Bonus modification. 
The following are acceptable bonus incentives which may be granted as site plan modifications by the Town Council in return for an owner or developer providing building design and site plan features desired by and acceptable to the Town and as adopted by section 18-87.5. 
A.  Bonus incentives. 
1.  Increase building footage and lot coverage. 
2.  Modification of lot coverages in general. 
3.  Reduce front, rear, and side building setbacks. 
4.  Modification to required number, size and location of parking spaces. 
No modification, variance, or waiver to use or maximum height restriction requirements may be permitted. 
(Code 1969, § 18-87.6; Ord. of 4-1996; Ord. of 7-12-1999; Ord. of 2-28-2000)  
ARTICLE 13. - C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 18-88. - Permitted uses. 
A.  All uses permitted in C-1 or C-1A zones are permitted in the C-2 zone, provided that such uses when located in a C-2 zone conform to all provisions of the C-2 zone and provided that such uses are not designated as conditional uses in the C-2 zone as well as all specific requirements and limitations provided for such particular use in the C-1 and C-2 zones. 
B.  The following specified retail stores, shops or businesses shall be permitted, provided that: 
1.  There shall be no manufacture, compounding, processing or treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental and essential to a retail store or business and where all such products are sold at retail on the premises. 
2.  Such uses, operations and products are not objectionable due to odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise, vibrations, or other similar causes. 
Automobile service station; 
Automobile tire sales and service (such use not to include recapping or retreading on the premises); 
Feed or fuel store wholly within an enclosed building; 
Wholesale merchandising broker, excluding wholesale storage. 
C.  Uses customarily incident to section 18-73 are permitted in the C-2 zone. 
D.  Certified massage therapists are permitted in the C-2 zone. 
(Code 1969, § 18-88; Ord. of 2-1971; Ord. of 2-28-2000)  
Sec. 18-89. - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may also be permitted in the C-2 zone, subject to securing a use permit as provided for in section 18-209: 
A.  Adult bookstores, adult mini-motion picture theaters and establishments offering for sale, lease or rental adult oriented motion pictures, videotapes, discs, or cassettes, or photographs. In consideration of such applications, the board of zoning appeals shall apply standards for special permit uses contained in section 18-209. In addition, the board of zoning appeals shall be precluded from issuing the said use permit if the location does, in fact, abut a residentially zoned or residentially used property or is located closer than 1,000 feet from any church or school; and provided further that no two such adult bookstores or mini-theaters may be located closer than 1,000 feet from each other. Nothing contained herein shall be construed in any way to limit the application of any state statute relating to obscenity or relating to distribution of materials to juveniles. 
B.  Amusement enterprises or video arcades, if conducted wholly within an enclosed building, provided such building contains at least 1,000 square feet of floor space open to the public and the floor area occupied by amusement enterprises does not exceed five percent of that floor area open to the public. 
C.  Auditoriums and halls. 
D.  Auto sales, new and secondhand; provided, however, that secondhand auto sales will be allowed only where such sales are made as a normal part of the business of a franchised dealer in new automobiles, and where such secondhand autos are kept upon and sold from the same premises as those upon which the new automobile agency is located. 
E.  Bed and breakfast inns and hotels. 
F.  Drive-through facility complying with the application and submittal requirements as set forth in section 18-210. 
G.  Farm or gardening implement, sales and service. 
H.  Fortunetellers, clairvoyants and practitioners of palmistry and phrenology, provided: 
(1)  The same shall be at all times conducted in such a manner as to be fully open to public observation and scrutiny. 
(2)  No housekeeping, cooking or sleeping quarters or facilities shall be maintained in, on, or about the premises; nor shall such use be conducted as a home occupation under any circumstances. 
(3)  No other business shall be conducted or service rendered on the premises. 
(4)  No persons ever having been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude shall be employed therein. 
(5)  Daily records shall be maintained listing the name and address of each customer or client, the service performed and the charge therefor. Such records shall be kept for a period of three years and shall be open to inspection and examination by authorized representatives of the Town. 
I.  Minute car wash stations. 
J.  Pet shops. 
(Code 1969, § 18-89; Ord. of 5-10-1971; Ord. of 1-5-1976; Ord. of 6-6-1977; Ord. of 4-20-1981; Ord. of 6-15-1981; Ord. of 4-4-1983; Ord. of 11-8-1994; Ord. of 7-10-1995; Ord. of 2-28-2000)  
Sec. 18-90. - Area requirements. 
The following area requirements apply in the C-2 zone: 
A.  For buildings hereafter erected and used exclusively for dwelling purposes, see section 18-149. 
B.  Front yard. The front yard shall be measured from the building line to the front property line and shall be not less than 15 feet. Structures in existence at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived and which previously complied with then-existing front yard requirements, shall not hereafter be deemed to be nonconforming solely by virtue of their noncompliance with the front yard requirements of this section. 
C.  All new structures requiring a building permit undertaken subsequent to the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived and all structural renovation, expansion, addition or change to existing structures requiring a building permit, and undertaken subsequent to the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, whether such structure be conforming or nonconforming on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, where such renovation, expansion, addition or change may reasonably be expected to result in an increase of 50 percent or more in usable floor area of such structure, shall be required to conform in every way to the front yard requirements of this section as well as all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Side yard. No side yard is required except that each commercial or industrial building with any side wall containing windows or other openings which does not side on a street or alley, shall provide along such wall a side yard of not less than five feet and one foot additional for each story above the first story. 
E.  Rear yard. Rear yards shall be a minimum of ten feet. 
F.  At least 25 percent of the front yard shall be landscaped. 
1.  Landscaping shall be in accordance with a plan approved by the Town Council after receiving reports and recommendations from the planning commission and the Board of Architectural Review. Landscape maintenance shall be subject to the provisions as set forth in section 18-173.14. 
2.  An approved landscape plan may be revised with the approval of the Board of Architectural Review. 
(Code 1969, § 18-90; Ord. of 11-1-1982; Ord. of 1-3-1983; Ord. of 2-28-1994)  
Sec. 18-91. - Height limit. 
The maximum height of any structure erected following the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be three stories above ground level, but shall not exceed 35 feet above ground level. Structures in existence at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived will not be considered nonconforming as to the height limit provision. This amendment shall not affect the rights of any persons who have filed, prior to the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, preliminary or final site plans for the construction of structures in excess of the height limit provided by this chapter on property presently zoned C-1A or C-2. 
(Code 1969, § 18-91; Ord. of 4-18-1977; Ord. of 6-6-1977)  
Sec. 18-92. - Accessory building and private parking area requirements. 
Regulations for accessory buildings and private parking areas are specified in article 17 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-92)  
Sec. 18-93. - Off-street parking area. 
Regulations for off-street parking areas are specified in article 16 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-93)  
Sec. 18-94. - Nameplates and signs. 
Regulations for nameplates and signs are specified in article 19 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-94)  
Sec. 18-95. - Site plan approval. 
(a)  Site plan approval shall be as required by article 25 of this chapter. 
(b)  Maintenance of site. Following completion and approval by the Town of on-site improvements pursuant to any approved site plan, all such on-site improvements required by and included on that site plan shall be maintained in strict compliance with that site plan until such site plan is amended after first obtaining Town approval as provided in article 25 of this chapter. 
(c)  General regulations. For general regulations, see article 4 of this chapter. 
(d)  Supplemental regulations. For supplemental regulations, see article 18 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-95; Ord. of 11-1986)  
ARTICLE 14. - CMP INDUSTRIAL PARK ZONE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 18-95.25. - Applicability and purpose. 
A.  The purpose of the CMP Industrial Park Zone is to provide a protective zone for a park-like development of industry that is based on the performance of an industry as well as on the type of industry. This zone is intended to be located in areas which are not feasible for light of heavy industrial developments because of proximity to residential uses or other conditions. The regulations of this zone are intended to encourage development compatible with surrounding or abutting residential districts, with suitable open spaces, landscaping, and parking areas. To these ends, development is limited to a low concentration; external effects are limited; and permitted uses are confined to those administrative, research, and manufacturing activities which can be carried on in an unobtrusive manner, and to certain facilities which are necessary to serve the employees of the district. 
B.  These regulations have been established so as to provide a healthful operating environment for industry, while preventing detrimental effects to the use or development of adjacent properties or the general neighborhood; to protect industries within the district from the adverse effect of other incompatible industries, and at the same time to reduce to a minimum the impact of industries on surrounding nonindustrial land uses; and to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents or workers in the area. 
( Ord. of 4-27-15, § 1 ) 
Editor's note— An ordinance of April 27, 2015 , renumbered § 18-95.1 as § 18-95.25.  
Sec. 18-96. - Permitted uses. 
Any of the following uses, to be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except off-street parking and loading, shall be permitted uses in the CMP zone, provided such uses meet performance standards set forth hereinafter: 
A.  Professional, executive, and administrative offices. 
B.  Research, experimental, or testing laboratories. 
C.  Assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radios and phonographs, including the manufacture of small parts only, such as coils, condensers, transformers, and crystal holders. 
D.  Other assembly, limited manufacturing or other uses which fulfill the conditions and standards of this article, when located and arranged according to a plan providing for aesthetic and other conditions in harmony with the neighborhood and approved by the Town Council after receiving report and recommendation thereon from the planning commission. 
E.  Uses customarily incident to any of the uses listed in subsections A through D of this section when located on the same lot, provided that such uses, operations, or products are not objectionable due to odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration, or other similar causes. 
F.  Accessory buildings when located on the same lot. 
G.  A residence related to the use allowed in this zone, such as janitor or night watchman. Any such residence shall meet the requirements of the RM-2 or this zone, whichever are more restrictive. 
H.  Facilities operated by and within an industrial establishment within the zone primarily for its own employees, such as snack bars or cafeterias, or employees' recreational facilities, provided they meet the criteria set forth in section 18-72 A.2b. 
(Code 1969, § 18-96; Ord. of 2-1971)  
Sec. 18-97. - Conditional uses. 
There are no conditional uses in the CMP zone. 
(Code 1969, § 18-97)  
Sec. 18-98. - Area requirements. 
The following area requirements apply in the CMP zone: 
A.  Any tract of land zoned CMP (industrial park) shall have a minimum area of 50 acres except that a tract with an area of not less than ten acres shall be permitted where such tract adjoins and has a common boundary with a CMP zone. Within any CMP zoned area, each main building erected, together with its accessory buildings, shall be located on a lot having an area of at least two acres, with the exception of public utility buildings and structures necessary for public convenience and service, which may be located on a lot having an area of one acre, subject to the approval of the Town Council upon consideration of the necessity of the exception; and provided that the lot is of sufficient size that all provisions of this article may be fulfilled. 
B.  Required yards and landscaped areas. No principal or accessory building shall be located: 
1.  Less than 50 feet from the front, rear, or side lot line. 
2.  Less than 100 feet from the boundary of any residential zone. 
3.  Less than the following minimum distances from the street right-of-way line or proposed street right-of-way of the following types of streets or highways as designated by proper governmental authority: 
Freeway or express highway 	100 feet 
Other primary highways 	75 feet 
Connecting or secondary (arterial) highway 	75 feet 
From a local street within the industrial park zone 	50 feet 
 
No parking area shall be located: 
(a)  Less than 50 feet from a lot line fronting on a public street. 
(b)  Less than 15 feet from any side or rear lot line; provided that the Town Council may waive this requirement. 
(c)  Less than 50 feet from any residential zone. 
C.  Landscaping. 
1.  The required yards set forth in subsection B of this section shall be landscaped in accordance with a plan approved by the Town Council after receiving report and recommendation of the planning commission as set forth in section 18-116. 
2.  Landscaping shall mean the planting of grass, shrubs, trees, and other comparable ground cover, as well as the provision of ornamental masonry walls where required. To protect the abutting contiguous uses, a protective strip of land bordering the external boundaries and along any frontage on public rights-of-way and devoted to the planting, cultivation, growing, and maintenance of sight-obscuring trees, shrubs, and plant life shall be established and maintained. The maintenance guarantee of such protective strips and the planned landscaping of the site may be bonded to the Town in a reasonable amount if required by the Town Council. 
D.  Planting screens. All planting screens or walls required in section 18-101 shall be located abutting parking areas rather than on the periphery of the lot. 
E.  Frontage. Each lot shall have a minimum frontage of 150 feet on a street or private way; provided, however, that the Town Council may approve a lesser frontage to a minimum of 100 feet for lots located on culs-de-sac or on street curves or having other extraordinary characteristics. 
F.  Lot coverage. Not more than 25 percent of the area may be covered by buildings, including accessory buildings. 
G.  Spacing between buildings. No building other than an accessory building shall be located closer than 50 feet to any other building. 
(Code 1969, § 18-98; Ord. of 3-20-1972)  
Sec. 18-99. - Height limit. 
The maximum height for any structure in the CMP zone shall be 45 feet, except that accessory structures may be of a greater height, provided such greater height is approved by the Town Council after obtaining a report and recommendation from the planning commission. 
(Code 1969, § 18-99)  
Sec. 18-100. - Outside storage. 
A.  Raw materials and supplies and finished or semi-finished products may, if properly screened from streets and any abutting property by landscaping, or ornamental masonry walls, be stored in the open within the setback requirement for the area. When ornamental masonry walls are used for screening, they shall be solid and at least six feet in height, and of a minimum height equal to the material stored. Outdoor storage facilities shall not occupy more than five percent of the area of the lot. 
B.  Fuel storage tanks utilized as part of the heating equipment of an establishment shall be located underground or in a building. Bulk storage of gasoline or petroleum products shall not be permitted except as incidental to a laboratory, a production operation, or the servicing of company-owned or leased vehicles, and then shall be subject to the fire regulations of the Town and of the county. 
(Code 1969, § 18-100; Ord. of 3-20-1972)  
Sec. 18-101. - Off-street parking requirements. 
A.  In a CMP zone the following off-street parking regulations shall supersede those in article 16 of this chapter, whenever the following regulations are more restrictive. 
B.  The minimum requirement for off-street parking for an industrial or manufacturing establishment or warehouse or similar use shall be one parking space for each 1½ employees or one for each two employees on combined major and second shifts, and, in addition, one visitor parking space for every ten employees, except that the Town Council may authorize fewer visitor parking spaces if it finds that a lesser number will be sufficient for the operation anticipated. In addition to the foregoing, one parking space shall be provided for each company-owned or leased truck, passenger car, or other vehicle located or principally based on the premises. No parking spaces may be located within required yards, except that an area equivalent to not more than five percent of the total area of all required parking spaces may be located within a required yard for use as parking space for visitors, selected personnel, and minor deliveries. Off-street parking spaces may be grouped in facilities serving more than one lot or establishment. When the lot on which parking spaces are located abuts the rear or side lot line of, or is across the street from, any land in a residential zone other than publicly-owned land, an ornamental masonry wall, or evergreen plantings six feet or more in height shall be maintained so as to screen substantially the parking lot from view from the nearest property in the residential zone. The screenings shall be maintained in good condition at all times. 
C.  In parking lots of one acre or more, at least five percent of the area of the parking lot shall be devoted to landscaping within the interior of the parking area. No lighting on parking lots shall be more than ten feet above ground level and shall be so screened as not to shine beyond the parking lot. 
(Code 1969, § 18-101; Ord. of 3-20-1972)  
Sec. 18-102. - Loading berth requirements. 
Off-street loading berths shall be provided for all buildings in which material of any kind is received or from which material is shipped. The number and size of loading berths is dependent upon the type and volume of material received and shipped. The plot plan required in section 18-116 A shall show the number and size of loading berths together with sufficient information, either on the plot plan or by a separate statement in writing, as to the type and average daily volume of materials to be received and shipped. The number and size of loading berths to be provided will be subject to approval of the Town Council, after receiving a recommendation and report thereon from the planning commission at the time the plot plan is approved. In determining the adequacy of the loading berths, the Town Council will be governed by the standard that sufficient berths of an appropriate size will be provided reasonably to preclude the necessity of having cargo vehicles parked or standing on public streets awaiting their turn either to load or unload. Such berths may be located either within a building or in the open, but not within required yards. If such berths are not enclosed, they shall be located not less than 300 feet from any residence zone boundary or public park area and effectively screened therefrom as in the case of parking areas specified in section 18-101. For the purpose of this section, the 300-foot limitation shall not be applied against a residential zone area across a railroad right-of-way. 
(Code 1969, § 18-102)  
Sec. 18-103. - Access roads to loading berths. 
All access roads to loading berths shall be at least 14 feet wide, except that if tractor-trailers are to be accommodated, then the roads shall be at least 14 feet wide for one-way traffic and at least 22 feet wide for two-way traffic. 
(Code 1969, § 18-103)  
Sec. 18-104. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 18-104, pertaining to loading on rail lines, was deleted in its entirety on March 20, 1972.  
Sec. 18-105. - Hours prohibited for loading. 
Loading and unloading in the CMP zone, except from a berth located within a building, shall not be permitted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Code 1969, § 18-105)  
Sec. 18-106. - Signs. 
Sign regulations are specified in article 19 of this chapter, except that freestanding signs may be placed at ground level in the CMP zone, provided such signs are not so located as to obstruct, impair, or impede the line of sight for traffic coming from the opposite direction or traffic moving along intersecting streets, highways, or roads, whether public or private. 
(Code 1969, § 18-106)  
Sec. 18-107. - Lighting of freestanding signs. 
Freestanding signs may be lighted by either self-contained lighting or external lighting, provided such lighting shall be shielded or directed in such a way that it does not shine or reflect into any residential zone or public park or public road. 
(Code 1969, § 18-107)  
Sec. 18-108. - Screening. 
Wherever in this article provision is made for erection and maintenance of an ornamental masonry wall or evergreen planting for screening purposes, such wall shall be of sufficient height to screen the activity from a residential zone or public park area, but in no event, less than six feet in height. The wall shall not contain any openings other than entrances or exits or necessary openings to provide for proper drainage. Walls shall be of substantial construction and maintained at all times in a state of good repair, and such walls and screening shall be set back at least 20 feet from road intersections so as not to obstruct the line of sight in either direction. 
(Code 1969, § 18-108; Ord. of 3-20-1972)  
Sec. 18-109. - Evergreen screening. 
Evergreen screening, except where existing natural screening is used, shall consist of evergreen plantings with the same height restriction provided for ornamental masonry walls in section 18-108. Such planting shall be so staggered and in such depth that activities on one side cannot be readily observed from the other side through the screening. 
(Code 1969, § 18-109; Ord. of 3-20-1972)  
Sec. 18-110. - Inadequately maintained screening. 
Wherever an ornamental masonry wall or natural screen or existing fence is not adequately maintained by the owner of the property, then the Town, after giving 30 days' written notice to the property owner, may take the necessary action to repair or otherwise maintain the wall, or natural screen or existing fence. The expense for such repair or maintenance shall be chargeable to the owner of the property and shall become a lien on the real property with the same force and effect as real property taxes. 
(Code 1969, § 18-110; Ord. of 3-20-1972)  
Sec. 18-111. - Street rights-of-way. 
All public streets, highways, or roads within the industrial park zone shall have a minimum of a 60-foot right-of-way with a minimum of a 40-foot paved area. 
(Code 1969, § 18-111)  
Sec. 18-112. - General intent. 
It is the intent of these regulations to prevent land or buildings from being used or occupied in any manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious, or otherwise objectionable fire, explosive, radioactive, or other hazardous condition; noise or vibration; smoke, dust, odor, or other form of air pollution; electrical or other disturbance; glare or heat; liquid or solid refuse or wastes; condition conducive to the breeding of rodents or insects; or other substance, condition, or elements in a manner or amount as to adversely affect the surrounding area. Any use permitted under section 18-96 may be undertaken and maintained if it conforms to all regulations of the CMP zone including the regulations of this section. Specifically, all uses shall operate in conformance with the limitations set forth in section 18-113. 
(Code 1969, § 18-112)  
Sec. 18-113. - Limitations upon external effects. 
Limitations shall be imposed upon external effects of any use permitted in a CMP zone and the specific standards to be followed are as set forth in section 18-117. 
(Code 1969, § 18-113)  
Sec. 18-114. - Plans for abatement to be presented. 
Plans for such abatement measures and/or devices as are necessary to bring the proposed operation into conformance with section 18-112 shall be presented to the planning commission and the Town Council at the time of application for site plan approval. Performance standards specifications shall be included as a part of these plans. 
(Code 1969, § 18-114)  
Sec. 18-115. - Tests for non-adherence to standards. 
In the event the Town Council has reason to believe that an installation in a CMP zone is not operating within the performance standards set by this article, the council may cause to be made such tests as are necessary to demonstrate adherence or non-adherence to the standards in accordance with recommendations of the planning commission. If the operator is found to be in violation of this article, he shall be required to pay the reasonable costs of such tests. 
(Code 1969, § 18-115)  
Sec. 18-116. - Application and site plan approval. 
A.  Application. In addition to submitting the plans and other data required in chapter 4, an applicant for a building permit or certificate of occupancy in a CMP zone shall submit a plan of development to the planning commission as set forth in subsection D of this section; a description of the proposed operation including all machinery, processes, and products, and an estimate of the maximum number of employees contemplated and the number of shifts during which they would work; and specifications for the mechanisms and techniques to be used in restricting the emission of dangerous and objectionable elements. The description of the proposed operation must be in sufficient detail to indicate the effects of the operation in the production of auto and traffic congestion or problems of noise, glare, odor, sewerage, air pollution, water pollution, fire or safety hazards, or other factors detrimental to the health safety, and welfare of the area. 
B.  Other information required. The applicant shall provide whatever other information the planning commission or the Town Council may require to determine the effect that the proposed uses may have upon their environment and on the cost of providing municipal services to the areas. 
C.  Private covenants included in plan. Private covenants and/or provisions for associations of individual owners proposed within a CMP zone shall be included as a part of the preliminary development plan. 
D.  Plan of development, requirements for approval of. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any use except in accordance with a plan of development approved by the Town Council after receiving a prior report and recommendation of the planning commission for the lot or tract on which such use is to be located. Other property owners within the particular CMP tract involved shall be advised of such submission and given the opportunity to present their views to both the planning commission and the Town Council. Such plan of development shall show the location and height of all buildings and structures; the area devoted to parking facilities and loading berths; all access roads, landscaping and screening plans; areas designated for outdoor storage; proposed signs; and other features required by this article. The planning commission and the Town Council shall consider the standards and objectives of the industrial park regulations and, specifically, the location of buildings, parking and loading areas, and other features with respect to the topography of the lot and existing natural features such as watercourses and large trees, with the objective of achieving a maximum of coordination between the proposed use and the surrounding uses. 
E.  When issuance of permit authorized. Upon the finding by the Town Council after prior report and recommendation of the planning commission that the contemplated development will constitute an industrial development of sustained desirability and stability, that it will be in harmony with the character of the surrounding neighborhood and consistent with the overall long-range plans for the community, that it will not result in traffic hazards, and that the plans indicate that it will be adequately landscaped, buffered, and screened, the Town Council shall authorize the issuance of a permit or permits for a proposed development in a CMP Industrial Park Zone. 
F.  Change in use. A new certificate of occupancy shall be required if there are any major structural alterations or substantial variations from the operations referred to in the building permit or previous certificate of occupancy permitting such use. However, any normal replacement or addition of equipment and machinery not affecting the foregoing operations or not changing the degree or nature of dangerous and objectionable elements emitted shall not be considered a change in use. 
(Code 1969, § 18-116)  
Sec. 18-117. - Performance standards. 
A.  Use limitations. All uses in a CMP zone shall operate in conformance with the limitations set forth in each subsection below: 
1.  Vibration. No vibration shall be produced which is transmitted through the ground and is discernible without the aid of instruments at or at any point beyond the lot line; nor shall any vibration produced exceed 0.002g peak measured at or beyond the lot line using either seismic or electronic vibration measuring equipment. 
2.  Noise. All noise shall be muffled so as not to be objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency, or shrillness. In no event shall the sound-pressure level of noise radiated continuously from a facility at nighttime exceed at the lot line the values given in Table 1 (set out hereafter) in any octave band of frequency. However, where the lot line adjoins or lies within 25 feet of the boundary of a residence district, the sound-pressure levels of noise radiated at nighttime shall not exceed at the lot line the values given in Table 2 (set out hereafter) in any octave band of frequency. The sound-pressure level shall be measured with a sound level meter and an octave bank analyzer that conform to specifications published by the American Standards Association. (American Standard Sound Level Meters for Measurement of Noise and Other Sounds, Z24.3-1944, American Standards Association, Inc., New York, N.Y. and American Standard Specification for an Octave-Band Filter Set for the Analysis of Noise and Other Sounds, Z24.10-1953, American Standards, Inc., New York, N.Y. shall be used.) 
TABLE 1 
Maximum permissible sound-pressure levels at the lot line for noise radiated continuously from a facility between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
Frequency Band Cycles Per Second 	Sound Pressure Level Decibels 
re 0.0002 dyne/cm 2 
20—75 	69 
75—150 	60 
150—300 	56 
300—600 	51 
600—1,200 	42 
1,200—2,400 	40 
2,400—4,800 	38 
4,800—10,000 	35 
 
If the noise is not smooth and continuous and is not radiated between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., one or more of the corrections in Table 3 below shall be added to or subtracted from each of the decibel levels given above in Table 1. 
TABLE 2 
Maximum permissible sound-pressure levels at a lot line for noise radiated continuously from a facility between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., where the lot line adjoins or lies within 25 feet of the boundary of a residence district. 
Frequency Band Cycles Per Second 	Sound Pressure Level Decibels 
re 0.0002 dyne/cm 2 
20—75 	65 
75—150 	50 
150—300 	43 
300—600 	38 
600—1,200 	33 
1,200—2,400 	30 
2,400—4,800 	28 
4,800—10,000 	26 
 
If the noise is not smooth and continuous and is not radiated between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., one or more of the corrections in Table 3 below shall be added to or subtracted from each of the decibel levels given above in Table 2. 
TABLE 3 
Type of Operation in Character of Noise 	Correction in Decibels 
Daytime operation only 	Plus 5 
Noise source operates less than 20% of any one-hour period 	Plus 5* 
Noise source operates less than 5% of any one-hour period 	Plus 10* 
Noise source operates less than 1% of any one-hour period 	Plus 15* 
Noise of impulsive character (hammering, etc.) 	Minus 5 
Noise of periodic character (hum, screech, etc.) 	Minus 5 
 
*Apply one of these corrections only. 
3.  Air pollution, smoke, dust, fumes, particulate matter. 
a.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Atmosphere means the air that envelopes or surrounds the earth. Where air pollutants are emitted into a building not designed specifically as a piece of air pollution control equipment, such emission into the building shall be considered an emission into the atmosphere. 
Combustion contaminants means particulate matter, sulfur, carbon, or their compounds, discharged into the atmosphere from the burning of any kind of material containing carbon in a free or combined state. 
Particulate matter means material which is suspended in or discharged into the atmosphere in finely divided form as a liquid or a solid, including smoke, dust, fumes, or mist. 
Process weight per hour means the total weight of all materials introduced into any specific process which process may cause any discharge into the atmosphere. Solid fuels charged will be considered as part of the process weight but liquid and gaseous fuels and combustion air will not. The process weight per hour will be derived by dividing the total process weight by the number of hours in one complete operation from the beginning of any given process to the completion thereof, excluding any time during which the equipment is idle. 
Standard conditions means a gas temperature of 60 degrees Fahrenheit and gas pressure of 14.7 pounds per square inch absolute. Results of all analyses and tests shall be calculated or reported at this gas temperature and pressure. 
b.  Smoke. There shall not be discharged into the atmosphere from any source of emission whatsoever any air contaminant for a period or periods aggregating more than three minutes in any one hour which is: 
(1)  As dark or darker in shade than that designated as No. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart, as published by the United States Bureau of Mines, or its equivalent; or 
(2)  Of such opacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than does smoke described in paragraph 3(b)(1) of this standard. 
c.  Combustion contaminants. There shall not be discharged into the atmosphere from any single source of emission combustion contaminants (excluding condensed steam) in any state or combination thereof exceeding at the point of discharge 0.3 grains per cubic foot of gas calculated to 12 percent carbon dioxide at standard conditions. 
TABLE 4 
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE PER HOUR 
Process Weight 
Per Hour, LB 	Allowable 
Discharge 
Per Hour, LB 	Process Weight 
Per Hour, LB 	Allowable 
Discharge 
Per Hour, LB 
50 	0.24 	3,300 	5.36 
100 	0.46 	3,400 	5.44 
150 	0.66 	3,500 	5.52 
200 	0.852 	3,600 	5.61 
250 	1.03 	3,700 	5.69 
300 	1.20 	3,800 	5.77 
350 	1.35 	3,900 	5.85 
400 	1.50 	4,000 	5.93 
450 	1.63 	4,100 	6.01 
500 	1.77 	4,200 	6.08 
550 	1.89 	4,300 	6.15 
600 	2.01 	4,400 	6.22 
650 	2.12 	4,500 	6.30 
700 	2.24 	4,600 	6.37 
750 	2.34 	4,700 	6.45 
800 	2.43 	4,800 	6.52 
850 	2.53 	4,900 	6.60 
900 	2.62 	5,000 	6.67 
950 	2.72 	5,500 	7.03 
1,000 	2.80 	6,000 	7.37 
1,100 	2.97 	6,500 	7.71 
1,200 	3.12 	7,000 	8.05 
1,300 	3.26 	7,500 	8.39 
1,400 	3.40 	8,000 	8.71 
1,500 	3.54 	8,500 	9.03 
1,600 	3.66 	9,000 	9.36 
1,700 	3.79 	9,500 	9.67 
1,800 	3.91 	10,000 	10.00 
1,900 	4.03 	11,000 	10.63 
2,000 	4.14 	12,000 	11.28 
2,100 	4.24 	13,000 	11.89 
2,200 	4.34 	14,000 	12.50 
2,300 	4.44 	15,000 	13.13 
2,400 	4.55 	16,000 	13.74 
2,500 	4.64 	17,000 	14.36 
2,600 	4.74 	18,000 	14.97 
2,700 	4.84 	19,000 	15.58 
2,800 	4.92 	20,000 	16.19 
2,900 	5.02 	30,000 	22.22 
3,000 	5.10 	40,000 	28.3 
3,100 	5.18 	50,000 	34.3 
3,200 	5.27 	60,000 	40.0 
 
Where process weight falls between figures stated, values of allowable discharge per hour shall be interpolated. Process weight is defined as total weight of raw materials entering process (not weight of finished product). Solid fuels charged are considered as part of process weight, but liquid and gaseous fuels and combustion air are not. In continuous operation, average rate of feed is used. In batch operation, total batch weight divided by operating time of a batch cycle determines process weight per hour. 
d.  Particulate matter. 
(1)  There shall not be discharged in any one hour from any sources whatsoever, except as provided in subsection A.3.c of this section, particulate matter, excluding condensed steam, in total quantities in excess of the amount shown in the preceding table. 
(2)  When the process weight is in excess of 60,000 pounds per hour, there shall not be discharged in any one hour from any source whatsoever dust or fumes in excess of 0.066 percent of the hourly process weight. 
e.  Threshold values. There shall not be discharged into the atmosphere any contaminant for which threshold limit values are listed for working atmospheres by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists in such quantity that the concentration of the contaminant at ground level at any point beyond the boundary of the property shall at any time exceed the threshold limit. 
f.  Exceptions. Subsections A.3.b, c, d, and e of this section do not apply to: 
(1)  Fire set by any officer, employee, or firefighter in the course of his official duty, for the purpose of weed abatement, the prevention of fire hazard, or the instruction of public employees in the methods of firefighting or research relating to the prevention and control of fires. 
(2)  Agricultural operations in the growing of crops or the raising of fowl or animals. 
4.  Odors. 
a.  There shall not be discharged or permitted to escape into the atmosphere, odors which shall be offensive to the public or which endanger public comfort, repose, health, or safety. 
b.  The intensity of offensive odors shall be determined at the property line adjacent to the source in the manner described in "Air Pollution Abatement Manual," Chapter 5, Table 3; Manufacturing Chemists' Assn., Washington, D.C. 1951. 
5.  Electromagnetic radiation. The following standards shall apply: 
a.  General. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated, any planned or intentional source of electromagnetic radiation for such purposes as communication, experimentation, entertainment, broadcasting, heating, navigation, therapy, vehicle velocity measurement, weather survey, aircraft detection, topographical survey, personal pleasure, or any other use directly or indirectly associated with these purposes which does not comply with the then current regulations of the Federal Communications Commission regarding such sources of electromagnetic radiation, except that for all governmental communications facilities, governmental agencies, and government-owned plants, the regulations of the Interdepartmental Radio Advisory Committee shall take precedence over the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, regarding such sources of electromagnetic radiation. Further, said operation in compliance with the Federal Communications Commission or the Interdepartmental Radio Advisory Committee regulations shall be unlawful if such radiation causes an abnormal degradation in performance of other electromagnetic radiators or electromagnetic receptors of quality and proper design because of proximity, primary field, blanketing, spurious reradiation, harmonic content, modulation, or energy conducted by power or telephone lines. 
(2)  The determination of "abnormal degradation in performance" and "of quality and proper design" shall be made in accordance with good engineering practices as defined in the latest principles and standards of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, the Institute of Radio Engineers, and the Electronic Industries Association. In case of any conflict between the latest standards and principles of the above groups, the following precedence in the interpretation of the standards and principles shall apply: (1) American Institute of Electrical Engineers, (2) Institute of Radio Engineers, and (3) Electronic Industries Association. 
(3)  Recognizing the special nature of many of the operations which will be conducted because of the research and educational activities, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated, to maintain or cause to be maintained any planned or intentional source of electromagnetic energy, the radiated power from which exceeds 1000 watts, without the express approval of the Town. Further, it is required that any person intending to operate or cause to be operated, to maintain or cause to be maintained, any planned or intentional source of electromagnetic energy, the radiated power from which exceeds ten watts, shall file, at least 30 days prior to such operation, a description of the radiating device and the operating characteristics thereof with the Town. 
b.  Electromagnetic interference. For the purpose of these regulations, electromagnetic interference shall be defined as electromagnetic disturbances which are generated by the use of electrical equipment other than planned and intentional sources of electromagnetic energy which interfere with the proper operation of electromagnetic receptors of quality and proper design. It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated any source of electromagnetic interference, the radiation or transmission from which exceeds the maximum values tabulated below (kc = kilocycles; mc = megacycles): 
RADIATED 
Section of 
Electromagnetic Spectrum 
(from - to) 	Primary Intended 
Service 	Maximum Field 
Strength at 
Edge of Property 
Containing 
Interference Source 
10kc*—100kc 	Communications Service 	500 microvolts/meter 
100kc—535kc 	Navigational Aids 	300 microvolts/meter 
535kc—1605kc 	AM Broadcasting 	200 microvolts/meter 
1605kc—44mc** 	Various Communications 
Service 	200 microvolts/meter 
44mc—88 mc 	VHF Television Airport 
Control 	150 microvolts/meter 
88mc—174mc 	FM Broadcasting 	200 microvolts/meter 
174mc—216mc 	VHF Television 	150 microvolts/meter 
216mc—580mc 	Navigational Aids Citizens 
Radio 	250 microvolts/meter 
580mc—920mc 	UHF Television 	300 microvolts/meter 
920mc—30,000mc 	Various 	500 microvolts/meter 
 
BY TRANSMISSION OR CONDUCTION 
Section of 
Electromagnetic Spectrum 
(from - to) 	Primary Intended 
Service 	Maximum Voltage 
Measured Line to Line 
or Line to Ground Where 
Power/Telephone Lines 
Cross Edge of 
Property Containing 
Interference Source 
10kc*—100kc 	Communications Service 	2.5 millivolts 
100kc—535kc 	Navigational Aids 	1.5 millivolts 
535kc—1605kc 	AM Broadcasting 	1.0 millivolts 
1605kc—44mc** 	Various Communications Service 	0.5 millivolts 
44mc - 88 mc 	VHF Television 	0.25 millivolts 
88mc - 174mc 	FM Broadcasting Airport Control 	1.5 millivolts 
174mc—216mc 	VHF Television 	0.15 millivolts 
216mc—580mc 	Navigational Aids Citizens Radio 	5.0 millivolts 
580mc—920mc 	UHF Television 	20.0 millivolts 
920mc—30,000mc 	Various 	150 millivolts 
 
;le=2;* kc = kilocycles 
**mc = megacycles 
c.  Method of measurement. 
(1)  For the purpose of determining the level of radiated electromagnetic interference, standard field strength measuring techniques shall be employed. The maximum value of the tabulation shall be considered as having been exceeded if at any frequency in the section of the spectrum being measured, the measured field strength exceeds the maximum value tabulated for this spectrum section. 
(2)  For purposes of determining the level of electromagnetic interference transmitted or conducted by power or telephone lines, a suitable, tunable, peak reading, radio frequency voltmeter shall be used. This instrument shall, by means of appropriate isolation coupling, be alternately connected from line to line and from line to ground during the measurement. The maximum value of the tabulation shall be considered as having been exceeded if at any frequency in the section of the spectrum being measured, the measured peak voltage exceeds the maximum value tabulated for this spectrum section. 
6.  Fire and explosion. All activities and all storage of flammable explosive materials at any point shall be provided with adequate safety and firefighting devices in accordance with the Fire Prevention Code of Fairfax County. 
7.  Radioactive materials. The handling of radioactive materials, the discharge of such materials into air and water, and the disposal of radioactive wastes, shall be in conformance with the regulations of the Atomic Energy Commission as set forth in title 10, chapter 1, part 20, Standards for Protection Against Radiation, as amended, and all applicable regulations of the state. 
8.  Glare and heat. No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights or from high temperature processes such as combustion or welding or otherwise, so as to be visible at the lot line shall be permitted. These regulations shall not apply to signs or floodlighting or parking areas otherwise permitted by this chapter. There shall be no emission or transmission of heat or heated air so as to be discernible at the lot line. 
9.  Non-radioactive liquid or solid wastes. There shall be no discharge at any point into any public or private sewage disposal system or stream, or into the ground, of any liquid or solid materials except in accordance with the regulations of the Town, the County of Fairfax, Virginia, and the state water board, as applicable. 
B.  General regulations. For general regulations, see article 4. 
C.  Supplemental regulations. For supplemental regulations, see article 18; when the regulations in article 14 are more restrictive, they shall apply. 
(Code 1969, § 18-117)  
ARTICLE 15. - CM LIMITED INDUSTRIAL ZONE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 18-118. - Permitted uses. 
A.  All uses permitted in the C-2 zone are permitted in the CM zone, provided that where such uses are located in the CM zone, they shall conform to any specific requirements or limitations provided for such particular use in the C-2 zone except as hereinafter provided. A dwelling other than for a watchman or caretaker employed on the premises shall not be permitted. Conditional uses under section 18-89 are permitted without securing a use permit. 
B.  Uses to be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building except for the on-site parking of delivery vehicles which are incidental thereto: 
1.  The manufacture, compounding, assembling, or treatment of articles for merchandise from the following materials which have been prepared beforehand: bone, cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, shells, textiles, tobacco, wood, yarns, and paint not employing a boiling process. 
2.  The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or gas. 
3.  The manufacture and maintenance of electric and neon signs, billboards, commercial advertising structures, light sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating ducts and equipment, cornices, eaves, and the like. 
4.  The manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, and rubber and metal stamps. 
5.  Assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radios, television sets, and phonographs; electroplating and the manufacture of small parts and components such as transistors, coils, condensers, transformers, crystal holders, and the like. 
6.  Automobile assembling, painting, upholstering, rebuilding, reconditioning, body and fender works, truck repairing or overhauling. 
7.  Blacksmith shop and machine shop excluding the following: punch presses over 20 tons rated capacity, drop hammers, and automatic screw machines. 
8.  Carpentry and woodworking shops. 
9.  Distribution plants, parcel delivery, ice and cold storage plant, bottling plant, and food commissary or catering establishment. 
10.  Foundry casting lightweight non-ferrous metal not causing noxious fumes, noise, or odors. 
11.  Indoor skating arenas. 
12.  Laboratories: experimental, photo or motion picture, film, or testing. 
13.  Laundry, cleaning and dyeing works, and carpet and rug cleaning. 
14.  Storage buildings and warehousing. 
C.  Uses enumerated below are to be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except that supplies and materials necessary to the conduct of such uses may be stored outside such building, provided all such outside storage is contained within and screened from the outside on all sides by an ornamental masonry wall not less than six feet in height: 
1.  Building material sales yard, including the sale of rock, sand, gravel and the like as incidental part of the principal business, but excluding concrete mixing. 
2.  Petroleum, retail storage and distribution thereof. 
3.  Plumbing yard or storage. 
4.  Retail lumber yard. 
5.  The owner or occupant of the property shall be required to maintain such ornamental masonry wall or fence, or chain link or other acceptable open fencing, in a proper state of repair. 
6.  Exception, fencing for purpose of containment only: A chain link or other acceptable open fence, not less than six feet in height, may be substituted in part or in total for the opaque wall or fence when, in the judgment of the zoning administrator after consultation with the director of public works, it is determined that: 
(1)  Due to topographic conditions a solid fence would not screen the storage area from residential property at higher elevation, or other public view in general. 
(2)  Solid screening from public view at ground level is not a paramount consideration, i.e., when the only view is from the storage area of one property to the immediately adjacent storage area, a view not generally shared by the public. 
When subsections C.6(1) and (2) of this section exist in concert, the zoning administrator shall determine where exceptions are justified. 
D.  Uses customarily incident to any of the above uses and accessory buildings. 
E.  Uses by certified massage therapists. 
(Code 1969, § 18-118; Ord. of 2-1970; Ord. of 2-1971; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 2-28-2000)  
Sec. 18-119. - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may also be permitted in the CM zone subject to securing a use permit as provided for in section 18-209: 
A.  The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment of such products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, dairy products, drugs, perfumes, pharmaceuticals, perfumed toilet soap, toiletries, and food products except fish and meat products, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast, and the rendering or refining of fats and oils. 
B.  Concrete mixing plants. 
C.  Contractor's equipment storage yard or plant, or rental of equipment commonly used by contractors. 
D.  Draying, freighting, or trucking yard or terminal. 
E.  Collection of waste glass, paper and metal for off-site recycling, provided that no chemical processing, burning or heating of any such waste material shall take place on site, nor shall any site used pursuant to this section exceed 5,000 square feet in area. 
F.  Drive-through facility complying with the application and submittal requirements as set forth in section 18-210. 
(Code 1969, § 18-119; Ord. of 11-1-1971; Ord. of 11-8-1994; Ord. of 7-10-1995; Ord. of 2-28-2000)  
Sec. 18-120. - Area requirements. 
The area requirements for the CM zone are the same as those specified for the C-2 zone. 
(Code 1969, § 18-120)  
Sec. 18-121. - Yard requirements. 
The following yard requirements apply in the CM zone: 
A.  Front yard. Front yard requirements are the same as those specified for the C-2 zone. 
B.  Side yard. No side yard is required. 
C.  Rear yard. Rear yards shall be a minimum of ten feet. 
(Code 1969, § 18-121)  
Sec. 18-122. - Height limit. 
The height limit for buildings in the CM zone is 45 feet. 
(Code 1969, § 18-122)  
Sec. 18-123. - Accessory building and private parking area requirements. 
Regulations for accessory buildings and private parking areas are specified in article 17 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-123)  
Sec. 18-124. - Off-street parking area. 
Regulations for off-street parking areas are specified in article 16 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-124)  
Sec. 18-125. - Nameplates and signs. 
Regulations for nameplates and signs are specified in article 19 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-125)  
Sec. 18-126. - Site plan approval. 
(a)  Site plan approval shall be as required by article 25 of this chapter. 
(b)  General regulations. For general regulations, see article 4 of this chapter. 
(c)  Supplemental regulations. For supplemental regulations, see article 18 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-126)  
ARTICLE 15.1. - PR PARK AND RECREATIONAL ZONE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 18-126.1. - Permitted uses. 
Any of the following uses shall be permitted in the PR zone when owned or exclusively used by one or more political subdivisions, public authorities, or nonprofit organizations: 
A.  Parks, parkland, playgrounds, stream valley parks. 
B.  Private organizations or individuals owning parcels with such uses as delineated herein may apply for this zoning category for said parcels, provided that the organization operating such uses is not for profit and its net earnings are used to promote the general welfare, education, or recreation, and do not accrue to the direct benefit of any individual. 
(Code 1969, § 18-126.1; Ord. of 4-15-1991; Ord. of 3-7-1994)  
Sec. 18-126.2. - Conditional uses. 
The following shall be conditional uses in the PR zone: 
A.  Recreational facilities and athletic fields, such as community recreation centers, golf courses, and clubs (driving ranges may be included only as an accessory use to a golf course operation), swimming pools, tennis courts and playing fields (not to include indoor skating rinks). 
B.  The installation and use of safety fences, backstops, and other types of fencing integral to a particular sport or activity and at variance with section 18-17, outdoor lights, and electronic public address systems associated with any of the uses as enumerated in section 18-126.1 or above. 
(Code 1969, § 18-126.2; Ord. of 4-15-1991; Ord. of 3-7-1994)  
Sec. 18-126.3. - Transitional uses. 
There are no transitional uses in the PR zone. 
(Code 1969, § 18-126.3; Ord. of 4-15-1991)  
Sec. 18-126.4. - Area requirements. 
For those structures which require the issuance of a building permit, the following area requirements shall apply in the PR zone: 
A.  Lot width. Lots shall have a minimum width of 75 feet. 
B.  Front yard. Front yards shall be a minimum of 15 feet in depth. 
C.  Side yard. Side yards shall be a minimum of 15 feet in depth. 
D.  Rear yard. Rear yards shall be a minimum of 25 feet in depth. 
E.  Open space. All property within the PR zone shall provide a minimum of 60 percent open space. Such open space shall not include principal buildings, enclosed accessory buildings, parking areas and related ingress/egress. 
Such structures and features as bleachers, playground equipment, in-ground permanent swimming pools, picnic structures, trails, tennis courts, playing fields, etc., may be considered and permitted in the open space. 
(Code 1969, § 18-126.4; Ord. of 4-15-1991)  
Sec. 18-126.5. - Height limit. 
The maximum height of structures in the PR zone may be 2½ stories or 35 feet. 
(Code 1969, § 18-126.5; Ord. of 4-15-1991)  
Sec. 18-126.6. - Fences. 
Fence regulations are prescribed in section 18-17, and fences in the PR zone shall be in accordance with the requirements as set forth in section 18-126.2 for safety fences, backstops or other types of fencing integral to a particular sport or activity. 
(Code 1969, § 18-126.6; Ord. of 4-15-1991)  
Sec. 18-126.7. - Accessory building requirements. 
One or more enclosed accessory buildings are permitted in the PR zone, the total floor area of which shall not exceed 150 square feet in area per acre of open space. 
(Code 1969, § 18-126.7; Ord. of 4-15-1991)  
Sec. 18-126.8. - Off-street parking area. 
Regulations for off-street parking areas are specified in article 16 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-126.8; Ord. of 4-15-1991)  
Sec. 18-126.9. - Nameplates and signs. 
Regulations for nameplates and signs are specified in article 19 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-126.9; Ord. of 4-15-1991)  
Sec. 18-126.10. - Site plan approval. 
(a)  All elements of any site plan must be approved by the Town Council as required by article 25 of this chapter, after receiving a report and recommendation from the planning commission. Prior to forwarding such recommendation to the Town Council, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing in the manner prescribed in section 18-246. Before considering any such recommendation from the planning commission, the Town Council shall hold a public hearing in the manner as prescribed in section 18-247. 
(b)  General regulations. For general regulations, see article 4 of this chapter. 
(c)  Supplemental regulations. For supplemental regulations, see article 18 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-126.10; Ord. of 4-15-1991; Ord. of 3-7-1994)  
ARTICLE 15.2. - PC PARK AND CONSERVATION ZONE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 18-126.11. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this article that land zoned PC should, to the greatest extent possible, remain or be restored to a natural, undisturbed, and undeveloped state. Indigenous plants and trees should be preserved or re-established whenever possible. 
(Code 1969, § 18-126.11; Ord. of 6-2009)  
Sec. 18-126.12. - Permitted uses. 
Any of the following uses shall be permitted in the PC zone when consistent with the intent of this article and owned or exclusively used by one or more political subdivisions, public authorities, or nonprofit organizations: 
Observation, education, and other non-motorized activities that provide for the passive enjoyment of natural vegetation, wildlife, and environment. 
(Code 1969, § 18-126.12; Ord. of 6-2009)  
Sec. 18-126.13. - Rezoning of parcels. 
A.  Any political subdivision, public authority, or nonprofit organization owning a parcel may apply for this zoning category, provided that its proposed use is consistent with section 18-126.12 and the parcel meets all other requirements, including the minimum lot size and open space requirements in section 18-126.14. 
B.  Private organizations or individuals owning parcels may apply for this zoning category provided that: 
1.  The proposed use of the parcel is consistent with section 18-126.12 and it meets all other requirements, including the minimum lot size and open space requirements in section 18-126.14; and 
2.  The administration of uses and maintenance of the parcel are carried out by a nonprofit organization or a governmental entity, and the net earnings from the parcel will be used to promote the general welfare, and not accrue directly to any private entity or individual. 
(Code 1969, § 18-126.13; Ord. of 6-2009)  
Sec. 18-126.14. - Minimum lot size and open space requirements. 
A.  Each PC zoned parcel shall be at least five acres in size. However, this requirement may be waived if a parcel is immediately adjacent to and abuts land already zoned as PC, or contains a natural feature appropriate for the PC zone, and PC zoning for such parcel would be consistent with the intent of this article. 
B.  Each PC zoned parcel shall at all times provide a minimum of 90 percent open space. Principal buildings, enclosed accessory buildings, observation decks, bridges, impervious sidewalks/paths/trails, parking areas, ingress/egress infrastructure, and any other structure shall not be considered open space. 
1.  This requirement may be waived at the time of rezoning if there is a viable plan to bring the parcel into compliance. 
2.  This requirement may be waived at any time if necessary to address issues of public safety and welfare. 
(Code 1969, § 18-126.14; Ord. of 6-2009)  
Sec. 18-126.15. - Conditional uses. 
Permitted conditional uses in the PC zone include restoration and maintenance activities, efforts to protect the property from degradation or misuse, activities to ensure public safety and welfare, and other uses determined appropriate and necessary to support the intent of this article. 
(Code 1969, § 18-126.15; Ord. of 6-2009)  
Sec. 18-126.16. - Structural improvements in PC zone. 
A.  Structural improvements may be allowed in the PC zone, provided that they are consistent with permitted uses and the general intent of this article, including the protection and preservation of PC land. Subject to the open space requirements in section 18-126.14 and the requirements set forth in this section, the following types of improvements may be allowed: observation decks, enclosed accessory buildings, benches, fences, and bridges. Impervious trails or paths may be allowed, but only when there are no other reasonable and effective alternatives. All such improvements shall be noted as amendments to the site plan and follow the procedures set forth in this section. 
B.  Area requirements. For those structures which require the issuance of a building permit, the following area requirements shall apply in the PC zone: 
1.  Lot width. Lots shall have a minimum width of 75 feet. 
2.  Front yard. Front yards shall be a minimum of 15 feet in depth. 
3.  Side yard. Side yards shall be a minimum of 15 feet in depth. 
4.  Rear yard. Rear yards shall be a minimum of 25 feet in depth. 
C.  Height limit. The maximum height of structures in the PC zone may be 2½ stories or 35 feet, unless otherwise specified. 
D.  Fences. Fence regulations are prescribed in section 18-17. 
E.  Accessory buildings. One or more enclosed accessory buildings may be permitted as a conditional use on each property if the parcel will remain in compliance with the open space requirement. However, the total floor area of all accessory buildings on a single PC zoned parcel shall not exceed 150 square feet in floor area. Accessory buildings may not exceed one story in height and should be constructed of materials compatible with the uses permitted in this zone. 
(Code 1969, § 18-126.16; Ord. of 6-2009)  
Sec. 18-126.17. - Transitional uses. 
There are no transitional uses in the PC zone. 
(Code 1969, § 18-126.17; Ord. of 6-2009)  
Sec. 18-126.18. - Off-street parking area. 
Regulations for off-street parking areas are specified in article 16 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-126.18; Ord. of 6-2009)  
Sec. 18-126.19. - Nameplates and signs. 
Regulations for nameplates and signs are specified in article 19 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-126.19; Ord. of 6-2009)  
Sec. 18-126.20. - Site plan approval. 
(a)  All elements of any site plan must be approved by the Town Council as required by article 25 of this chapter, after receiving a report and recommendation from the planning commission. Prior to forwarding such recommendation to the Town Council, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing in the manner prescribed in section 18-246. Before considering any such recommendation from the planning commission, the Town Council shall hold a public hearing in the manner as prescribed in section 18-247. 
(b)  General regulations: For general regulations, see article 4 of this chapter. 
(c)  Supplemental regulations: For supplemental regulations, see article 18 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-126.20; Ord. of 6-2009)  
ARTICLE 16. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING AREAS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of May 22, 2017 , amended article 16 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article 16, §§ 18-127—18-137.1, pertained to similar material, and derived from the Code of 1969, §§ 18-127—18-137.1; Ord. of March 1972; Ord. of October 1973; Ord. of May 1974; Ord. of July, 1974; Ord. of April, 1977; Ord. of May, 1977; Ord. of July, 1981; Ord. of April 1983; Ord. of November, 1990; Ord. of February, 1991; Ord. of April 15, 1991. 
 
Sec. 18-127. - Plot plan for parking area required. 
No application for a building permit, use permit, or occupancy permit for a commercial or an industrial building or use in any commercial transitional or industrial zone shall be approved, unless there is included with the plan for such building, improvement or use, a plot plan showing the required open space designated as an automobile parking compound for off-street parking purposes in accordance with section 18-130 together with the exact location and detail drawings of any ornamental masonry wall which may be required by other sections of this chapter; and no use permit or occupancy permit shall be issued unless the required facilities, and ornamental masonry wall, if required, have been provided in accordance with those shown on the approved plan. 
( Ord. of 5-22-2017 )  
Sec. 18-128. - Dimensions of off-street parking spaces and aisles. 
All off-street parking spaces and adjacent aisles provided in compliance with the requirements of this article for non-single family detached residential lots shall at least conform to the following minimum dimensions: 
A. Parking Angle 
(degrees) 	B. Stall Width 
(in feet) 	C. Stall Length 
(in feet) 	D. Aisle Width, 
One-way/Two-way 
(in feet) 
0 (parallel) 	8 	22 	16/22 
45 	9 	19 	16/20 
60 	9 	20 	18/20 
90 	9 	18 	23/23 
 
 
A - Parking Angle B - Stall Width C - Stall Length D - Aisle Width 
( Ord. of 5-22-2017 )  
Sec. 18-128.1. - Compact parking spaces. 
For purposes of computation under this chapter, one compact automobile parking space shall be eight feet wide by 16 feet long. 
( Ord. of 5-22-2017 )  
Sec. 18-129. - Space allocation for parking. 
All garage or other space allocated for the parking of vehicles within buildings or in basements or open space on the roofs of buildings, shall be considered part of the required off-street parking requirements. 
( Ord. of 5-22-2017 )  
Sec. 18-130. - Requirements. 
Required off-street parking space or spaces are to be made available to and provided for the use of the occupant or occupants and, if applicable, patrons or customers of such uses. At the determination of the zoning administrator, adequate parking space to park vehicles belonging to and which are a part of the business activity within a building shall be provided and such space(s) shall be in addition to space requirements required by this chapter. 
Off-street parking space(s) shall be provided as follows: 
Use 	Minimum Required 
Off-street 
Parking Spaces 	Notes/Additional 
Requirements 
Detached single-family dwellings 	Each detached single-family residential dwelling unit constructed subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall provide on the same lot, not less than 2 parking spaces. Acceptable off-street parking shall consist of driveways and garages or carports. 	1 additional space for every bedroom over 3 bedrooms. Maximum requirement of 4 spaces. 
See Note 1 
Boardinghouse, guest house or tourist home 	1 permanently constructed and maintained space per guest room 	
Professional and real estate offices in RM-2 or T zones 	1 space per 200 square feet of area devoted to such use 	
Clubs or comparable ones 	1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area in any building used for such purpose 	
School auditoriums (public and private), general auditorium and similar places of assembly 	1 space per 4 seats in such facility or structure 	
Churches or other places of worship 	1 space per 6 seats provided in the main sanctuary 	
Hospitals and welfare institutions 	1 space per 800 square feet of gross floor area of the building 	
Commercial building (except as provided for in other uses listed) 	1 space per 200 square feet of floor area on all floors 	Floor area does not include stairs and elevators 
Bowling alleys 	3 spaces per alley 	
Theaters 	2 spaces per 5 seats 	
Indoor skating arenas 	1 space per 100 square feet 	
Industrial buildings 	1 space per 3 employees on maximum shift 	
Hotels and motels 	1 space per rental room 	
Furniture stores 	1 space per 500 square feet of floor area plus 1 space per employee on maximum shift 	
Restaurants 	1 space per 4 seats 	
Minute car wash stations 	Space for 30 cars waiting for service 	
Townhouses and two-family dwelling 	2 spaces per dwelling unit 	Plus 1 space per 5 dwelling units for visitor parking. 
See Note 1 
Multiple family residential dwelling units (excluding townhouses), efficiency units 	1 space per dwelling unit 	See Note 1 
Multiple family residential dwelling units (excluding townhouses), one bedroom 	1.5 spaces per dwelling unit 	See Note 1 
Multiple family residential dwelling units (excluding townhouses), two or more bedrooms 	2 spaces per dwelling unit 	See Note 1 
Amusement enterprises or video arcades 	1 space per 2 mechanical or electronic amusement devices in addition to required parking for primary use of building 	One parking space for each two mechanical or electronic amusement devices and one secure and conveniently located bicycle rack capable of storing at least five bicycles for each three mechanical or electronic amusement devices 
Child care centers, nursery schools and day care 	1 space per room used for care facility plus 1 space per 500 gross floor area of building 	
Civic and quasi-public uses 	1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area in any building used for such purpose 	See Note 2 
Banks 	1 space per 200 square feet of floor area plus sufficient space for 10 stacking spaces for first drive-through window and 5 spaces for each additional window 	See Note 2 
Restaurant, with drive-through window 	1 space per 4 seats and 10 stacking spaces per drive-through 	5 stacking spaces need to be made available for the ordering station. 
See Note 2 
Vehicle drive-through services 	1 space per 200 square feet of total floor area plus sufficient area for 10 stacking spaces for the first bay and 5 stacking spaces for each additional bay 	The bay area may be included in such calculations at rate of one bay to one parking space. All drive-through stacking aisles shall be designed so as not to impede pedestrian or vehicular circulation on the site or in any abutting right-of-way. 
See Note 2 
Swimming pool 	1 space per 6 persons legally allowed in pool at one time plus 1 space per employee on maximum shift 	
Tennis club 	2 spaces per court plus 1 space per employee on maximum shift 	
Outdoor regulation playing fields 	25 spaces per regulation playing field 	Baseball, softball, football or soccer fields consistently used for regulation games of pre-teen to adult leagues 
Outdoor playing field complexes (three or more regulation playing fields in one location) 	75% of required number of spaces for outdoor regulation playing fields 	Shared parking facilities: Recreational and athletic facilities may jointly use the parking spaces of neighboring establishments and properties when each of the following conditions is satisfied: a. Such parking spaces are located not more than 400 feet in distance therefrom; b. The aforesaid establishments and properties are not normally open, used, or operated during the peak demand for parking by such recreational and athletic facilities; and c. In the case of privately owned parking facilities, written permission for use of such parking spaces is first obtained from the owners of each of the affected properties, and copies of all such agreements are filled with the office of zoning administrator for the Town. 
Community recreation centers 	1 space per 4 seats in auditoriums and assembly rooms (1 seat per 15 square feet of gross floor area), 1 space per 4 recreation participants in game rooms and gymnasiums (1 participant per 30 square feet of gross floor area), 1 space per 200 square feet of permanent office space 	
 
Note 1: For the purposes of constructing future additions, alteration, extensions, renovations and restorations, no single-family detached, townhouse, two-family, or multiple-family residential structure in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this original section is derived shall be deemed to be nonconforming due to lack of compliance herewith. 
Note 2: For civic and quasi-public uses, banks, restaurants with drive-through window, and vehicle drive-through services, no such structure in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which the original sections were derived shall be deemed to be nonconforming due to lack of compliance herewith. 
( Ord. of 5-22-2017 )  
Sec. 18-130.1. - Accessible parking spaces. 
Accessible parking spaces shall be provided in off-street parking facilities as required by the most recent American Disabilities Act (ADA) Standards for Accessible Design. 
( Ord. of 5-22-2017 )  
Sec. 18-131. - Location of parking facilities. 
There shall be no parking between the building setback line and the street line within the C-1, C-1A, C-2, and C-M zoning districts, and as set forth in section 18-101 for the CMP zoning district; nor within five feet of the side yard property lines within the RM-2, RTH, C-1, C-1A, C-2 and C-M zoning districts. All automobile parking areas for commercial and industrial uses shall be located on the site or conveniently near, and in no case more than 400 feet from the principal building or use to which such parking facilities are appurtenant. Any off-site parking will require a Town approved and recorded agreement with the property owner. This off-site parking agreement(s) shall include an illustration of off-site parking spaces. 
( Ord. of 5-22-2017 )  
Sec. 18-132. - Loading space. 
Every hospital, institution, commercial or industrial building hereafter erected shall provide indoor or outdoor space for the loading and unloading of goods and materials. Such space shall be at least 25 feet in depth; such space, if located within a building, shall be at least 15 feet in height; such space also shall have a width of at least 15 feet for every 50 feet or fraction thereof of building width. 
( Ord. of 5-22-2017 )  
Sec. 18-133. - Loading space in rear yard. 
A loading space may occupy a required rear yard or any part thereof. 
( Ord. of 5-22-2017 )  
Sec. 18-134. - Improvements applicable to parking areas and loading spaces. 
All private or public parking areas and loading spaces constructed, excluding regular maintenance, after the effective date of the original ordinance from which this section is derived shall be developed as follows: 
A.  All parking areas in the single-family residential zoning districts shall be constructed of permanent materials, with an asphalt, concrete, or grid paver surface, meeting the specifications of the Town. Ingress and egress to a public street shall be provided by means of a driveway meeting these same specifications and maintaining a width of not less than 12 nor more than 25 feet at the street right-of-way line. 
B.  All parking areas in the townhouse, two-family, multiple-family residential, commercial and industrial zoning districts shall be constructed of permanent materials, with an asphalt or concrete surface, meeting the specifications of the Town. Ingress and egress to a public street shall be provided by means of entrances and exits meeting these same specifications and maintaining a width of not less than 25 feet nor more than 35 feet at street right-of-way line. All parking areas shall also be provided with bumper guards as deemed necessary by the director of public works in order to protect a building from vehicular bumpers, or a public sidewalk from overhanging bumpers, to prevent vehicles from rolling down embankments or onto adjacent property, or to provide protection against other hazards peculiar to the topography or site development of a particular parcel of ground. Curb stops may be substituted for bumper guards where their use is considered adequate by the director of public works. 
C.  Whenever any such private or public parking lot abuts or adjoins any public street, a landscaping strip at least five feet in width, continuous except for entrances and exits, shall be provided immediately inside the line separating such parking lot from the adjoining street. 
D.  Per sections 18-256 and 18-257, any request for modifications of the requirements applicable to parking areas and loading spaces listed under subsections 18-134.B, and 18-134.C must be approved by council, after receiving recommendation from the planning commission. 
( Ord. of 5-22-2017 )  
Sec. 18-135. - Additional improvements required. 
Where off-street parking areas adjoin a lot in a detached residential zone, said parking areas shall be screened in accordance with the provisions of section 18-172. Any lights used to illuminate said parking areas shall not exceed ten feet in height above grade and shall be so arranged and hooded as to confine all direct light rays entirely within the boundary lines of the parking areas. 
( Ord. of 5-22-2017 )  
Sec. 18-136. - Additional protective conditions. 
Additional protective conditions may be required in connection with off-street parking adjacent to residential zones, when, in the judgment of the Town council, such are deemed necessary for the protection, convenience, and quiet of surrounding residential properties. 
( Ord. of 5-22-2017 )  
Sec. 18-137. - Non-availability of parking area. 
At any time that a required parking area shall cease to be available for such use, except as a result of government action, the occupancy or use permit for the principal use to which such parking area is appurtenant shall be revoked and declared null and void, until such time as other acceptable off-street parking space is provided. 
( Ord. of 5-22-2017 )  
Sec. 18-137.1. - Transitional parking. 
In addition to other provisions of article 16 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply without modification to all land used for transitional parking pursuant to section 18-13, and shall, in addition to special conditions imposed by the board of zoning appeals, be deemed to constitute conditions of any use permit granted for any such transitional parking lot: 
(a)  No commercial enterprise, sales, repair, work or servicing of any kind shall be conducted or permitted on any part of any transitional parking lot. 
(b)  No fee shall be charged for parking thereon and all parking thereon shall be restricted to the employees and patrons of the commercial establishment or establishments for which the transitional parking use permit was granted. 
(c)  No signs of any kind except those necessary for orderly parking and traffic movement shall be erected. 
(d)  The paved parking area shall be interrupted with landscape planting. For every 3,000 square feet of pavement there shall be 180 square feet of internal landscape planting of trees and shrubs. 
(e)  All such transitional parking lots shall be screened from all adjacent property in any residential zone and from that portion of the lot between the front or side yard setback line and any street by a brick wall or other ornamental masonry wall of equally acceptable aesthetic quality which does not require painting, erected to a height of at least six feet above grade, located at and running parallel to the boundary of any such transitional parking lot. 
(f)  All transitional parking lots shall be cleaned of trash, garbage, and debris at least once each week throughout the year. All grass located in or on such lots shall be mowed at least once each week between May 1 and November 15 of each year and all trimmings removed from paved surfaces. All shrubs shall be kept neatly trimmed. Dead trees and shrubs and deteriorated pavement and masonry shall be replaced as required by the director of public works of the Town. 
(g)  There shall be no repairing, painting, reconstruction or refurbishing of any vehicle, other equipment or materials, nor any dismounting or installation of equipment on any vehicle other than equipment or materials, parked or located on any transitional parking lot. 
(h)  No vehicle exceeding three-quarters ton load-carrying capability, and no buses, shall be parked overnight on any transitional parking lot. 
(i)  The owners, operators, lessees, occupants, tenants, persons having care or custody of or using, managing or having control of, and fiduciaries holding title to, or having the care, custody, control or management of the land used for any transitional parking lot, or the commercial properties or operations for the benefit of which such transitional parking lot use permit is granted, shall jointly and severally be responsible for maintaining and operating such transitional parking lot in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(j)  Artificial lighting shall conform to the provisions relating thereto contained in section 18-69. When filing an application for any transitional parking lot use permit, the applicant shall submit a site plan showing all details of layout planting, screening, walls, storm drainage, lighting and other relevant features as required by the director of public works of the Town. Conditions, in addition to those required by this section necessary for the protection, maintenance of value and quiet enjoyment of surrounding residential properties, and the peaceful, undisturbed use of said surrounding property by its occupants, may be imposed, and the use permit made subject thereto by the board of zoning appeals of the Town. Upon the failure of any person enumerated in subsection (i) of this section to operate or maintain any transitional parking lot in compliance with the conditions and specifications set forth in this section, the director of public works of the Town shall after ten days written notice to such person of failure to comply, cause such parking lot to be brought into conformance with such conditions and specifications and bill the owner of the land for the cost thereof. If such bill not be paid within 30 days of its mailing to the person enumerated in subsection (i) of this section, it shall be added to the Town real estate tax on the land and constitute a lien on such land to the same extent as the real estate tax is a lien. 
(k)  All such parking lots shall display thereon signs approved in design by the director of public works in such number and at such locations as designated by the director of public works restricting the use of such parking lots to lawful parking of vehicles by patrons of the adjoining commercial establishments and prohibit trespassing, disorderly conduct and all unlawful acts on and uses of such parking lots. 
( Ord. of 5-22-2017 )  
ARTICLE 17. - ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, SWIMMING POOLS AND PRIVATE PARKING AREAS 
 
Sec. 18-138. - One-story accessory building; where to be located. 
An accessory building not exceeding one story or 14 feet in height above average grade may be located only in the rear yard and shall not be closer than five feet to any alley line and not less than one foot from any side or rear lot line. 
(Code 1969, § 18-138; Ord. of 1-17-1972; Ord. of 9-24-1984; Ord. of 1-24-2005)  
Sec. 18-138.1. - Swimming pool; where to be located. 
A family pool as defined in chapter 19 may be located only in the rear yard and shall not be closer than 20 feet to any alley line, and not less than ten feet from any side or rear lot line. 
(Code 1969, § 18-138.1; Ord. of 1-17-1972; Ord. of 9-24-1984; Ord. of 1-24-2005)  
Sec. 18-138.2. - Outdoor hot tubs; area and location requirements. 
An outdoor hot tub may be located within the side and rear yards of the subject property, provided that the device meets the side yard setback requirements of the residential zoning district in which it is located, and is situated no closer than 20 feet to any alley line, nor less than ten feet from any rear property line. The total water surface area of the outdoor hot tub may not exceed two percent of the total area of the subject property, and the device must be secured in the manner as set forth in section 19-13(b). 
(Code 1969, § 18-138.2; Ord. of 1-17-1972; Ord. of 9-24-1984; Ord. of 4-17-1989; Ord. of 1-24-2005)  
Sec. 18-139. - Two-story accessory building; where to be located. 
A two-story accessory building is permitted provided that no part of it shall exceed the height of the principal building, or be located nearer than ten feet to any lot line. 
(Code 1969, § 18-139; Ord. of 1-17-1972; Ord. of 9-24-1984; Ord. of 1-24-2005)  
Sec. 18-140. - Accessory building; area and location. 
An accessory building may occupy not more than 30 percent of the area of a required rear yard. In residential zones, where any portion of such accessory building is located in the rear of a principal building, it shall be not less than ten feet therefrom; where no portion of such accessory building is located directly in the rear of a principal building, it shall be not less than 15 feet therefrom; and provided further that the front of the accessory building shall be no less than ten feet from an extension of the rear wall line of the principal building on the adjacent lots. 
(Code 1969, § 18-140; Ord. of 1-17-1972; Ord. of 9-24-1984; Ord. of 1-24-2005)  
Sec. 18-140.1. - Swimming pool; area and location. 
A family pool may occupy not more than 25 percent of the area of the actual rear yard. In residential zones, where any portion of such family pool is located in the rear of a principal building, it shall be not less than ten feet therefrom; where no portion of such family pool is located directly in the rear of a principal building, it shall be not less than five feet therefrom; and provided further that the front edge of the family pool shall be no less than five feet from an extension of the rear wall line of the principal building on the adjacent lots. 
(Code 1969, § 18-140.1; Ord. of 1-17-1972; Ord. of 9-24-1984; Ord. of 1-24-2005)  
Sec. 18-141. - Accessory building on corner lot. 
No accessory building on a corner lot shall be constructed beyond the building line of any adjoining lot, nor be located nearer than five feet to the side line of such adjoining lot. 
(Code 1969, § 18-141; Ord. of 1-17-1972; Ord. of 9-24-1984; Ord. of 1-24-2005)  
Sec. 18-141.1. - Swimming pool on corner lot. 
No family pool on a corner lot shall be constructed or installed beyond the building line of any adjoining lot, nor be located nearer than ten feet to the side line of such adjoining lot. 
(Code 1969, § 18-141.1; Ord. of 1-17-1972; Ord. of 9-24-1984; Ord. of 1-24-2005)  
Sec. 18-142. - Accessory building not to be used for dwelling purposes. 
No accessory building shall be used for dwelling purposes other than by domestic servants, employed entirely on the premises. 
(Code 1969, § 18-142; Ord. of 1-17-1972; Ord. of 9-24-1984; Ord. of 1-24-2005)  
Sec. 18-143. - Trailer and manufactured home not an accessory building. 
A trailer or manufactured home is not considered an accessory building and shall not be used for the display or sale of merchandise or as a dwelling; provided, however, that a public use trailer or public use manufactured home approved under section 18-152.2 shall be deemed to be part of the principal use of the property. 
(Code 1969, § 18-143; Ord. of 1-17-1972; Ord. of 9-24-1984; Ord. of 1-24-2005)  
Sec. 18-144. - Private parking area; where to be located. 
A private parking area may occupy any part of a required rear yard. In residential zones, it shall be not less than one foot from any side or rear lot line. 
(Code 1969, § 18-144; Ord. of 1-17-1972; Ord. of 9-24-1984; Ord. of 1-24-2005)  
Sec. 18-145. - Private parking area on corner lot. 
No private parking area on a corner lot shall be constructed beyond the building line of any adjoining lot, nor be located nearer than five feet to the side line of such adjoining lot. 
(Code 1969, § 18-145; Ord. of 1-17-1972; Ord. of 9-24-1984; Ord. of 1-24-2005)  
Sec. 18-146. - Accessory building or private parking areas for dwellings in commercial or industrial zones. 
The location of accessory buildings or parking areas for dwellings erected in commercial or industrial zones shall be the same as required above. 
(Code 1969, § 18-146; Ord. of 1-17-1972; Ord. of 9-24-1984; Ord. of 1-24-2005)  
Sec. 18-147. - Private garage; when not considered an accessory building. 
A private automobile garage having any part of a wall in common with a dwelling is considered a part of a principal building and not an accessory building. 
(Code 1969, § 18-147; Ord. of 1-17-1972; Ord. of 9-24-1984; Ord. of 1-24-2005)  
Sec. 18-147.1. - Satellite antenna. 
A.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Satellite antenna means an apparatus, usually dish shaped, the purpose of which is to have the capability to receive communications from a transmitter or a transmitter relay located in planetary orbit. 
B.  Location, number and size. 
1.  (a)  Only one satellite antenna not exceeding 14 feet in diameter may be erected or installed on any one building lot in the Town regardless of the zone in which it is located. 
(b)  Any such antenna shall be located only in the rear yard of such lot no closer than 15 feet to any side or rear lot line nor less than ten feet from the rear of a principal building; provided, however, that in lieu of any such antenna in a rear yard, one satellite antenna four feet or less in diameter may be suitably mounted to the roof area of a building. 
2.  Corner lot. In addition to the provisions of subsection B.1 of this section, no satellite antenna on any corner lot shall be erected forward of the building line of any adjoining lot nor closer than 15 feet to the side of such adjoining lot. 
3.  Height limitation. No satellite antenna mounted in any such yard shall exceed 18 feet measured vertically from the highest point of the signal receiving apparatus, when positioned for operation, to the bottom of the base which supports the satellite antenna, except any antenna which pursuant to this section may be located and suitably mounted to the roof of a building. 
C.  Mounting and screening. 
1.  Ground mounting. All satellite antenna shall be ground mounted at ground level pursuant to all requirements of the building code after securing the proper building permits, and sufficiently secured to withstand a 100-year windstorm, except such antenna four feet or less in diameter which is otherwise permitted by this section to be mounted to the roof area of a building. 
2.  Screening. All ground-mounted satellite antenna over four feet in diameter shall be screened from adjoining properties by a wooden or masonry fence of six feet in height or by a living screen of evergreen plantings not less than five feet in height at the time of planting, planted no more than five feet on center and of a variety which will mature to a height of at least six feet. All such fences or plantings shall be fully and properly maintained during such time as the antenna being screened shall remain in such location. 
D.  Variances by board of zoning appeals. Upon application to the board of zoning appeals by any property owner, and upon showing by such property owner to the satisfaction of the board of zoning appeals that a usable satellite signal cannot be obtained on such owner's property solely by reason of one or more of the requirements established by this section, the board of zoning appeals may grant such variance as may be necessary to permit reception of a usable signal and under such special conditions as the board of zoning appeals may deem proper under the circumstances, whereupon perpetual compliance with such special conditions by the property owner shall be a prerequisite to continued maintenance and use of such antenna. 
(Code 1969, § 18-147.1; Ord. of 9-24-1984; Ord. of 4-4-1994)  
ARTICLE 18. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 18-148. - Applicability. 
The regulations specified elsewhere in this chapter shall be subject to the following supplemental regulations as to use, height, area, and other matters. 
(Code 1969, § 18-148)  
Sec. 18-149. - Single-family dwelling in a less restricted zone. 
Any single-family dwelling erected in a less restricted zone, insofar as such is permitted, shall conform to all regulations in the RS-10 zone. 
(Code 1969, § 18-149)  
Sec. 18-150. - Multifamily dwelling in commercial or industrial zone. 
Any multifamily dwelling erected in any commercial or industrial zone, insofar as such is permitted, shall conform to all regulations applying in the RM-2 zone. 
(Code 1969, § 18-150)  
Sec. 18-151. - Row dwelling. 
Row dwellings are prohibited. 
(Code 1969, § 18-151)  
Sec. 18-151.1. - Drive-in restaurants. 
Drive-in restaurants are prohibited within the corporate limits of the Town. 
(Code 1969, § 18-151.1; Ord. of 2-1971)  
Sec. 18-152. - Trailers. 
The use of a trailer as a residence, an office, or for conducting retail sales or solicitations, as referred to in chapter 15, is hereby prohibited, with the following exceptions: 
(a)  Public use trailers as provided in section 18-152.2; 
(b)  The temporary use of a trailer on an actual construction site for the purpose of an on-site construction office during the period of actual construction only, and when first approved by the director of public works; and 
(c)  A sales trailer for residential development on a newly subdivided site subject to the terms of section 18-152.1 when first approved by the director of public works. 
Notwithstanding the prohibitions set forth in this section, the Town Council may authorize the temporary use of a trailer or mobile home as a dwelling for a period not to exceed six months by residents of the Town when the council is first satisfied that such temporary use is required during reconstruction of a dwelling located in the Town and formerly occupied by said residents which dwelling has been destroyed or rendered uninhabitable by fire or other disaster not willfully caused by such residents. Any such authorization of the council pursuant hereto may be revoked by the council prior to expiration of the six-month period if revocation is deemed by the council to be necessary in the public interest. 
(Code 1969, § 18-152; Ord. of 4-1970; Ord. of 5-1974; Ord. of 12-1992; Ord. of 10-1995; Ord. of 1-1995)  
Sec. 18-152.1. - Sales trailers for residential developments. 
A.  Upon final approval by the Town Council of a new residential subdivision and recordation thereof, a permit may be obtained for one on-site sales trailer therein upon posting with the Town a cash bond in the amount of $10,000.00 to insure removal of the trailer. 
B.  The said bond shall be forfeited to the Town should the permittee fail to remove the trailer upon expiration of the permit or upon completion and sale of the last residential structure in the subdivision, whichever shall occur sooner; otherwise, the bond shall be returned to the permittee upon such timely removal of the trailer. 
C.  Bond proceeds shall be held in an interest-bearing account to the benefit of the permittee upon return of the bond. 
D.  Such permit shall be void upon expiration of six months following issue but may be extended for not more than one additional six month period for good cause shown. 
(Code 1969, § 18-152.1; Ord. of 10-1995)  
Sec. 18-152.2. - Public use trailers and manufactured homes. 
Notwithstanding the prohibitions set forth in section 18-152, a public use trailer or a public use manufactured home may be permitted to serve an interim need as part of a permitted public use subject to the following standards and procedures: 
A.  The Town Council may approve, for a period of up to three years, a public use trailer or temporary public use manufactured home upon finding that such installation complies with the applicable provisions of this chapter and is consistent with the conditions of any permit for the principal use issued pursuant to section 18-209. 
B.  For an existing public use trailer permitted pursuant to subsection A of this section or approved pursuant to this subsection B, the council, upon a finding that the public health, safety and welfare of the Town will not be thereby impaired, may extend the time allowed for a public use trailer for additional periods of up to two years each pursuant to section 18-256. 
C.  All public use trailers must comply with all provisions of this chapter and be consistent with all conditions of any permit issued pursuant to section 18-209, unless such requirements are modified pursuant to section 18-256. 
D.  Notwithstanding the provisions in subsections A through C of this section, the Town Manager may approve installation of a public use trailer or public use manufactured home in order to respond to exigent needs. Such approval shall be for an interim period, not to exceed one school year, pending satisfaction of the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1969, § 18-152.2; Ord. of 1-2005)  
Sec. 18-152.3. - Portable storage containers. 
Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of this chapter, portable storage containers located outside of a fully-enclosed building or structure shall be allowed only in single-family detached residential districts, subject to the following restrictions: 
A.  No more than one portable storage container shall be allowed on a zoning lot, and for no longer than a total of 30 days in any consecutive 12-month period; provided, however, that during bona fide construction activity and a building permit on such lot, and for an additional period of 24 hours before and after such construction, a portable storage container used in connection with such construction activity may remain for a period not exceeding a total of six months in any 12-month period; 
B.  No portable storage container shall have dimensions greater than 16 feet in length, eight feet in height. 
C.  Except where a building permit has been issued, all portable storage containers shall be located on private property and on a driveway or other paved surface. 
D.  Portable storage containers shall be allowed only upon issuance of a permit by the zoning administrator. The fee for such permit shall be as set forth in section 1-12, Schedule of Planning and Zoning Fees. 
(Code 1969, § 18-152.3; Ord. of 6-2009)  
Sec. 18-153. - Overnight parking of commercial vehicle in residential zone. 
A.  General prohibition; time limits; exceptions. 
1.  It shall be unlawful to park any commercial vehicle in any residential zone of the Town for more than one hour in any 24-hour period, except that not more than one such vehicle which does not exceed 20,000 pounds gross weight may be parked overnight and on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays off street on the property owned or leased by the vehicle owner or custodian; provided that while so parked, such vehicle shall not be moved or operated at any time to further any profit-making business or professional enterprise, and further provided that while so parked between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., such vehicle shall not be operated nor its engine run for any purpose whatsoever, nor may such vehicle be driven from the parked location between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
2.  The provisions of this section, however, shall not apply to any vehicle or vehicles designed or used to haul garbage, trash, refuse or wastes of any type, the parking or storage of the same on street or off street in any residential zone being hereby strictly prohibited at any and all times of day or night. 
3.  The restrictions, prohibitions, and limitations imposed by this section shall not apply to any vehicle, or vehicles, owned or used by the Town in furtherance of its municipal purposes when such vehicles are parked on Town-owned property. 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, any such vehicle may be parked on a residential street for more than one hour while actually being loaded or unloaded or while the custodian of any such vehicle is actively performing services in the area or for the occupants of a residence abutting the street on which the vehicle is parked and the residence is not that of the custodian of such vehicle. 
(Code 1969, § 18-153; Ord. of 3-1982; Ord. of 1-1985)  
Sec. 18-153.1. - Authority to restrict keeping of inoperative motor vehicles, etc., on residential or commercial property; removal of such vehicles. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, except within a fully enclosed building or structure, on any property zoned for residential, multifamily or commercial purposes, any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer as such are defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2.100, which is inoperative except that one such inoperative motor vehicle may be kept outside of a fully enclosed building or structure if shielded or screened from view by an auto cover. As used in this section, the term "inoperative motor vehicle" shall mean any motor vehicle which is not in operating condition; or which for a period of 60 days or longer has been partially or totally disassembled by the removal of tires and wheels, the engine, or other essential parts required for operation of the vehicle or on which there are displayed neither valid license plates nor a valid inspection decal. However, the provisions of this section shall not apply to a licensed business which on June 26, 1970, was regularly engaged in business as an automobile dealer, salvage dealer or scrap processor. 
B.  Removal of inoperative vehicles. 
(1)  The owner of property zoned for residential, multifamily or commercial purposes shall, at such time as the Town may prescribe, remove therefrom any such inoperative motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers that are not kept within a fully enclosed building or structure. 
(2)  The Town through its own agents or employees may remove any such inoperative motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers, whenever the owner of the premises, after reasonable notice has failed to do so. 
(3)  In the event the Town, through its own agents or employees, removes any such motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers, after having given such reasonable notice, the Town may dispose of such motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers after giving additional notice to the owner of the vehicles. 
(4)  The cost of any such removal and disposal shall be chargeable to the owner of the vehicle or premises and may be collected by the Town as taxes and levies are collected. 
(5)  Every cost authorized by this section with which the owner of the premises has been assessed shall constitute a lien against the property from which the vehicle was removed, the lien to continue until actual payment of such costs has been made to the Town. 
C.  Exception for vehicles with stored vehicle license plates. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any of the provisions in subsections A and B of this section, the owner or property zoned for residential, multifamily or commercial purposes may store on any one parcel of such land one inoperative motor vehicle for the purpose of restoration for a period not to exceed six months after first obtaining from the department of finance a stored vehicle license plate and payment of a fee of $50.00. 
(2)  Such license plate shall at all times be displayed on the vehicle for which issued and shall be displayed in a conspicuous location which shall be visible from that public street or other public right-of-way nearest the location of the said stored vehicle unless that vehicle is not visible from said public street or other public right-of-way. 
(Code 1969, § 18-153.1; Ord. of 6-1987; Ord. of 4-4-1988; Ord. of 1-1990)  
Sec. 18-153.2. - Automobile graveyards. 
Automobiles graveyards are prohibited within the corporate limits of the Town. 
(Code 1969, § 18-153.2; Ord. of 1-1969)  
Sec. 18-153.3. - Parking of motor buses on Town streets. 
The parking of any motor bus on Town streets between the hours of 3:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. during weekdays and all Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1969, § 18-153.3; Ord. of 4-1980)  
Sec. 18-153.4. - Parking commercial vehicles in residential zones prohibited. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to park, or to permit to be parked, or to be left standing in areas zoned for residential use, any commercial vehicle as defined herein except when such commercial vehicle is being used to pick up or discharge passengers or when temporarily parked pursuant to the performance of work or service at a particular location. 
B.  For the purposes of this section, the term "commercial vehicle" shall include the following: 
1.  Any solid waste collection vehicle, tractor truck or tractor truck/semitrailer, or tractor truck/trailer combination, dump truck, concrete mixer truck, towing and recovery vehicle with a registered gross weight of 12,000 pounds or more and any heavy construction equipment, whether located on the highway or on a truck, trailer, or semitrailer; 
2.  Any trailer, semitrailer or other vehicle in which food or beverage are stored or sold; 
3.  Any trailer or semitrailer used for transporting landscaping or lawn-care equipment whether or not such trailer or semitrailer is attached to another vehicle; 
4.  Any vehicle licensed by the commonwealth for use as a common contract carrier or as a limousine. 
C.  Notwithstanding subsections A and B of this section, one resident of each single-family dwelling unit zoned residential may be permitted to park one vehicle licensed as a taxicab or limousine on such street or highway, provided other vehicles are permitted to park thereon. 
(Code 1969, § 18-153.4)  
Sec. 18-154. - Display of merchandise. 
A.  No merchandise shall be displayed nor any business conducted between the street line and the building line. Where the building housing such business is located to the rear of the building line, storage and display may be conducted but no sales shall be consummated in that area normally used for pedestrian traffic immediately adjacent to any front, side or rear of the building itself, provided that such area be limited to a depth of four feet when measured from the building itself and provided further that there shall be maintained at all times for pedestrian traffic an area free and clear of any and all obstacles, such area to be at least six feet in width fronting immediately on and extending the full length of all such storage or display area. Notwithstanding the above provision of this section, no part of any vehicle parking area, driveway, or roadway may be utilized for storage or display of merchandise, nor may access to any phone booth or similar facility provided for public use be obstructed in any way. The provisions of this section do not apply to the interior or enclosed structures which are constructed in compliance with all applicable ordinances of the Town. 
B.  A waiver of subsection A of this section may be obtained for a period not exceeding 30 days by written application to the Town Manager accompanied by such evidence as may be required by the Town Manager to establish that such waiver is necessary: 
1.  To permit local business establishment with a principal place of business in the Town to sell for a limited period, holiday or seasonal items of a type, sort, kind and character normally sold by such establishment in the course of its regular business and according to the custom and usage for like businesses. All such sales shall be conducted by bona fide regular employees of that business for the benefit of the said business, the use of other persons, subcontractors or personnel of other organizations of any nature being prohibited; or 
2.  To permit the conduct of activities by recognized Town-based charities, religious or service organizations not having an established place of business when to require otherwise would be to impose an undue hardship, and primary and secondary schools wherein at least one-third of the student population are residents of the Town; provided, however, that the conduct of all such activities and sales by such organizations be carried out exclusively by uncompensated volunteers or members of the particular organization without compensation and that no paid agents, employees or contractors be used. 
C.  Notwithstanding subsections A and B of this section, the Town Manager is authorized to permit one private farmers' market or marketplace in the Town each year from May 1 to October 31, inclusive, at a location authorized by this chapter and approved by him, or other public property and only for the sale of vegetables, fruits, agricultural and farm products of a perishable nature grown or produced by the vendors thereof and not purchased by the vendors for sale. Conduct of such markets or marketplaces shall be in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws. All sales must be conducted in person by that vendor having grown or produced the products sold, members of his family or his direct employees. The hours of activity shall be limited to 7:30 a.m. until 1:30 p.m., Saturday only. 
(Code 1969, § 18-154; Ord. of 7-1969; Ord. of 12-1994; Ord. of 2-1996; Ord. of 6-2001)  
Sec. 18-155. - When basement living quarters may be maintained. 
No basement living quarters shall be maintained as a rental unit in any dwelling where the floor grade is more than two feet below the surrounding yard grade, except where the entire exterior wall area of one of the longer sides of the basement is above the ground level of the yard. 
(Code 1969, § 18-155)  
Sec. 18-156. - Public buildings; height. 
Public buildings shall comply with the height limitations established in the zone in which they are located. 
(Code 1969, § 18-156)  
Sec. 18-157. - Yard requirements, buildings other than dwellings; distances between principal buildings. 
For unit group buildings other than dwellings, the front, side, and rear yards along the lot lines shall be the same as required for the zone in which the property is located and the minimum distances between the principal buildings within the side area shall be equivalent to the sum of the two required front, side, or rear yards, or a combination of two of the above yards, according to the arrangement and relationship of the buildings. 
(Code 1969, § 18-157)  
Sec. 18-158. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 18-158 was deleted in its entirety on July 22, 1974.  
Sec. 18-159. - Obstruction to vision at corner, residential zone prohibited. 
On any corner lot in a residential zone there shall be no planting, structure, fences, shrubbery, or obstruction to vision more than three feet above the curb level within 25 feet of the intersection of any two street lines. 
(Code 1969, § 18-159)  
Sec. 18-160. - Obstruction at corner in commercial zone prohibited. 
On any corner lot in a commercial zone no building or obstruction shall be permitted within eight feet of the intersection of any two street lines. 
(Code 1969, § 18-160)  
Sec. 18-161. - Gasoline stations; locations of pumps and driveways. 
Gasoline pumps shall be erected at least ten feet behind the building line. When a gasoline service station occupies a corner lot, the ingress or egress driveways shall be located at least 20 feet from the intersection of the front and side street lines of the lot. Any driveway serving a gasoline service station shall have a minimum width at the throat of 25 feet and a width at the throat not to exceed 35 feet. A lot shall not be used for a gasoline service station if it is within 300 feet of an entrance to a public or parochial school, a public park or playground. 
(Code 1969, § 18-161)  
Sec. 18-162. - Annexed areas; how classified. 
Any area annexed to the Town after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall, immediately upon such annexation, be classified as having a Town zoning most nearly approximating the zoning which it had prior to annexation, until a zoning map for said area has been adopted by the Town Council. The planning commission shall recommend to the Town Council appropriate zoning for the annexed area within three months after the effective date of such annexation. 
(Code 1969, § 18-162)  
Sec. 18-163. - When additional story is permitted. 
On any lot, sloping downhill from the street, which has an average ground slope on that portion of the lot to be occupied by the principal buildings of 25 percent or more, an additional story may be permitted. 
(Code 1969, § 18-163)  
Sec. 18-164. - Penthouses and other roof structures above permitted height limits; when allowed. 
Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building, and fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples, flagpoles, water tanks, silos, or similar structures which are part of the principal building may be erected above the height limits herein described, but no penthouse or roof structure, or any space above the height limit shall be allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor space. All structures and equipment here permitted (except towers, steeples and flagpoles) shall be enclosed, the facade of such enclosure to be in harmony with the facade of the principal structure. 
(Code 1969, § 18-164)  
Sec. 18-165. - Front yard requirement, residential zones, for lot lying between two lots with dwellings thereon. 
In any residential zone any lot lying between two lots immediately adjacent thereto and having dwellings erected upon them at the time of enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, shall have a front yard equal in depth at least to the average depth of front yards of the lots immediately adjacent thereto, provided no front yard shall be less than 15 feet in depth and no front yard shall be required to be more than 40 feet in depth. 
(Code 1969, § 18-165)  
Sec. 18-166. - Front and side yard requirements. 
The front and side yard requirements shall not apply to dwellings, boardinghouses or roominghouses erected above the ground floor of a building when said ground floor is designed exclusively for commercial or industrial purposes. 
(Code 1969, § 18-166)  
Sec. 18-167. - How far carport may project into side yard. 
An unenclosed carport or garage may project into a required side yard for a distance not to exceed five feet; provided, however, that any yard on the side street of a corner lot shall not be reduced to less than ten feet in width. Notwithstanding the above, any such unenclosed carport or garage permitted to project into a required side yard as set forth in this chapter shall be single story, not to exceed 14 feet. 
(Code 1969, § 18-167; Ord. of 5-2009)  
Sec. 18-168. - Porches; projection into required yard area prohibited. 
Any one-story or two-story enclosed or unenclosed porch shall be considered a part of the building in the determination of the size of any yard and shall not project into any required front, side, or rear yard. 
(Code 1969, § 18-168)  
Sec. 18-169. - Bay windows, eaves, decks and other architectural features. 
A.  The space in any required yard shall be open and unobstructed except for: 
1.  The ordinary projections of minor architectural features in the form of window sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves, steps, and chimneys, and accessibility improvements such as basement areaways and window wells, provided such features shall not project more than four feet into any required yard; 
2.  The projection of major architectural features such as bay windows, box windows, cantilevered floor areas, oriels, and other such features as determined in the sole and reasonable discretion of the zoning administrator, provided that such features shall not project more than two and one-half feet into any required yard, or exceed two stories in height or ten feet in length. Additionally, the combined length of all such features shall not exceed one-third of the total length of the building façade upon which they are placed; and 
3.  Decks, which shall not project more than four feet into any required yard, except as specified for rear yards in the RS-16, RS-12.5, RS-10 and RTH zones. 
(Code 1969, § 18-169; Ord. of 10-16-1972; Ord. of 10-7-2002; Ord. of 8-20-2012(2))  
Sec. 18-170. - Fire escapes. 
Open fire escapes shall not extend into any required yard. 
(Code 1969, § 18-170)  
Sec. 18-171. - Walls; when setback and yard requirements do not apply. 
The setback and yard requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any retaining wall which is less than five feet high, nor to any decorative masonry wall which is less than four feet high. 
(Code 1969, § 18-171)  
Sec. 18-172. - Wall required between certain zones. 
A.  All transitional parking lots and all parking lots in transitional zones shall be screened from all adjacent property in any residential zone, and all land zoned C-1, C-1A, C-2, RM-2, RTH or CM on which any industrial, commercial, townhouse or multifamily housing use is conducted shall be screened from all adjacent property in any detached residential zones. Further, all land zoned C-1, C-1A, C-2 or CM on which any industrial or commercial use is conducted shall be likewise screened from all adjacent property in any RM-2 zone. Such screening shall be by a masonry wall constructed of brick or other ornamental masonry of equal acceptable aesthetic quality which does not require painting and shall be maintained at all times. Said wall shall be located on that land so used for that less restrictive but more intense and higher density use along the boundary line separating such land from that adjacent land used for the less dense, less intense residential use and said wall shall be erected to a minimum height of six feet above that grade of the residential side of the wall. 
B.  Where any land on which an ornamental masonry wall is required by this section abuts an alley, or where dedication of such alley is required from such land upon development thereof, the required six foot high masonry wall shall be constructed and maintained on the commercial land along the inside boundary line between such land and such alley when that land located directly on the opposite side of such alley and abutting thereon is zoned RS-16, RS-12.5, or RS-10. Where any land on which an ornamental masonry wall is required by this section abuts a public utility easement or right-of-way, or where dedication of such public utility easement or right-of-way is required from such land upon development thereof, the required six-foot-high ornamental masonry wall shall be constructed and maintained in said public utility easement or right-of-way along the inside boundary line between such utility easement or right-of-way and that land located directly on the opposite side of such public utility easement or right-of-way and abutting thereon which is zoned RS-16, RS-12.5 or RS-10. Provided, however, that the Town Council may waive or modify the requirement for any masonry wall or walls required by this section if in the judgment of the council such wall or walls would not protect the residential property against loss of privacy, trespass by persons or vehicles, or intrusion of noise or trash, attributable to activities conducted on any adjacent transitional parking lot, parking lot in a transitional zone or on adjacent land zoned C-1, C-1A, C-2 RM-2, RTH or CM; or in the judgment of the council, equivalent protection of such adjacent or nearby residential property against loss of privacy, trespass and intrusion of noise and trash can be achieved by evergreen planting, fencing or a combination of such planting and fencing; and provided further, that prior to the meeting at which such waiver of any masonry wall is to be considered, the planning commission and the council shall give written notice of same to the occupants of all property adjacent to and across the street from the property to which such waiver would apply. 
C.  All walls or evergreen screening required by this section shall be shown on all site plans required by article 25 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-172; Ord. of 7-1974; Ord. of 4-1976; Ord. of 5-24-1982; Ord. of 2-1983; Ord. of 10-1983)  
Sec. 18-172.1. - Underground utility services. 
A.  All utility services, including, but not limited to, all wires, cables, pipes, conduits and appurtenant equipment, carrying or used in connection with the furnishing of electric power, telephone, telegraph, cable television, petroleum, gas, steam, water or sewer systems, shall, after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, be placed below the surface of the ground; provided that: 
(a)  Equipment such as electric distribution transformers, switchgear, meter pedestals, and telephone pedestals, which is normally installed above ground in accordance with accepted utility practices for underground distribution systems, may be so installed; 
(b)  Meters, service connections, and similar equipment normally attached to the outside wall of the premises it serves may continue to be so installed; and 
(c)  Existing overhead utility services to any building, accessory building, or structure erected prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived may remain overhead when repaired, replaced, or increased in capacity. 
B.  All improvements herein required shall be constructed in accordance with accepted standards of utility practice for underground construction. 
C.  Whenever relocation of utility facilities is compelled by any construction undertaken by any unit of government, the provisions of this section may be waived by the Town Council. 
(Code 1969, § 18-172.1; Ord. of 4-1969; Ord. of 9-1990)  
Sec. 18-173. - Home occupation. 
In any residential zone a home occupation is permitted, including the use of the home as an office, provided that the occupation complies with all the following conditions: 
A.  Is operated in its entirety within the single unit dwelling and only by the person maintaining a dwelling therein. 
B.  Does not display or create outside the building any external evidence of the home occupation, including any method of advertisement other than a dwelling nameplate as permitted in section 18-185. 
C.  Does not utilize more than 25 percent of the gross livable floor area including the basement. 
D.  No person is employed other than a member of the immediate family residing on the premises. Provided, however, that in the event any such family member so employed in any home occupation dies or becomes physically incapacitated, and such incapacitation is certified by a medical doctor as preventing said family member from performing such employment thereby causing a hardship to the proper conduct of said home occupation, the board of zoning appeals may grant a variance to permit temporary employment of not more than one person for a period not to exceed six months following a public hearing, pursuant to section 18-234. 
E.  Does not use any internal combustion engine as a power source and does not use more than a total of three horsepower in fractional horsepower electric motors (other than is normally used for domestic use). 
F.  Will not involve the emission of any sounds, odors, or smoke beyond the property line in excess of normal single unit dwelling use. 
G.  No commodity will be sold on the premises. 
H.  Any service involving the presence of customers or clients on the premises will be operated on an appointment basis only. 
I.  Will not constitute a nuisance because of sidewalk or street traffic. 
J.  Said use will not tend to affect adversely the use and development of adjoining properties in the immediate neighborhood. 
K.  No equipment or merchandise shall be stored anywhere on the premises other than inside the principal residential structure itself. 
L.  No commercial deliveries shall be made either to or from the premises before 8:00 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m. 
A boardinghouse, tourist home, massage therapist or massage therapy establishment, or principal office of a real estate business shall not be deemed a home occupation. 
(Code 1969, § 18-173; Ord. of 6-16-1975; Ord. of 2-4-1985; Ord. of 4-15-1985; Ord. of 11-1994; Ord. of 11-2004)  
Sec. 18-173.1. - Commercial group building development. 
The following regulations shall apply to all commercial group building development where permitted. For general regulations see article 4 of this chapter. All supplemental regulations contained in this article shall apply, excepting that where other regulations in this article are in conflict with the regulations in this section, then this section shall govern. 
A.  Commercial group building developments complying with sections 18-72 and 18-73 shall be permitted subject to approval of a site plan of each development by the Town Council in accordance with article 25 of this chapter. 
B.  General specifications: 
1.  All area and height and parking requirements for commercial group building development shall be governed by the regulations applicable to the zone in which located. 
2.  The common open space and any common parking lot, including any required screening, shall be governed by a council of co-owners if such development shall have qualified pursuant to the Horizontal Property Act of this Commonwealth, or conveyed to a non-stock, nonprofit corporation, organized and operated under the laws of the commonwealth. If conveyed to such corporation, the owner or developer shall present, with the site plan required by article 25 of this chapter, copies of the articles of incorporation of such corporation, its bylaws and an adequately financed plan with effectuating agreements and covenants acceptable to the Town assuring the development and maintenance of any common open space and common parking lots. The membership of such non-stock, nonprofit corporation shall consist of all the individual lot and unit owners of the development. 
3.  Common open space, excluding any contained in lots, streets and parking, shall after development in accordance with the site plan, not be denuded, defaced, or otherwise disturbed in any manner without the written approval of the Town Council. All common open space including, but not limited to, paved parking areas and driveways, shall be maintained in accordance with standards and regulations from time to time issued by the director of public works with the approval of the Town Council. 
4.  Minimum gross floor area: Gross plan area shall be interpreted as a measure of usable area exclusive of attic, garage and basement which is more than 50 percent underground. Each separate unit in a series shall have a minimum gross floor area of 800 square feet per floor with the average gross floor area within a series to be not less than 1,000 square feet per floor. 
5.  Minimum area permitted, commercial group building development: One contiguous acre, maximum number of units per gross acre not to exceed eight. 
6.  No more than ten units shall be constructed in a contiguous series in any commercial group building development. 
7.  Facades, roofs and treatment of external materials shall be submitted as a condition of site plan approval. Not more than two abutting units and not more than one-third of any abutting series of units shall have the same architectural design or treatment of materials unless otherwise approved by the architectural review board of the Town. 
8.  A minimum ten percent of the gross acreage of each commercial zone building development shall be provided for common open space to include green areas, trees, plantings, etc. for the purpose of improving the appearance of the project. 
C.  Unit width. For each separate unit in a commercial group building development there shall be a minimum unit width of 20 feet. Not more than two abutting units and not more than one-third of any abutting series of units shall have the same width. 
D.  Yard requirements. See subsection B of this section. 
E.  Front yard. None required excepting that the distance from the unit front to common open space or common parking lot shall be subject to site plan approval, provided not more than two abutting units shall have the same front setback from such common open space or parking lot. 
F.  Side yard. None required excepting that end units and corner units shall be set back from the property line a distance equal to the required side yard for the zone in which located. 
G.  Rear yard. None required excepting that no unit in any group shall be constructed closer than 25 feet from the rear property line. 
H.  Height limit. Maximum height of each unit shall be 2½ stories, but not to exceed 35 feet. 
I.  Off-street parking area. As specified in article 16 of this chapter excepting that notwithstanding contrary provisions of article 16 of this chapter, all required parking facilities in any commercial group building development shall be located on the site and meet all requirements of the zone in which located. 
J.  Nameplates and signs. As specified in this chapter for the zone in which the development is located. 
K.  Public utilities. All utilities requiring transmission by wires shall be placed underground or under surface, except pad-mounted transformers which shall be properly screened. 
(Code 1969, § 18-173.1; Ord. of 4-22-1974)  
Sec. 18-173.2. - Intent and purpose. 
The Town Council finds and declares that: 
A.  The intrusion of non-regulated garage sales is causing annoyance to citizens in residential areas in the Town and congestion of the streets in residential areas in the Town. 
B.  The provisions contained in section 18-173.12, Non-regulated Garage Sales, are intended to prohibit the infringement of any businesses in any established residential areas by regulating the term and frequency of garage sales, so as not to disturb or disrupt the residential environment of the area. 
C.  The provisions of this ordinance do not seek control of sales by individuals selling a few of their household or personal items. 
D.  The provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained are enacted not to prevent but to regulate garage sales for the safety and welfare of the Town citizens. 
(Code 1969, § 18-173.2; Ord. of 3-17-1980)  
Sec. 18-173.3. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Garage sale means and includes all general sales, open to the public, conducted from or on a residential premises used for family residential purposes only, in any residential zone as defined by this chapter, for the purpose of disposing of personal property including, but not limited to, all sales entitled "garage," "lawn," "yard," "attic," "porch," "room," "backyard," "patio," "flea-market," or "rummage" sale. This definition shall not include a situation where no more than five specific items are held out for sale and all advertisement of such sale specifically names those items to be sold. 
Personal property means property which is owned, utilized and maintained by an individual or members of his residence and acquired in the normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. It does not include merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment or merchandise obtained from persons other than those specifically authorized to conduct a sale under the specific permit granted. 
(Code 1969, § 18-173.3)  
Sec. 18-173.4. - Number of sales limited. 
It shall be unlawful for any such sale to be conducted on premises other than those occupied as a residence by one of the persons conducting such sale. No more than two such sales may be conducted at any one residence and/or family household during any calendar year. If members of more than one residence join in conducting such sale, such sale shall be considered to have been conducted at all of such residences. 
(Code 1969, § 18-173.4)  
Sec. 18-173.5. - Home of operation. 
Such garage sales shall be limited in time to no more than the daylight hours of two consecutive days or two consecutive weekends (Saturday and Sunday). 
(Code 1969, § 18-173.5)  
Sec. 18-173.6. - Advertising; signs. 
(a)  Signs permitted. Only the following specified signs may be displayed in relation to a pending garage sale: 
(1)  Two signs permitted. Two signs of not more than four square feet each shall be permitted to be displayed on the property of the residence where the garage sale is being conducted. 
(2)  Directional signs. Four signs of not more than two square feet each are permitted, provided that the premises upon which the garage sale is conducted is not on a major thoroughfare, and permission to erect said signs is received from the property owners upon whose property such signs are to be placed. 
(3)  No signs shall be posted on public or utility property. 
(b)  Time limitations. No sign or other form of advertisement shall be exhibited for more than two days prior to the day such sale is to commence. 
(c)  Removal of signs. Signs must be removed each day at the close of the garage sale activities or by the end of daylight, whichever first occurs. 
(Code 1969, § 18-173.6; Ord. of 1-1997)  
Sec. 18-173.7. - Public nuisance. 
The individual conducting such sale and the owner or tenant of the premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on the premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No such individual shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on said premises nor permit vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets in the area of such premises. All such individuals shall obey the reasonable orders of any member of the police or fire departments of the Town in order to maintain the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Code 1969, § 18-173.8)  
Sec. 18-173.8. - Parking. 
All parking of vehicles shall be conducted in compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances. Further, the Police Department may enforce such temporary controls to alleviate any special hazards and/or congestion created by any garage sale. 
(Code 1969, § 18-173.9)  
Sec. 18-173.9. - Persons exempted from ordinance. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to or affect the following: 
(a)  Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. 
(c)  Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business establishment from or at any place of business wherein such sale would be permitted by the zoning regulations of the Town or under the protection of the nonconforming use section thereof or any other sale conducted by a manufacturer, dealer or vendor and which sale would be conducted from properly zoned premises and not otherwise prohibited in other ordinances. 
(d)  Any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural or governmental institution or organization when the proceeds from the sale are used directly for the institution or organization's charitable purposes and the goods or articles are not sold on a consignment basis. 
(Code 1969, § 18-173.9)  
Sec. 18-173.10. - Separate violations. 
Every article sold and every day a sale is conducted in violation of this ordinance shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1969, § 18-173.10)  
Sec. 18-173.11. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any of the terms and regulations of this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $250.00 or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed ten days for each violation. 
(Code 1969, § 18-173.11)  
Sec. 18-173.12. - Separability. 
If any provision of this ordinance is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, or if the application of this ordinance to any person or circumstances is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions or applications of this ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional provision or application. 
(Code 1969, § 18-173.12)  
Sec. 18-173.13. - Condominium conversions. 
A.  Information filing required. The declarant of a conversion condominium in the Town shall file with the zoning administrator, copies of all information otherwise required to be filed by such declarant with any and all appropriate departments, agencies and offices of the commonwealth and such filing with the zoning administrator shall be done simultaneously with such other filing required by the commonwealth. 
B.  Offer of lease to elderly and disabled tenants required. 
(1)  The declarant of a conversion condominium in the Town shall, simultaneously with giving to tenants such notice of conversion as is required by applicable provisions of the Code of Virginia, offer elderly and disabled tenants occupying as their residence at that time, apartments or units in the proposed conversion condominium leases or extensions of lease on the apartments or units they then occupy or on other apartments or units of equal size and overall quality. 
(2)  Offers of leases or extensions of leases required by this section shall include no less than 20 percent of the apartments or units in the proposed conversion condominium and shall be offered for a term of three years. Such offers of leases or extensions of leases shall not apply to apartments or units which will, in the course of conversion, be substantially altered in the physical layout, restricted exclusively to nonresidential use or rendered legally uninhabitable because of renovations or rehabilitation which the declarant intends in good faith to perform. 
For the purpose of this section the term "elderly" means a person not less than 62 years old and the term "disabled" means a person suffering from a severe, chronic physical or mental impairment which results in substantial functional limitations. 
C.  Reimbursement of displaced tenants required. The declarant of any residential condominium converted from multifamily rental shall reimburse any tenant displaced by the conversion for amounts actually expended to relocate as a result of such dislocation but not in excess of the amount to which the tenant would have been entitled to receive under law if the real estate comprising the condominium had been condemned by the Virginia Department of Highways and Transportation. 
D.  Schedule of reimbursable expenses. The zoning administrator shall maintain a current schedule of reimbursable expenses, which schedule shall be available to the public during business hours. 
(Code 1969, § 18-173.13; Ord. of 7-12-1982; Ord. of 6-17-1985)  
Sec. 18-173.14. - Maintenance of landscape areas. 
1.  Owners of property within the Town shall maintain all landscaping, and all planting areas installed pursuant to any provision of this chapter in compliance with regulations to be published from time to time by the director of public works. Such regulations shall, among other elements, require the regular periodic mowing of grass, trimming of borders, fertilization and watering of all ground cover, shrubbery, and trees, application of insecticides to protect against infestation, removal of weeds, pruning of all plantings as necessary to maintain vigor and appearance, replacement of dead shrubs, trees, bushes and plants, and removal of trash, litter, garbage and debris. 
2.  Where any such landscaping or planting area is not maintained in compliance with subsection 1 of this section, the director of public works shall immediately notify the owner of the property on which such landscaping or planting area is located of such deficient maintenance and request that the necessary maintenance work be performed. Such notice and request shall be by certified mail sent to the owner, postage prepaid. Where no address can be found, the letter herein referred to shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property. 
3.  If the deficiencies in landscaping or planting area maintenance referred to in subsection 2 of this section have not been corrected by the property owner within ten days from the date the letter referred to in this section has been mailed, or the notice posted, the director of public works shall cause the deficiencies to be corrected by Town forces or by a contractor of the Town. 
4.  Where deficiencies in the maintenance of landscaping or planting areas are corrected at Town expense by the director of public works pursuant to subsection 3 of this section, the cost of same shall be billed to the owner of the property; and if such bill is not paid, it shall be added to the real estate bill on such property, and shall be a lien on such property to the same extent and effect as the real estate tax. 
(Code 1969, § 18-173.14; Ord. of 11-1986)  
Sec. 18-173.15. - Blighted property a nuisance. 
A.  The Town Council may, by ordinance, declare any blighted property as defined in this chapter, to constitute a nuisance, and thereupon abate the nuisance pursuant to authority of municipal corporations to so act. 
B.  Such ordinance shall be adopted only after written notice by certified mail to the owner or owners at the last known address of such owner as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books or current real estate tax assessment records. 
(Code 1969, § 18-173.15; Ord. of 10-1998)  
Sec. 18-173.16. - Security fences. 
Notwithstanding any restrictions related to fences, fences used for security and protection of Town and/or government facilities, structures and/or utilities, may exceed the height restriction set forth in this chapter. Fences exceeding such restrictions, barbed wire, razor wire, concertina wire and/or other security enhancement devices may be used for security protection of Town and/or government facilities, structures and/or utilities if approved by resolution of the Town Council. Such resolution shall be based upon the recommendation of the director of public works and chief of police and upon a finding by the Town Council that such measures are necessary in the interest of public safety and security for such facility, structure and/or utility. 
(Code 1969, § 18-173.16; Ord. of 11-2004)  
ARTICLE 19. - NAMEPLATES AND SIGNS 
 
Sec. 18-174. - Intent. 
A.  The intent of this article is to control all signs within the Town, to ensure that they are appropriate for their respective principal uses and in keeping with the appearance of the affected property and surrounding environment, and to protect the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. In addition, the intent of this article is to: 
1.  Encourage good design in the context of the overall image and visual environment of the Town; 
2.  Protect property values; enhance the appearance of the business and industrial community; 
3.  Stimulate the economic vitality of the Town, encourage a business atmosphere that continues to attract new enterprises to the Town, encourage trade within the Town, and to appropriately inform consumers; 
4.  Ensure that signs are adequate, but not excessive; 
5.  Prohibit the erection of signs in such numbers, sizes, designs and locations as may create danger to the public by obscuring road signs or by unsafely diverting the attention of motorists; 
6.  Prohibit signs which are likely to create unsafe conditions because of unsound structures or unsuitable locations; 
7.  Avoid excessive competition for placement of signs, so that permitted signs provide identification, direction, information and advertising while minimizing clutter and unsightliness. 
B.  The general premise for the control of signs includes legibility, the effective display of information, the safety of passing traffic, and the coordination of signs with buildings, landscaping and other elements of the visual environment. In particular, signs should be designed and constructed as follows: 
1.  For maximum legibility, considering viewing, location and traffic conditions. 
2.  For size and dimensions, signs should be related to the frontage and setback of the building. 
3.  The setback and size of signs should give a fair exposure to all commercial buildings in a given area. 
4.  Signs should be integrated with the architecture of the buildings to which they relate, and with the nearby landscaping. 
(Code 1969, § 18-174)  
Sec. 18-175. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Awning or canopy includes any structure made of cloth or metal or a frame attached or detached from a building and projecting therefrom, and possibly carried by frames supported at grade level. 
Banner, pennants or streamers, standards or flags means any temporary sign consisting of lightweight, flexible material, which is supported by a frame, ropes, cables, wires or other anchoring devices. 
Building directory means a wall sign which lists the names, times, uses and locations of various services, offices or activities within a building, and which is intended to be read at close proximity. 
College or university means a place, location, building, or structure that houses or is used by an organization devoted to higher education. To be eligible for signage under section 18-185.F, the organization must serve an institutional purpose. Proof of such purpose includes being approved or recognized by the State Council of Higher Education for Virginia, or by an equivalent agency of the state in which the primary campus of the institution is located. Eligibility under section 18-185 F does not include business schools. 
Freestanding sign means any sign supported by one or more uprights, braces or poles, or placed directly on the ground or on a foundation on the ground and not attached to a building. 
Master sign plan means a comprehensive sign plan for a multi-tenant development, building or shopping center which identifies all proposed permanent wall, free-standing and window signs. 
Monument sign means a freestanding sign no taller than six feet in height, permanently placed in a landscaped area and used to identify a building, its tenants or businesses located on the same site. 
Moving or rotating signs means any sign which involves motion or rotation of any part or which displays flashing or intermittent lights. 
Place of worship means a church, synagogue, temple, mosque, or other building or structure that houses the sanctuary or principal place of worship of an organization devoted to the furtherance of religious ideals. To be eligible for signage under section 18-185.F, the organization must have tax exemption based on the religious nature of its activities. 
Political sign means a temporary sign relating to the election of a person to public office, or a political party, or a matter to be voted upon by an election called by a duly constituted public body. 
Principal street means that public street which parallels the longest side of a shopping center; in the case of only one public street adjoining a shopping center, that one street shall be the principal street. 
Projecting sign means any sign which is attached in a plane approximately perpendicular to the surface of a building or other structure. 
School means a location, building, or structure that houses or is used by an organization for instruction in any branch or branches of knowledge. To be eligible for signage under section 18-185 F, the organization must serve an institutional purpose. Proof of such purpose may include being accredited, licensed, certified or being recognized by the state board of education. Eligibility under section 18-185 F does not include home-based schools or vocational schools. 
Show window display means displays of merchandise, pictures, posters, prices, promotional statements, etc., designed and intended to be viewed by pedestrians in front of the show window. 
Sign means any object, letter, figure, design, symbol, artistic display, trademark, flag (excluding federal, state and local flags), illumination of other device intended to call attention to or identify or give direction to any place, subject, person, firm, business, public performance, article, machine or merchandise. 
Sign area includes the entire face of the sign and any adjacent area incidental to its decoration and, in case of an open sign made up of individual letters, figures or designs, the space between and around such letters, figures or designs. 
Sign height means the difference in height between the elevation of the established or proposed grade level beneath the sign and the elevation of the uppermost extremity of the sign structure. 
Sign maintenance means the renewal, painting, repair or cleaning of an existing sign which retains the same sign information items, colors, composition, location and structure as the original. 
Sign structure means any assembly of materials which supports a sign and which is not an integral element of a wall or building. 
Temporary sign means any sign, banner, valance or advertising display which may easily be dismantled or removed and which may only be displayed for a limited period of time an any one location. 
Time-temperature display means a sign which displays time/date/temperature for the convenience of the public. 
Wall sign means any sign which is affixed directly to or suspended from a wall, marquee, mansard roof or parapet wall of a building, with the exposed face of the wall and extending from it less than 12 inches. A wall sign may be either of one-piece construction or of individual letters or symbols. A wall sign may also be inscribed on or attached to the vertical or nearly vertical surface of an awning or canopy which is permanently affixed to a building. 
Window sign means any permanent or temporary sign which can be read from a public street or parking lot, and which is placed on the inside surface of a glass window or within a distance of six feet inside the window. Show window displays are not included within this definition. 
(Code 1969, § 18-175; Ord. of 8-19-1991; Ord. of 10-1996; Ord. of 3-1999)  
Sec. 18-176. - Permits required. 
Except for an exempt sign, a permit is required to erect, alter in any major respect, including changing colors, or move any sign. No nameplate or sign shall be permitted in any residential, commercial or industrial zone of any character other than specified in this article. 
(Code 1969, § 18-176)  
Sec. 18-177. - Exempt signs. 
Exempt signs shall include the following: 
1.  Signs not exceeding 1.5 square feet in area, and not otherwise prohibited by section 18-178. Any sign over 1.5 square feet and not otherwise prohibited by section 18-178 shall require a permit as specified in section 18-176. 
2.  Temporary window signs. Signs made of paper, cardboard, cloth or similar material may be displayed in buildings in the commercial and industrial zones, provided the area of such signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the total area of transparent glass. 
3.  Bulletin boards. One white lighted bulletin board is permitted, not exceeding 18 square feet in area for nonprofit organizations. 
4.  Residential nameplate. One residential nameplate for each dwelling unit shall be permitted not exceeding 1.5 square feet in area. Such sign may be at but not project over any street sign. 
5.  For sale or for rent signs. One unlighted sign will be permitted to advertise property for sale or for rent, provided such sign is located on the property to which it pertains and provided the total area of such sign does not exceed six square feet. 
6.  Other similar signs as determined by the zoning administrator or designee. 
(Code 1969, § 18-177; Ord. of 8-19-1991)  
Sec. 18-178. - Prohibited signs and sign structures. 
Signs prohibited by this article include: 
1.  Signs and/or sign structures, except temporary signs, which are erected on any property without the express written permission of the property owner or his authorized agents. 
2.  Signs which are a public nuisance because of amplified sound, smoke, vapor, particle emission or objectionable odors. 
3.  Signs and/or sign structures which violate the visibility provisions of this article. 
4.  Signs on roof prohibited. Signs of any type shall not be erected upon the roof of any building, except on the sides of a mansard-type roof. 
5.  Billboards prohibited. Billboards are hereby prohibited in the Town. 
6.  Moving or rotating signs and pennants, banners, streamers, etc., are prohibited. Signs which involve motion or rotation of any part, or display flashing or intermittent lights are prohibited. Standards, banners, flags, streamers, and similar devices used for advertising purposes are prohibited, unless provided by the zoning administrator for not more than 30 days. Sponsorship banners at facilities where recreational uses occur, as defined in this chapter, may be permitted in the discretion of the zoning administrator for a period not to exceed 120 days. The zoning administrator shall exercise his discretion with due regard for the intent provision of this article set forth in section 18-174 A.3. 
7.  All signs and sign structures which are erected after the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived and which do not comply with the provisions of the article shall be deemed prohibited signs, subject to removal. Signs approved by the Board of Architectural Review, but not erected prior to this article shall not be subject to removal. 
8.  Signs or sign structures, the permits for which have been revoked. 
9.  Any exposed-tubing lighting arrangement, except that: 
a.  Any business establishment may have one or more signs with a total area not to exceed 1½ square feet. Signs of more than 1½ square feet in total area and consisting of exposed tubing that were in existence as of August 19, 1991, may continue in operation only so long as they remain in good operating condition and provided that they are not replaced or altered in any manner whatsoever. For the purposes of this section, the term "replaced" shall mean the removal of an existing lighting arrangement and its substitution with any other type as defined herein; and the term "altered" shall mean the process of changing, enlarging, extending, or reducing the existing lighting arrangement. 
b.  Any business establishment with a public entrance and all of its parking in the rear of its building may have, in addition to the lighting permitted under subsection A.9.a of this section, one exposed-tubing lighting arrangement not exceeding one and one-half square feet in total area located in a rear-facing display window or public entrance. 
10.  Telephone and facsimile numbers, Internet and electronic mail addresses: the use of telephone numbers, facsimile numbers, Internet addresses or electronic mail addresses on a permanent wall and freestanding signs can be districting to motorists and thereby create a hazardous situation. Therefore, telephone numbers, facsimile numbers, Internet addresses, and electronic mail addresses may not be displayed on such signs, either jointly or individually, except when required by federal, state, or local law. Evidence of such requirement must be submitted with any application for a sign permit containing a telephone or facsimile number, or an Internet or electronic mail address. 
(Code 1969, § 18-178; Ord. of 8-19-1991; Ord. of 10-1995; Ord. of 3-1999; Ord. of 6-2010)  
Sec. 18-179. - Structural requirements; maintenance and illumination. 
A.  No sign or sign structure shall be erected unless it complies with the applicable requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and this chapter. 
B.  All signs and sign structures shall be maintained in good repair and in a safe and secure condition. A sign or sign structure found by the zoning administrator or his designee to be unsafe or insecure may be deemed a public nuisance, subject to the removal provisions of this article. 
C.  All signs and sign structures shall be kept in a neat, clean and presentable condition, such that each sign information item is clearly legible. A sign found by the zoning administrator or his designee to show clear evidence of deterioration, including rust, faded colors, discoloration, holes and missing parts or information items, may be deemed a public nuisance, subject to the removal provisions of this article. 
D.  A sign illumination shall be by means of internal light sources or by external, shielded light sources. 
(Code 1969, § 18-179)  
Sec. 18-180. - Revocation of permits and removal of signs. 
A.  The zoning administrator may revoke any permit issued under this section in any instance in which the sign or sign structure is found to be in violation of any provision of this section, unless the sign owner corrects such a violation within 30 days of receiving written notice of such revocation. 
B.  Responsibility. The responsibility of any sign or sign structure shall rest jointly and severally with the sign owner, and the owner of the premises on which the sign is located. 
C.  Special remedies. Every sign or sign structure declared to be a public nuisance may be abated, enjoined, restrained or removed by the Town in any available legal proceeding or court action in addition to the other remedies specified by this article. 
(Code 1969, § 18-180)  
Sec. 18-181. - Signs erected prior to this article. 
No sign erected before the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be altered in any major respect, or its color changed, or moved unless it is brought under compliance with the provisions of this article. This provision does not apply to routine sign maintenance. 
(Code 1969, § 18-181)  
Sec. 18-182. - Permitted signs in transitional zones. 
Each business located in a transitional zone shall be permitted an identification sign not exceeding two square feet in area which shall be attached to and parallel with the front of all the building in which the business is located. Where more than one business is located in a single building, all such identification signs shall be of the same style and size and mounted in a closely spaced group which shall not exceed eight square feet in total area. In lieu of such attached signs and not in addition thereto, there may be permitted one freestanding identification sign not exceeding a maximum of 18 square feet accommodating all businesses in such location. No such identification sign or groups of signs or any other external feature of any building or facility shall be electrically illuminated, directly or indirectly, by any device which consumes more than 100 watts of electric power. All such illumination shall be shielded against reflection or direct radiation into adjacent residential zones. 
(Code 1969, § 18-182; Ord. of 11-15-1993)  
Sec. 18-182.1. - Permitted signs in RTH zones. 
One freestanding sign not exceeding a maximum of 24 square feet and the maximum height of the sign or structure shall be no more than six feet above average grade, identifying by name a townhouse subdivision as the same appears on that subdivision plat previously approved by the Town Council and recorded among the land records of the county. Such identification sign shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the street line. All sign illumination shall be by means of external, shielded light sources. 
(Code 1969, § 18-182.1; Ord. of 10-1988)  
Sec. 18-183. - Permitted signs in RM-2 multifamily zones. 
The following signs are also permitted in the RM-2 zone: 
A.  One identification sign, not to exceed three square feet for boarding[houses] and roominghouses. 
B.  One white-lighted identification sign (excluding illuminated signs of the flashing or animated types), not to exceed 12 square feet for multiple dwellings and principal offices of professions. 
(Code 1969, § 18-183)  
Sec. 18-184. - Permitted signs in commercial and industrial zones. 
A.  Permitted nameplates and signs. All nameplates and signs permitted in residential zones are permitted in commercial and industrial zones. 
B.  Sign area. A total limit of two square feet of sign area is permitted for each linear foot of commercial or industrial building frontage. This shall include all exterior and interior signs, except after review by the Board of Architectural Review, 1½ square feet may be added to the building sign for street number designation purposes only. 
C.  Exterior signs. 
1.  Any exterior sign shall pertain only to a use conducted within the building and shall front the principal street, a parking area on the rear portion of the lot, or in the case of a corner building, on that portion of the side street wall within 50 feet of the principal street. In no case shall a sign project above the roofline or be displayed on a rear wall of a building so that it is visible in a residential zone except as permitted in sections 18-184 C.3 and 18-184 C.4. All exterior signs shall serve the primary purpose of identifying the business and/or profession conducted on the premises, but may also include reasonable product information as is approved by the Board of Architectural Review established by chapter 4. 
2.  All exterior signs attached to a building shall be flat against the building and parallel with its horizontal dimension. 
3.  An exterior identification sign not to exceed 12 square feet or four feet in length may be attached to the rear wall of a building, provided that such sign is flat against the building and parallel with its horizontal dimensions, that it is not lighted, and that the building has a rear entrance for its customers. 
4.  All exterior signs attached to canopies which are structurally a part of the building and all exterior signs attached flat against a building with less than 18 inches between the top of the display window and above the roofline may project three feet above the roofline but not exceed 4½ feet in total height, provided such signs shall be opaquely shielded and hooded from any immediately adjoining residential zones. The back of signs attached to a canopy shall not extend behind a line 18 inches back from and parallel with the outermost edge of the top of the canopy. 
D.  Freestanding suspended signs. Signs not attached to any building shall not project over the property line and the bottom of such sign shall not be less than nine feet above the finished grade at its base, except that a freestanding sign may be placed lower than nine feet if such is placed on a landscaping strip, and it is determined by the zoning administrator or designee that it does not interfere with pedestrian traffic or traffic vision. One freestanding sign not to exceed 36 square feet in area shall be permitted for each separate building or buildings located in a commercial or industrial zone, except shopping centers. 
E.  Shopping center signs. 
1.  Shopping centers shall be permitted one free-standing sign, no larger than 100 square feet in area. The maximum height of such sign shall be the lesser of 20 feet or the roofline height of the nearest building. 
2.  In lieu of one freestanding sign, a shopping center may have two monument signs under the following conditions: 
a.  The center must have a minimum, continuous principal street frontage of 500 linear feet and a minimum, continuous side street of 250 linear feet; 
b.  The combined area of both signs may not exceed 100 square feet; 
c.  Signs may be no taller than six feet. 
All such signs shall be used for center and tenant identification purposes only. 
F.  Window signs, permanent. Permanent window signs shall be permitted on each side of a building on which a ground floor business has street frontage or in the front of such building where there is no street frontage. 
1.  Area. No window sign shall exceed 25 percent of the total transparent glass area of the windows on each side of the building. In addition, sign area per business shall not exceed ten square feet on any street frontage. 
2.  Location. No permitted window sign shall be located in a window above the second floor. 
G.  Master sign plan. 
1.  A master sign plan may be proposed by a property owner or authorized agent for a multi-tenant development, building or shopping center. The master sign plan shall clearly show the layout, location, dimensions, design, letter style, color, material and illumination of all proposed permanent wall, free-standing and window signs. 
2.  If a master sign plan is approved by the Board of Architectural Review, applications for approval of individual sign permits included in the plan may be submitted pursuant to section 18-186.E without further review by the board. 
3.  Any application for an individual sign permit that is not consistent with an approved master sign plan will require the review and approval of the Board of Architectural Review. 
(Code 1969, § 18-184; Ord. of 3-1999)  
Sec. 18-184.1. - Permitted signs in PR zones. 
The following signs are permitted in PR zones: 
A.  Site identification. One sign not to exceed 24 square feet in area shall be permitted for each separate street frontage that abuts the subject tract; 
B.  Multiple fields or uses within one site. One sign per field or use, not to exceed 12 square feet in area; 
C.  Scoreboards. As set forth in section 18-185.1; 
D.  Buildings with an area of less than 150 square feet. One non-illuminated sign of not more than two square feet in area may be permitted per building located on site. Such sign shall be attached flat against said building. 
E.  Buildings with an area of 150 square feet or more. One sign of not more than 12 square feet in area may be permitted per permanent building located on site. 
(Code 1969, § 18-184.1; Ord. of 4-15-1991)  
Sec. 18-185. - Special regulations for certain uses and signs. 
A.  Time, temperature and date signs. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 18-178, any freestanding sign which conforms in all other respects to the provisions of this article may include as a part thereof an area not to exceed 50 percent of that total sign on which there is alternately displayed by changing light patterns the time, temperature and date, provided: 
1.  Neither time, temperature nor date is otherwise displayed on or about the building or structure served by such sign. 
2.  The changing light patterns are restricted to the time, temperature and date portion of the sign only. 
3.  A series of separate, white, incandescent bulbs and no other device is used to create those characters comprising the time, temperature and date legend. 
4.  The said portion of the sign be completely extinguished at any time as any of the said legends should inaccurately display the proper time, temperature or date, any of the incandescent bulbs fail to light, or the sign is otherwise not fully functional or in proper operational condition. 
For the purpose of this section, the judgment of the zoning administrator or designee, exercised in good faith, shall be conclusive as to whether any sign is fully functional or in proper operating condition. 
B.  Awnings and canopies. No part of any awning shall be less than seven feet above the sidewalk level, nor shall any awning be less than one foot to the curbline. Architectural canopies may project 42 inches above any building. 
C.  Signs not attached to wall of building; setback requirements. All signs, except as otherwise provided herein, that are not attached to the wall of a building shall be set back ten feet from the street line. 
D.  Sign permitted for buildings other than dwelling. One identification sign not exceeding 12 square feet in area for buildings other than dwellings or business is permitted, provided the same shall be attached to and parallel with the front wall of the building. 
E.  Temporary signs. A temporary real estate sign and signs of a public and semi-public nature not exceeding 50 square feet in area may be erected upon issuance of a temporary six-month renewable permit. Such sign shall not be illuminated, nor shall it be less than 75 feet from any dwelling. No such temporary permit shall be granted unless a $25.00 bond has been posted. All temporary real estate signs and public and semi-public signs shall be dismantled within five days after expiration date of the temporary permit. 
1.  Temporary signs of a public or semi-public nature pertaining to elections. Five temporary signs not exceeding 20 square feet total may be posted on residential property after securing the necessary permits and posting of a $25.00 bond, for a period of 30 days prior to election day and shall be removed not more than five days after election day. Failure to remove signs shall constitute forfeiture of all bonds posted and all material will become property of the Town. 
2.  A banner across Maple Avenue at the intersection of Maple Avenue and Center Street shall be erected two weeks before election day to announce Town elections, such wording shall be "Town Council Election, Tuesday, May (date)" and removed the day after election. 
3.  Temporary signs during construction. 
a.  In the event an existing approved exterior sign permitted under section 18-184 requires temporary removal due to reconstruction or renovation of the building exterior where located, a temporary business identification sign of a size not exceeding the original may be substituted therefor during the period of actual reconstruction or renovation, or six months, whichever is less. All such temporary business identification signs shall be subject to approval of the Board of Architectural Review. 
b.  One construction sign identifying a construction site or project, located on the identified project site and meeting the permit requirements of this article, may be erected no more than five days prior to the beginning of construction and must be removed prior to issuance of an occupancy permit in the case of new construction. In the case of renovation or other construction during occupancy, such signs shall be removed on or before that date provided in the application for the sign permit as the date of estimated completion of renovation or other construction. 
c.  The zoning administrator is authorized to extend the time periods provided for in subsections E.3.a and b of this section, for one additional period not to exceed six months, for good cause shown. 
F.  Informational municipal and institutional signs. 
1.  The following categories of signs which serve a municipal purpose are permitted, provided that each such sign has first been authorized by the Town Council and approved by the Board of Architectural Review as to design: 
a.  Signs designating municipal buildings, parks, playgrounds, recreational areas and facilities or similar sites. All such signs shall be limited to 12 square feet in area except as otherwise permitted by section 18-184.1. 
b.  Signs identifying and designating historic districts, and sites and places where historic events occurred, provided that any such sign proposed for erection in any historic district so designated by the Town Council shall also be subject to any other procedures and approvals set forth in this Code and applicable to the erection of signs in said district. All such signs shall be limited to 12 square feet in area. 
c.  Signs which in the discretion of the Town Council further the municipal functions and purposes of the Town. All such signs shall be limited to 12 square feet in area. 
2.  The following categories of signs which serve an institutional purpose are permitted, subject to approval by the Board of Architectural Review (BAR) pursuant to chapter 4: 
a.  Signs designating schools, colleges, universities, hospitals, and places of worship. All such signs shall be limited to a total of 36 square feet in area per site. 
(1)  Such signs may be attached or freestanding. No more than two freestanding signs, each not exceeding eight feet in height, shall be permitted per site. This permitted signage includes any otherwise exempted signs and bulletin boards. 
(2)  Size and area restrictions herein established include all symbols, emblems, messages, or logograms. 
(3)  Street number designations, steeple-mounted symbols, stained glass windows or other such architectural features of a building are not to be considered a sign. 
(Code 1969, § 18-185; Ord. of 2-1988; Ord. of 3-16-1992; Ord. of 1-1996)  
Sec. 18-185.1. - Scoreboards and functional athletic devices. 
Notwithstanding the prohibition of all advertising on municipal signs as provided in section 18-185, the Town Council may approve the inclusion of a name or a logo or a registered mark on one scoreboard or like structure which serves a functional support purpose for organized athletic events involving team play, located on a fenced recreational field or park open to the public and at no other place; provided, however, that: 
1.  All other provisions of [section] 18-185 shall be fully satisfied; 
2.  Such name, logo or registered mark shall be restricted thereon to an area of 40 square feet or 25 percent of the total scoreboard or structure area, whichever is less; and 
3.  Approval of the Board of Architectural Review shall be obtained as to design, size, shape and color. 
(Code 1969, § 18-185.1; Ord. of 5-2006)  
Sec. 18-186. - Sign permit procedures. 
A.  Applications. Prior to any alteration or installation of a sign or sign structure that requires a permit, an application shall be submitted to the zoning administrator containing the following information: 
1.  Plans showing the area of the sign; 
2.  The size; 
3.  Character and color of letters and design proposed; 
4.  The method of illumination, if any; 
5.  The exact location proposed for such sign; 
6.  In the case of suspended or projecting signs, the method of fastening such sign to its supported structure; and 
7.  Samples or pictures of sign facing material and color. 
B.  Fees. A fee shall accompany the application. The fees shall be as shown on the schedule of fees adopted by the Town Council. 
C.  Application process. Upon receipt of a complete application for a sign permit, the zoning administrator shall schedule the application for review by the Board of Architectural Review. 
D.  Board of architectural review. The board shall review all applications for sign permits in accordance with the guidelines and procedures set forth in chapter 4 and in chapter 8-B of the Town Charter. 
E.  Issuance of permits. Sign permits shall be issued by the zoning administrator. 
F.  Right of appeal. Any final decision of the Board of Architectural Review may be appealed to the Town Council in accordance with section 4-12. 
(Code 1969, § 18-186)  
Secs. 18-187—18-196. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 20. - NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES 
 
Sec. 18-197. - Continuance of nonconforming buildings. 
Any nonconforming building or structure may be continued only so long as such building or structure is maintained in the same structural condition as it was in at the time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(Code 1969, § 18-197)  
Sec. 18-198. - Enlargements, etc., of nonconforming buildings. 
A nonconforming building or structure shall not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered in any manner unless such building or structure is made to conform to all the regulations of the zone in which located. 
(Code 1969, § 18-198)  
Sec. 18-199. - Repairs to nonconforming buildings. 
Repairs may be made to a nonconforming building or structure, provided that no structural alteration shall be made except as may be required by law or ordinance. 
(Code 1969, § 18-199)  
Sec. 18-200. - Restoration of nonconforming buildings damaged or partially destroyed. 
Any nonconforming building or structure which is damaged or partially destroyed by fire, flood, wind, earthquake, or other calamity or act of God or the public enemy, to the extent of not more than 50 percent of its value exclusive of foundations at that time, may be restored, provided that such restoration is started within a period of one year and is diligently prosecuted to completion. 
(Code 1969, § 18-200)  
Sec. 18-201. - Restoration when damage exceeds 50 percent of value. 
In the event such damage or destruction exceeds 50 percent of the value exclusive of foundations of such nonconforming building or structure, no repairs or reconstruction shall be made unless every portion of such building or structure is made to conform to all regulations for new buildings in the zone in which it is located. Restoration of nonconforming structures having historical or cultural value, to their original state, may be permitted. 
(Code 1969, § 18-201)  
Sec. 18-202. - Moving of nonconforming buildings. 
No nonconforming building or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to any other location on the lot unless every portion of such building or structure is made to conform to all the regulations of the zone in which it is located. 
(Code 1969, § 18-202)  
Sec. 18-203. - Nonconformance caused by government action or dedication. 
(1)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to those cases where the requirements of this chapter pertaining to yard setbacks, minimum lot dimensions, building line restrictions, and parking, cannot be met: 
A.  By reason of either the lawful action of a federal, state or local government in acquiring lands for roads or other public purposes; or 
B.  By the dedication of land by the owner thereof which is duly accepted by the appropriate government for public benefit and use. 
(2)  Provided, however, that the requirements of this chapter had been or could have been met prior to such government action or dedication. 
(3)  Provided, further, that such dedication or acquisition for public use shall not be deemed to authorize any subsequent increased or additional departure from the strict application of all other provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Provided, further, that the nonconformance with the requirements of this chapter pertaining to yard setbacks, minimum lot area, minimum lot dimensions, building line restrictions, and parking is caused by dedication for the purpose of widening existing streets and dedicated rights-of-way only and not by dedication of partial or total right-of-way requirements for proposed streets within a proposed subdivision. 
(Code 1969, § 18-203)  
Sec. 18-204. - Continuance of nonconforming use of buildings. 
The nonconforming use of a building or structure may be continued only so long as the same use which existed at the time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or a more restricted use continues, and such use is not discontinued for more than two years. 
(Code 1969, § 18-204)  
Sec. 18-205. - Change of use. 
Where a nonconforming use is changed to a use of a more restricted classification, it shall not thereafter be changed to a use of a less restricted classification. 
(Code 1969, § 18-205)  
Sec. 18-206. - Termination of nonconforming uses. 
Whenever any nonconforming building or structure is enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered so as to become a conforming building, the use thereafter occupying such building or structure shall conform to the regulations of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-206)  
Sec. 18-207. - Extension of use—General prohibition. 
A nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure shall not be enlarged or extended into any other portion of such conforming building or structure nor changed except to a conforming use. 
(Code 1969, § 18-207)  
Sec. 18-207.1. - Same—Exception. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 18-207, the board of zoning appeals may, by written order after holding a duly advertised public hearing, permit the expansion or extension of a nonconforming use within a conforming building, provided the board first finds as a matter of fact all of the following to exist: 
(a)  That the nonconformity resulted from enactment of an amendment to this chapter, at which time the existing use would otherwise have been conforming, and that failure of such use to fully satisfy all of the so amended criteria results from a newly enacted definition of a use specifically permitted prior to and subsequent to the effective date of such amendment. 
(b)  That after expansion or extension of the use, the building housing the use will conform in all respects to this chapter and the site on which said building is located shall comply with all requirements of the Town site plan and other ordinances respecting the use as if said use were fully complying. 
(c)  That the expansion or extension of the use will constitute a change to a greater degree of conformity than theretofore; and that thereafter, each element of such use shall have the same or a greater degree of conformity than existed prior to such change. 
(d)  That the expansion or extension will not operate to the detriment of adjacent property owners, or of the public welfare, health, morals, or safety and will not otherwise be contrary to the public interest, or to the spirit or purpose of this chapter. 
The provisions of this section shall not be interpreted to permit nor to empower the board of zoning appeals to permit the introduction into any zone of the Town, any nonconforming use or uses not lawfully located therein on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(Code 1969, § 18-207.1; Ord. of 4-1-1974)  
Sec. 18-208. - Continuance of nonconforming use of land. 
The nonconforming use of land may be continued only so long as the same use which existed at the time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or a more restricted use continues, and such use is not discontinued for more than two years; provided that no such nonconforming use of land shall in any way be enlarged or extended either on the same or adjoining property. 
(Code 1969, § 18-208)  
Sec. 18-208.1. - Conversion of nonconforming land or structures to condominium uses. 
Proposed conversion condominiums otherwise permitted by law and which do not conform to all applicable zoning site plan and subdivision ordinances of the Town shall require before conversion, such use permit, variance or special exception as may be appropriate under the specific circumstances. Upon demonstration by the applicant, to the reasonable satisfaction of the Town Council or board of zoning appeals as the case may require, that the nonconformities are not likely to be adversely affected by the proposed conversion, such request shall be granted. No action on such requests shall be unreasonably delayed. 
(Code 1969, § 18-208.1; Ord. of 7-12-1982)  
ARTICLE 21. - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS 
 
Sec. 18-209. - Use permit subject to certain conditions. 
The board of zoning appeals may issue a use permit for any of the uses enumerated in section 18-210 in response to an application therefor, provided the use for which the permit is sought: 
(1)  Will not affect adversely the health or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the proposed use; 
(2)  Will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood; and 
(3)  Will be in accord with the purposes of the Town's master plan. 
In granting any use permit, the board of zoning appeals may impose such conditions as it may deem in the public interest, including limiting the duration of a permit, and as will ensure that the use will conform to the foregoing requirements and that it will continue to do so, and may require a guarantee or bond to insure that the conditions imposed are being and will continue to be complied with. The board may revoke a use permit if the board determines that there has not been compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit. No permit may be revoked except after notice and hearing as provided by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204. 
(Code 1969, § 18-209; Ord. of 12-2-1991)  
Sec. 18-210. - Use permits required. 
A use permit is required for any of the following uses (see regulations for zone in which the use is proposed to be located): 
A.  Amusement enterprises, if conducted wholly within an enclosed building, provided that the existence and location of the same shall not impose a deleterious effect upon the Town and that permits therefor shall ensure compatibility with land use policies embodied in this chapter. 
B.  Auditoriums and halls. 
C.  Auto sales. 
D.  Bowling alley. 
E.  Carpenter or general woodworking shop (excluding outdoor storage). 
F.  Cemeteries. 
G.  Colleges and schools (private, elementary and high) of a noncommercial nature. 
H.  Concrete mixing plants. 
I.  Consumption of meals on a roof garden of an enclosed building in which a restaurant is located, or at sidewalk tables directly adjoining such building. 
J.  Contractor's equipment storage yard or plant, or rental of equipment commonly used by contractors 
K.  Draying, freighting, or trucking yard or terminal. 
L.  Farm or gardening implement, sales and service. 
M.  Feed and fuel yard. 
N.  Funeral homes. 
O.  Golf courses, country clubs, private clubs, including community buildings and similar recreational uses not owned and/or operated by a public agency (does not include golf driving ranges). 
P.  Hospitals, sanitariums and clinics which are an integral part of such hospitals and clinics providing treatment for mental or behavioral disorders as out-patient counseling or therapeutic facilities only; and provided that such clinics, if not an integral part of a hospital or sanitarium, are formally affiliated with such hospital or sanitarium or such other governmentally sponsored organization that provides counseling for mental or behavioral disorders. 
Notwithstanding any of the above, all clinics and facilities not an integral part of a hospital or sanitarium and treating contagious diseases, drug or alcohol addicts or abusers, sex offenders, felons, or persons suffering from psychosis, anti-social personality disorders or explosive personality disorders are not permitted, regardless of whether such facility operates an in-patient or out-patient facility, counseling or therapeutic facility or otherwise. 
Animal hospitals not providing boarding facilities other than for hospitalization to provide medical and/or surgical care for the patient are likewise subject to procurement of a use permit. However, animal hospitals providing boarding facilities not directly associated with immediate medical and/or surgical care for the patient are not permitted. 
Q.  Hotel and motel. 
R.  Institutional home and institutions of an educational or philanthropic nature, except those of a correctional nature or for mental cases. 
S.  Live entertainment and patron dancing in restaurants. 
T.  Manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment of such products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, dairy products, drugs, perfumes, pharmaceuticals, perfumed toilet soap, toiletries and food products, except fish and meat products, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast and the rendering or refining of fats and oils. 
U.  Massage therapists. 
V.  Minute car wash stations. 
W.  Nursery and kindergarten schools (private). 
X.  Reserved. 
Y.  Outdoor amusement enterprises. 
Z.  Pet shop. 
AA.  Plumbing yard or storage. 
BB.  Public buildings and uses. 
CC.  Public parking area in transitional use. 
DD.  Public parks, playgrounds, and other recreational uses. 
EE.  Public utilities, as defined and regulated in section 18-13. 
FF.  Taxi stand (only private property). 
GG.  Theater, indoor or outdoor. 
HH.  Transitional parking lots. 
II.  Drive-through facility, with the following submittal requirements and evaluation criteria: 
1.  Application submittal requirements: 
A.  A written statement describing the proposed use and providing all information pertinent to the review of the application. Such information would include, but not be limited to: the type of product or service to be offered; the proposed hours of operation and employee staffing; plans for the control of litter and the disposal and recycling of waste material; effects on air quality at the site and in adjacent areas; and estimates of sound levels that would be generated by the proposed use at site boundary lines. 
B.  A traffic analysis providing information that would include, but not be limited to: estimates of the number of vehicle trips and the amount of vehicular stacking that would occur daily and during a.m./p.m. peak hours; trip generation by use type; estimated internal and external traffic flows; parking and vehicular stacking spaces that would be provided on-site; and data on existing traffic conditions and the traffic-handling capacity of roads fronted by the proposed use. In addition, the analysis would discuss sight distances at points of ingress and egress, pedestrian and bicycle traffic, and any other site-specific traffic factors or public safety issues associated with the application. 
2.  Applications for drive-through facilities will be evaluated on the basis of the following criteria, with emphasis given to potential adverse effects on adjoining or nearby properties: 
A.  Location and arrangement of any drive-through window in relation to adjoining properties and public rights-of-way. 
B.  Appropriateness of proposed hours of operation. 
C.  Traffic circulation patterns, including safe ingress and egress, and a clear designation of drive-through aisles through the use of paving materials, pavement markings or landscaping. 
D.  Pedestrian circulation and safety. 
E.  Adequacy of screening of vehicle use and parking areas. 
F.  Noise impact associated with, but not limited to, exterior speakers and motor vehicles. 
G.  Compliance with federal, commonwealth and local pollution standards. 
H.  Other factors, as deemed appropriate, that affect the health, safety, and general welfare of the community. 
3.  Drive-through facilities adjacent to residentially-zoned properties shall meet the following applicable criteria: 
A.  A drive-through facility operating later than 10:00 p.m. shall not have any portion of its operation (including, but not limited to, the stacking lane, menu boards or speaker boxes) located closer than 75 feet from any residentially-zoned property. 
B.  No speaker box or other audio mechanism, regardless of operating hours, shall be located closer than 35 feet from any residentially-zoned property. 
(Code 1969, § 18-210; Ord. of 3-1969; Ord. of 2-6-1971; Ord. of 5-10-1971; Ord. of 6-2-1980; Ord. of 4-4-1983; Ord. of 11-8-1994; Ord. of 7-10-1995)  
Sec. 18-211. - Application of use permit. 
Written application for a conditional use permit may be made by any property owner, tenant, government office, department, board or bureau. Such application shall be made to the zoning administrator and shall accompany an application for a building permit, whenever the proposed building or structure will be or may be used for any of the uses enumerated in section 18-210. The zoning administrator shall also transmit a copy of the application to the planning commission and a copy of the application and site plan to the architectural review board, which commission and board shall send a recommendation to the board of zoning appeals within 30 days or appear as a party at the hearing. 
(Code 1969, § 18-211; Ord. of 3-1969)  
Sec. 18-212. - Fee. 
Every application for a use permit shall be accompanied by a check or cash payment to the Town in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees adopted by the Town which shall be applied to the cost of advertising and other expenses incidental to reviewing, publishing and reporting the fact. 
(Code 1969, § 18-212)  
Sec. 18-213. - Advertising and posting required. 
Each application for a use permit shall be advertised once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper having a paid general circulation in the Town. Notice of such application shall also be posted on a placard for two consecutive weeks on the property to which it pertains. 
(Code 1969, § 18-213)  
Sec. 18-214. - Notice and public hearing. 
The board of zoning appeals shall hold a public hearing on each application for a use permit not less than six days nor more than 21 days after final publication. Written notice, by registered mail, of the time and place of such hearing shall be given to the applicant at least ten days before the time of said hearing. 
(Code 1969, § 18-214; Ord. of 6-19-2000)  
Sec. 18-215. - Decision of board. 
The decision of the board on an application for a use permit shall be made within 90 days of the application therefor. 
(Code 1969, § 18-215; Ord. of 11-1987)  
Sec. 18-216. - Permit void after six months if operation not commenced. 
Any use permit shall become void six months after issuance if construction or operation related thereto has not commenced. 
(Code 1969, § 18-216)  
ARTICLE 21.1. - CHESAPEAKE BAY PRESERVATION AREAS 
 
Sec. 18-216.1.1. - Purpose and authority. 
It is the intent of the Town and this article to protect, improve and enhance the water quality of the Chesapeake Bay, its tributaries and other state waters. These regulations are issued under authority of Code of Virginia, §§ 62.1-44.15:74 and 15.2-2283 and regulations of 9VAC25-830-10 et seq. 
(Code 1969, § 18-216.1.1; Ord. of 1-6-1992; Ord. of 4-1993; Ord. of 2-2003; Ord. of 12-2003; Ord. No. 2014-005, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 18-216.1.2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best management practice (BMP) means a practice, or combination of practices, that is determined by the commonwealth to be the most effective, practicable means of preventing or reducing the amount of pollution generated by non-point sources to a level compatible with state water quality goals. 
Buffer area means an area of natural or established vegetation managed to protect other components of a resource protection area and state waters from significant degradation due to land disturbances. 
Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area (CBPA) means any land designated by the Town Council pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:74. Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas shall consist of resource protection areas and/or resource management areas. 
Development or land development means the construction or substantial alteration of residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreational, transportation, or utility facilities, structures or land. 
Floodplain means all lands that would be inundated by floodwater as a result of a storm event of a 100-year return interval. 
Highly erodible soils means soils with an erodibility index (EI) from sheet and rill erosion equal to or greater than eight. The EI for any soil shall be defined by the formula RKLS/T [6], where K is the soil susceptibility of water erosion in the surface layer; R is the rainfall and runoff; LS is the combined effects of slope, length and steepness; and T is the soil loss tolerance. 
Highly permeable soils means any soil having a permeability equal to or greater than six inches of water movement per hour in any part of the soil profile to a depth of 72 inches as found in the "National Soils Survey Handbook," November 1996, in the "Field Office Technical Guide" of the U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents natural infiltration of water into the soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to: roofs, buildings, structures, streets, parking areas, and any concrete, asphalt, or compacted gravel surface. 
Land disturbing activity means any land change which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands in the commonwealth or Town. Such land change or activity may include, but is not limited to: The removal or destruction of a portion of the natural topsoil; the removal or destruction of trees or other vegetative cover; clearing, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land; and construction activities. 
Non-point source pollution means diffuse source pollutants such as runoff from cultivated agricultural land, from silvicultural activities, and from urban storm runoff. These pollutants are conveyed to waterways through natural processes, such as rainfall, stormwater runoff, or groundwater seepage rather than by deliberate discharge. 
Non-tidal wetlands means areas other than tidal wetlands that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, as defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act, in 33 CFR 328.3b. 
Point source pollution means discharge of pollutants into waters at a specific location through a pipe, outfall, or ditch. 
Redevelopment means the process of developing land that is or has been previously developed. 
Resource management area (RMA) means a component of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area (not classified as a resource protection area (RPA)), as designated on the official CBPA map for the Town as incorporated in the current comprehensive plan that includes lands, which if improperly used or developed, have a potential for causing significant water quality degradation. Lands with the following characteristics may be classified as RMAs: 
A.  100-year floodplains; 
B.  Highly erodible soils and/or slopes in excess of 15 percent; 
C.  Highly permeable soils; 
D.  Non-tidal wetlands not classified as an RPA; or 
E.  Other lands as identified by the Town to be necessary to protect the quality of state waters. 
Resource protection area (RPA) means a component of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area as designated on the official CBPA map for the Town as incorporated in the comprehensive plan that is comprised of lands adjacent to a water body with perennial flow that have an intrinsic water quality value due to the ecological and biological processes they perform or are sensitive to the impacts which may result in significant degradation to the quality of state waters. The following lands shall be classified as RPAs: 
A.  Non-tidal wetlands connected by surface flow to or contiguous to a water body with perennial flow; 
B.  Other lands as identified by the Town to be necessary to protect the quality of state waters; and 
C.  Buffer areas having widths of not less than 100 feet, landward of the components listed in subsections A and B of this definition, and adjacent to and landward from each side of any water body with perennial flow. 
Substantial alteration means expansion or modification of a structure in a resource management area, which results in a disturbance of land exceeding an area of 2,500 square feet. 
Water body with perennial flow means a well-defined channel that contains water year-round during a year of normal rainfall with the aquatic bed located below the water table for most of the year. Groundwater is the primary source of water for the perennial stream, but it also carries stormwater runoff. A water body with perennial flow exhibits the typical biological, hydrological, and physical characteristics associated with the continuous conveyance of water. Generally, the Town will consider a water body to have perennial flow if it is depicted as a perennial stream on the most recent U.S. Geological Survey 7½ minute topographic quadrangle map (scale 1:24.000). 
Water dependent facility means development of any land that cannot exist outside of a resource protection area and must be located on the shoreline by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operation. These facilities include, but are not limited to: 
A.  Ports; 
B.  The intake and outfall structures of power plants, water treatment plants, sewage treatment plants and storm sewers; 
C.  Marinas and other boat docking structures; 
D.  Beaches and other public water-oriented recreation areas; and 
E.  Fisheries or other marine resources facilities. 
(Code 1969, § 18-216.1.2; Ord. of 1-6-1992; Ord. of 4-1993; Ord. of 2-2003; Ord. of 12-2003; Ord. No. 2014-005, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014) 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Note— This formula originally derived from the "Food Security Act Manual" of August 1988 in the "Field Office Guide" of the U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service. 
 
Sec. 18-216.1.3. - General provisions. 
A.  Application. The regulations in this section shall apply to all lands located within Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas (CBPA), both resource management areas and resource protection areas as defined above and as depicted on the official CBPA maps for the Town of Vienna. 
B.  Delineation of RPA (resource protection area) boundaries. An applicant for a building, clearing or grading permit, or subdivision or site plan review shall conduct an evaluation to locate the boundary of the RPA (100-foot buffer area) on the applicant's property as well as the boundary of the 50-foot portion of the buffer area that is directly adjacent to the water body with perennial flow. All plans shall clearly delineate the buildable areas on each lot and based on the performance criteria, identify the front and side yard setbacks and any other relevant easements or limitation regarding lot coverage. The applicant shall submit the results of the evaluation to the Town for review. The Town may provide such assistance to an applicant, as the Town deems necessary, to conduct such evaluation. 
C.  Dispute of resource protection area boundaries. An applicant for a building, clearing or grading permit, or subdivision or site plan review for land within an RPA who disputes the boundaries on the CBPA Map, a delineation of boundaries pursuant to subsection 18-216.1.3.B, or the inclusion of the applicant's property within an RPA shall submit to the zoning administrator a site specific evaluation with supporting evidence to determine where such boundaries are or whether a water body on or adjacent to the applicant's property is a water body with perennial flow. The existence and location of a water body with perennial flow that is on or adjacent to the development site must be identified in the evaluation, including any non-tidal wetlands connected by surface flow or contiguous to such a water body. The applicant shall submit to the zoning administrator surveys or drawings, which indicates a precise delineation of the RPA boundary, including buffer area. The zoning administrator will review and confirm that the boundaries of the RPA (resource protection area) are adjusted, as necessary, based on the evaluation of the site. 
(Code 1969, § 18-216.1.3; Ord. of 1-6-1992; Ord. of 4-1993; Ord. of 2-2003; Ord. of 12-2003; Ord. of 6-20-2011(2), § 1; Ord. No. 2014-005, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 18-216.1.4. - Allowed uses and developments. 
Permitted uses, accessory uses, and conditional uses shall be allowed as established by the underlying zoning district except as specifically modified by this article. Lot size shall meet the requirements of the underlying zoning district; provided further that any subdivision plat submitted after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall provide sufficient area outside an RPA to accommodate an intended use. 
A.  Allowed uses in resource protection areas. 
1.  Land development must be permitted by the underlying zoning district and must be in compliance with all applicable performance requirements of section 18-216.1.5. Land development shall be allowed only if it meets one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  Is water dependent: 
(1)  New or expanded water dependent facility may be allowed provided that: 
(a)  Any non-water dependent component is located outside of resource protection areas; 
(b)  Access will be provided with the minimum disturbance necessary. Where possible, a single point of access will be provided; 
(c)  It does not conflict with the comprehensive plan; 
(d)  It complies with the performance criteria for RPAs. 
b.  Constitutes redevelopment: 
(1)  Redevelopment in RPAs shall be permitted only if there is no increase in the amount of impervious cover and no further encroachment within the resource protection area. All redevelopment activities shall conform to the regulations contained in sections 17-55 and 17-56, chapter 18.1, and chapter 23; as well as the criteria for redevelopment in section 18-216.1.5.A.7. 
c.  Is a use established prior to October 1, 1989; 
d.  Is a road or driveway not exempted under section 18-216.1.4.A.2.b and satisfies the following conditions: 
(1)  No reasonable alternatives to aligning the road or driveway in or across the RPA exist; 
(2)  The alignment and design of the road or driveway are optimized, consistent with other applicable requirements, to minimize encroachment in the RPA and adverse effects on water quality; 
(3)  The design and construction of the road and driveway satisfy all applicable criteria of this chapter, including submission of a water quality impact assessment; and 
(4)  The proposed road or driveway meets all requirements to obtain a building permit or site plan approval. 
e.  Is a flood control or stormwater management facility satisfying the following conditions: 
(1)  The facility within the RPA is in its optimum location; 
(2)  The size of the facility is the minimum necessary to provide necessary flood control, stormwater management, or both; 
(3)  The facility must be consistent with a storm management program that has been approved by the state department of environmental quality as a Phase I modification to the Town's program; 
(4)  All applicable permits for construction in state or federal waters have been obtained from the appropriate state and federal agency, such as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the state department of environmental quality; 
(5)  A building permit or site plan approval has been obtained; 
(6)  Routine maintenance is performed on such facility to ensure that it continues to function as designed. 
2.  The following uses and improvements are exempt from the performance criteria of section 18-216.1.5 
a.  Passive recreation facilities, such as hike and bicycle trails, picnic areas and pathways, and historic preservation and archaeological activities, provided that: 
(1)  All land disturbing activity exceeding an area of 2,500 square feet shall be performed in accordance with performance criteria in section 18-216.1.5 A.5. 
(2)  Such uses are reviewed and approved by the zoning administrator. 
b.  Utilities, public facilities, improvements such as streets, channel improvements, bridges, utility pipes and utility transmission lines with the performance criteria exemptions found in section 18-216.1.5.D. 
c.  Reconstruction or structural alteration of those buildings, structures, and improvements existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, provided that the performance criteria of section 18-216.1.5.A are met. 
B.  Nonconforming uses and waivers. The lawful use of a building or structure which existed on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, January 6, 1992, and which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article may be continued in accordance with article 20 of this chapter. No alteration or expansion of a nonconforming principal building or structure shall be permitted with the exception that the zoning administrator may grant a waiver when: 
1.  There will be no net increase in non-point source pollutant load; 
2.  Any development or land disturbance exceeding an area of 2,500 square feet shall comply with all requirements of chapter 23; 
3.  Granting the waiver will not confer upon the applicant any special privileges denied by this article to other property owners in the RPA; 
4.  The waiver is not based on conditions or circumstances that are self-created or self-imposed, nor does the request arise from conditions or circumstances either permitted or nonconforming that are related to adjacent parcels; 
5.  The waiver is the minimum necessary to afford relief; 
6.  The waiver will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of the RPA, not injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare, and is not of substantial detriment to water quality; and 
7.  Reasonable and appropriate conditions are imposed which will prevent the waiver request from causing a degradation of water quality. 
This waiver may be granted only for relief from the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area requirements and shall not apply to any other restrictions imposed or required by this Code including, but not limited to, the floodplain, zoning, subdivision, erosion and sedimentation, and stormwater management ordinances. Any development not meeting the performance criteria under sections 18-216.1.5.B.1 and 18-216.1.5.B.2 shall require an exception under section 18-216.1.5.E. 
Appeals to any waiver decision of the zoning administrator shall be made to the board of zoning appeals in accordance with article 23 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-216.1.4; Ord. of 1-6-1992; Ord. of 4-1993; Ord. of 2-2003; Ord. of 12-2003; Ord. No. 2014-005, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 18-216.1.5. - Performance criteria. 
It is the intent of these criteria to achieve a ten percent reduction in non-point source pollution for redevelopment under one acre, achieve a twenty percent reduction in non-point source pollution for redevelopment one acre or greater, and to prevent an increase in non-point source pollution from new development. 
A.  General performance criteria. Unless provided elsewhere in this article, each use, development or redevelopment of lands located in a Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area as designated on the official CBPA map for the Town and/or verified by the site-specific evaluation required under section 18-216.1.3.B shall meet or exceed the following performance criteria: 
1.  No more land shall be disturbed than is necessary to provide for the proposed use or development. 
2.  Indigenous vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable, consistent with the use and development proposed. 
3.  All development, including single-family residential, which exceeds 2,500 square feet of land disturbance, shall be subject to site plan review as required in section 18-252. 
4.  All land development shall minimize impervious area consistent with the proposed use or development. 
5.  Any land disturbing activity that exceeds an area of 2,500 square feet, including single-family homes and septic lines and drain fields, shall comply with the requirements of chapter 23. 
6.  On-site land disturbing activities shall not begin until appropriate permits such as those for land disturbing or building have been issued and evidence provided that all required federal and state wetland permits have been obtained. 
B.  Additional performance criteria for resource protection areas. The following criteria shall apply within RPAs in addition to the general performance criteria in subsection 18-216.1.5.A: 
1.  Except as otherwise provided herein, no land disturbing activity and no acts prohibited by chapter 18.1 of the Town Code (Flood Plain Ordinance) shall be permitted in RPAs. 
2.  Buffer area requirements: 
a.  For the purpose of retarding runoff, preventing erosion and filtering non-point source pollution from runoff, a buffer area extending at least 100 feet adjacent to the edge of a water body with perennial flow shall be retained, if present, or established wherever such buffer does not exist. The 100-foot buffer shall be deemed to achieve a 75 percent reduction in sediment and a 40 percent reduction of nutrients. The following performance criteria shall apply. 
b.  In order to maintain the functional value of such buffer area, indigenous vegetation may be removed as permitted by the Town of Vienna only to provide reasonable sight lines, access paths, general woodlot management and BMP, including those that prevent upland erosion and concentrated flows of stormwater, as follows: 
(1)  Trees may be pruned or removed, subject to the provisions of subsection 18-252.E of the Town Code (Tree Preservation) to provide for sight lines and vistas; provided, however, that each tree removed shall be replaced with other vegetation, which is at least equally effective in retarding runoff, preventing erosion and filtering non-point source pollution from runoff. 
(2)  Dead, diseased or dying trees or shrubbery may be removed. 
(3)  Trees and woody vegetation may be removed in connection with approved stream bank erosion control projects. However, control techniques must be employed and appropriate vegetation established to protect or stabilize the stream bank. 
(4)  Any trail or pathway shall be constructed and surfaced so as to effectively control erosion. 
c.  When the establishment of a buffer area results in the loss of buildable area on a lot or parcel recorded prior to October 1, 1989, the zoning administrator may permit encroachment into the buffer area after submission of sufficient evidence as follows: 
(1)  Encroachments into the buffer area shall be permitted to the minimum extent necessary to achieve reasonable buildable area for a principal building or structure and necessary utilities to serve the building or structure. 
(2)  Where practicable, a vegetated area that will maximize water quality protection, mitigate the effects of buffer encroachment, and is equal to the encroachment area shall be established elsewhere on the lot or parcel to maximize water quality protection. 
(3)  The encroachment may not extend into the 50-foot portion of the buffer area that is directly adjacent to the water body with perennial flow. 
d.  All plans and/or plats submitted for approval and review shall include a notation that specifies the requirement to retain an undisturbed and vegetated 100-foot buffer area in the resource protection areas ("RPA"). 
C.  Water quality impact assessment. A water quality impact assessment (WQIA) is required to be submitted with all development and redevelopment site plans for property partially or totally located within an RPA and where there is land disturbing activity in excess of 2,500 square feet in the RMA. The WQIA study will include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Narrative description. 
a.  Impact of proposed development on water quality. 
b.  Description of specific measures to be employed to mitigate the impacts. 
c.  Geology of the site. 
d.  Estimates of pre-development and post-development runoff. 
e.  Additional information as deemed necessary by the director of public works or zoning administrator to assist in the review of the project. 
2.  Site drawing. 
a.  Existing topography, soils and hydrology of the site. 
b.  Boundaries of the RMA, and if adjacent to a water body with perennial flow as defined in this article, the location of the 100-foot RPA buffer area. 
c.  Location and nature of any proposed encroachments into the RPA buffer area including roadways and areas of grading; location of structures, driveways, or other impervious cover; utilities; and wetland mitigation sites. 
d.  Type and location of proposed stormwater management facilities and best management facilities and BMPs to mitigate the proposed encroachments. 
e.  Size and location of anticipated drainfield or wastewater irrigation areas. 
f.  Location of existing vegetation on site, including the number and type of trees and the vegetation to be removed in the buffer to accommodate the encroachment or modification; 
g.  Re-vegetation plan that supplements the existing buffer vegetation in a manner that provides for pollutant removal and erosion and runoff control. 
D.  Exemptions for public purposes. Exemptions for public utilities, public roads, railroads and similar facilities from performance criteria for RPAs are as follows: 
1.  Construction, installation, operation and maintenance of electric, natural gas, telephone, fiber optic, and cable television transmission lines, railroads and public roads and their appurtenant structures shall be exempt from the performance criteria in this section, provided that said construction, installation, operation and maintenance is in accordance with chapter 23 or the Erosion and Sediment Control Law (Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:51 et seq.), as appropriate. 
2.  Construction, installation and maintenance of water, sewer, natural gas, and underground telecommunications and cable television lines owned, permitted, or both by the Town or a regional service authority shall be exempt from the performance criteria in this section, provided that: 
a.  Such utilities and facilities shall be located outside RPAs to the highest degree possible. 
b.  No more land shall be disturbed than is necessary to provide for the desired utility installation. 
c.  All construction, installation and maintenance of such utilities and facilities shall be in compliance with all applicable state and federal permits and designed and conducted in a manner that protects water quality. 
d.  Any land disturbing activity exceeding an area of 2,500 square feet shall comply with the requirements of subsection A.5 of this section. 
E.  Exceptions. 
1.  An application for an exception to the requirements of section 18-216.1.4.A and subsection B of this section shall be made in writing to the board of zoning appeals. It shall identify the impacts of the proposed exception on water quality and on lands within the RPA through the performance of a water quality impact assessment, which complies with the provisions of subsection C of this section. 
2.  The board of zoning appeals shall notify the affected public of any such exception requests and shall consider these requests in a public hearing in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204, except that only one hearing shall be required. 
3.  The board of zoning appeals shall review the request for an exception and the water quality impact assessment and may grant the exception with such conditions and safeguards as deemed necessary to further the purpose and intent of this article if the board of zoning appeals finds that: 
a.  Granting the exception will not confer upon the applicant any special privileges denied by this article to other property owners in the RPA; 
b.  The exception is not based on conditions or circumstances that are self-created or self-imposed; 
c.  The exception is the minimum necessary to afford relief; 
d.  The exception will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of the RPA, not injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare, and will not result in substantial detriment to water quality; and 
e.  Reasonable and appropriate conditions can be imposed which will prevent the exception request from causing a degradation of water quality. 
4.  If the board of zoning appeals cannot make the required findings or refuses to grant the exception, the board of zoning appeals shall return the request for an exception together with the water quality impact assessment and the written findings and rationale for the decision to the applicant. 
5.  A request for an exception to the requirements of provisions of this article other than section 18-216.1.4.A and subsection B.2 of this section shall be made in writing to the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator may grant these exceptions provided that: 
a.  Exceptions to the requirements are the minimum necessary to afford relief; and 
b.  Reasonable and appropriate conditions are placed upon any exception that is granted, as necessary, so that the purpose and intent of this article is preserved. 
c.  Exceptions to subsection A of this section may be made, provided that the findings noted in subsection E.3 of this section are made. 
(Code 1969, § 18-216.1.5; Ord. of 1-6-1992; Ord. of 4-1993; Ord. of 2-2003; Ord. of 12-2003; Ord. of 6-20-2011(3), § 1; Ord. No. 2014-005, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
ARTICLE 22. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 18-217. - Administrative official. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the zoning administrator shall administer and enforce this chapter, including the receiving of applications, the inspection of premises, the issuing of building and occupancy permits and the determining of precise zone boundaries according to section 18-6. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued by him except where the provisions of this chapter have been complied with. In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired or converted, or any land is used in violation of this chapter, the zoning administrator is authorized and directed to institute appropriate action to put an end to such violation. 
(Code 1969, § 18-217)  
Sec. 18-218. - Building permit required. 
No excavation shall be commenced, no wall, fence, structure, premises, or land used, no building or part thereof built, constructed, or altered, no building shall be moved, no sign shall be erected, repaired or repainted until application has been made and the proper permit obtained from the zoning administrator in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and said permit has been posted at the building site in plain view from the street. 
(Code 1969, § 18-218; Ord. of 2-25-1974; Ord. of 9-27-1993)  
Sec. 18-219. - Land subject to flooding or erosion. 
No permit shall be issued for the erection of any permanent structure intended for residential, commercial or industrial use, nor shall any structure be erected, on land in such proximity and relative elevation to any open stream or drainage channel where such land is subject to periodic or recurring flooding from stormwater, or subject to the danger of erosion, unless all plans therefor conform to all requirements of chapter 18.1. 
(Code 1969, § 18-219; Ord. of 1-4-1982)  
Sec. 18-220. - Application for building permit. 
All applications for building permits (except interior remodeling) shall be accompanied by accurate plot plans in triplicate, prepared by a registered engineer or certified land surveyor, showing the following: 
A.  The lot upon which the building is proposed to be erected; lot dimensions, lot and block numbers, and subdivision's name if any, zoning, lot area and gross ground floor area; 
B.  Name and width of abutting street or streets; 
C.  Location, dimensions, and use of existing buildings and other structures on the lot or lots; 
D.  Location, dimensions and proposed use of buildings and other structures for which permit is requested; 
E.  Front, side, and rear yard dimensions; 
F.  North direction arrow; 
G.  Such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this chapter; 
H.  All plans and/or plats submitted for approval and review shall include a notation that specifies permitted development in the resource protection areas ("RPA") is limited to water dependent facilities or redevelopment in RPAs, including the 100-foot wide vegetated buffer. 
(Code 1969, § 18-220; Ord. of 6-20-2011(4), § 1)  
Sec. 18-221. - Certificate of occupancy; when required. 
A certificate of occupancy shall be required for any of the following: 
A.  Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or structurally altered; 
B.  Any change in use of an existing building; 
C.  Any change in ownership of a commercial or industrial use; 
D.  Change of occupancy and use of land to use of a different classification; 
E.  Any change in the use of a nonconforming use. 
(Code 1969, § 18-221)  
Sec. 18-222. - Occupancy, use, and change of use prohibited until certificate of occupancy obtained. 
A.  No occupancy, use, change of use, or continuation of a use following the change in ownership or proprietary control of such use of any building shall take place until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the zoning administrator in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter. Written application for a certificate of occupancy for a new building, or for an existing building, which is to be altered, shall be filed with the zoning administrator at the same time as the application for the building permit for such building. Upon completion of the erection or alteration of a building or part thereof, the applicant for such certificate may request the zoning administrator to issue the certificate. The zoning administrator shall issue the certificate of occupancy for any use or changes of use indicated in section 18-221 within ten days of the receipt of the written request for issuance thereof, provided there has been full compliance with the provisions of this Code. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision hereof, no occupancy permit shall be issued as the result of a change in occupancy, a change of use, a change in ownership of use, or a change of proprietary control of any use in any building housing a single use until the zoning administrator is first satisfied that both the building and site are in full compliance with all specifications provided on the original site plan therefor and those relating to fences, walls, landscaping, and parking facilities in particular. 
(Code 1969, § 18-222; Ord. of 8-6-1973; Ord. of 8-20-1990)  
Sec. 18-222.1. - Temporary occupancy permits. 
Subject to the conditions hereinafter set forth, a temporary occupancy permit may be issued when in the judgment of the zoning administrator and the Town Manager, denial of temporary occupancy would exercise such a hardship on the applicant therefor as to constitute unreasonable denial of the use of his property due to any of the following reasons: 
1.  Immediate compliance with all provisions of the site plan is impossible or impractical due to season, weather conditions, or inability of the applicant to comply for reasons outside his control. 
2.  Unusual construction requirements not generally encountered by others in like or similar construction. 
3.  Full compliance respecting a new structure requires destruction of an existing structure then occupied by the applicant, which existing structure must be vacated by the applicant to enable completion of the new structure for full compliance. 
No such temporary occupancy permit shall be issued unless and until the zoning administrator and Town Manager are satisfied that all other applicable requirements of this Code have been met with respect to the structure which is the subject of the application and further, until the applicant shall first post with the Town a bond, either in cash or with a surety acceptable to the Town, guaranteeing complete compliance with the approved site plan and all applicable provisions of this Code within six months next following issuance of such temporary occupancy permit. 
(Code 1969, § 18-222.1; Ord. of 5-21-1973)  
Sec. 18-223. - Required approval for erection and occupancy of new buildings. 
The following approvals shall be obtained for erection and occupancy of new buildings. 
A.  Initial approval. No permit for the erection of any building shall be issued until the application therefor has been submitted to and approved by the zoning administrator. If approval by any officer, body or agency of the Town is required (other than that of the building inspector), the zoning administrator shall not approve the application until after such approval has been obtained. 
B.  Intermediate approval. The erection of a building shall not proceed beyond the corners of a concrete slab or the placement of the corners of the foundation, whichever is applicable in establishing the exact location of all corners of the said building, until such location, as indicated by a certified land surveyor's plat thereof, has been submitted to and approved by the zoning administrator as conforming to all applicable provisions of this article. 
C.  Final approval. No certificate of occupancy for any new building shall be issued, until the exact location of the completed building and of all appurtenances thereto, as indicated by a certified land surveyor's plat showing every constructed feature on the lot, including driveways and automobile parking areas and showing the composition of the surfacing of such driveways and automobile parking areas, has been submitted to and approved by the zoning administrator, as conforming to all applicable provisions of this article. 
D.  Approval of location of completed buildings, etc. No certificate of occupancy for any one-family dwelling shall be issued until the exact location of the completed buildings and any accessory buildings as shown on a certified land surveyor's plat, has been submitted to and approved by the zoning administrator as conforming to all applicable provisions of this article. 
(Code 1969, § 18-223; Ord. of 9-1968)  
Sec. 18-224. - Certificate of occupancy; when change of use involved. 
Written application for a certificate of occupancy for a change in the use of land, or of a building, or for a change in a nonconforming use, as herein provided, shall be made to the zoning administrator. The same procedure is required as specified in sections 18-222 and 18-226, except that no building permit is involved. 
(Code 1969, § 18-224)  
Sec. 18-225. - Certificate of occupancy; statements required. 
Every certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or the proposed use of a building or land complies with all the provisions of law and of all Town ordinances and regulations. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the Town hall and copies shall be furnished on request, to any person having proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected. 
(Code 1969, § 18-225)  
Sec. 18-226. - Fees. 
The fees for any permit required by this chapter shall be paid to the Town as set forth in the schedule of fees adopted by the Town Council. 
(Code 1969, § 18-226)  
Sec. 18-227. - Application for building permit and certificate of occupancy unacceptable unless all required information furnished. 
No application for a building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be accepted by the zoning administrator unless all of the information required has been furnished by the applicant. 
(Code 1969, § 18-227)  
Sec. 18-228. - Building permit and certificate of occupancy void after six months if operation not commenced. 
Construction or operation shall be commenced within six months of date of issuance or said building permit or certificate of occupancy becomes void. 
(Code 1969, § 18-228)  
Sec. 18-229. - Violation to act without permit or certificate of occupancy when one required; false statement in material matter voids permit. 
It shall constitute a violation of this chapter for any person, whether owner, agent, or occupant, to do any of the things for which a permit or certificate of occupancy is required by this chapter without having first obtained the said permit or certificate; and any permit or certificate issued upon a false statement of any fact which is material to the issuance thereof, shall be void. Whenever the fact of such false statement shall be established to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator, he shall forthwith revoke the permit or certificate by notice in writing to be delivered to the holder of the void permit or certificate upon the premises where the violation has occurred, or if such holder is not found there, by posting the said notice of revocation in some conspicuous place upon the said premises. Any such person who shall proceed thereafter with such work or use without having obtained a new permit or certificate in accordance with this chapter shall be deemed guilty of violation thereof. Any applicant for a building permit and certificate of occupancy required by this article who, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, conveys, uses or occupies, or permits or suffers the use, conveyance or occupancy of the premises for which such building permit is issued, shall be guilty of violating this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-229; Ord. of 9-1969)  
ARTICLE 23. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS 
 
Sec. 18-230. - Continuation of existing board. 
The board of zoning appeals heretofore established shall continue as the board of zoning appeals under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-230)  
Sec. 18-231. - Membership. 
The board of zoning appeals shall consist of not less than five nor more than seven residents of the Town, appointed by the circuit court of the county upon recommendation of the Town Council, for a term of five years. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term. Any board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office, or for other just cause, by the court which appointed him. Members of the board shall hold no other public office in the Town except that one may be a member of the planning commission. A member whose term expires shall continue to serve until their successor is appointed and qualifies. 
(Code 1969, § 18-231; Ord. of 12-2-1991; Ord. of 8-24-2015 , § 1)  
Sec. 18-232. - Appeals. 
The board of appeals is authorized to hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator or other administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-232)  
Sec. 18-233. - Variances. 
The board of appeals shall have the power to grant, upon appeal or original application in specific cases, such variance from the terms of this chapter provided the burden of proof shall be on the applicant for a variance to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the application meets the standard for a variance and the criteria set out in this section. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, general or special, a variance shall be granted if the evidence shows that the strict application of the terms of the ordinance would unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property or that the granting of the variance would alleviate a hardship due to a physical condition relating to the property or improvements thereon at the time of the effective date of the ordinance, and 
(1)  The property interest for which the variance is being requested was acquired in good faith and any hardship was not created by the applicant for the variance; 
(2)  The granting of the variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and nearby properties in the proximity of that geographical area; 
(3)  The condition or situation of the property concerned is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to the ordinance; 
(4)  The granting of the variance does not result in a use that is not otherwise permitted on such property or a change in the zoning classification of the property; and 
(5)  The relief or remedy sought by the variance application is not available through the conditional use permit process or, when permitted by this chapter, determination by the zoning administrator. 
B.  In authorizing a variance, the board may impose such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed structure or use as it may deem necessary in the public interest and may require a guarantee or bond to insure that the conditions imposed are being and will continue to be complied with. 
(Code 1969, § 18-233; Ord. of 8-24-2015 , § 1)  
Sec. 18-234. - Variances; notice and hearing. 
With respect to an appeal for a variance, the board shall hold a public hearing and give notice of the time and place thereof as prescribed in sections 18-213 and 18-214. 
(Code 1969, § 18-234)  
Sec. 18-235. - Variance valid for six months. 
Any variance authorized by the board to permit the erection or alteration of a building or structure shall be valid only for six months unless a building permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within this period and the erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of the decision. 
(Code 1969, § 18-235)  
Sec. 18-236. - Applications for conditional use permits. 
The board of appeals is authorized to hear and decide applications for those use permits enumerated in section 18-210. 
(Code 1969, § 18-236)  
Sec. 18-237. - Interpretation of zoning map. 
A.  The board is authorized to hear and decide applications for interpretation of the zoning map where there is any uncertainty as to the location of a district boundary. The board may interpret the map in such way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the ordinance for the particular section or district in question. 
B.  The board shall not have the power, however, to re-zone property or substantially to change the locations of district boundaries as established by this chapter, or to change the locations of zone boundaries as established by the zoning map. 
(Code 1969, § 18-237)  
Sec. 18-238. - Interpretation of zoning map; notice and hearing. 
With respect to an application for interpretation of the zoning map as provided in section 18-237, the board shall hold a public hearing and give notice of the time and place thereof as prescribed in sections 18-213 and 18-214. 
(Code 1969, § 18-238)  
Sec. 18-239. - Procedure. 
A.  Appeals. An appeal to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any official of the Town affected by any decision of the zoning administrator. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days after the decision appealed from by filing with the zoning administrator, and with the board, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, appeals from a notice of violation involving temporary or seasonal commercial uses, parking of commercial trucks in residential zones or similar short-term recurring violations, shall be taken within 14 days after the decision appealed from. 
(Code 1969, § 18-239; Ord. of 7-3-2000)  
Sec. 18-240. - Notice and hearing. 
The board shall hold a public hearing of an appeal, give public notice of the time and place thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest as prescribed in sections 18-213 and 18-214. 
(Code 1969, § 18-240)  
Sec. 18-241. - Decisions of board. 
A.  In all cases coming before the board of zoning appeals, decisions shall be made within 90 days of the filing of the application or appeal. The board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from. Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2312, the concurring vote of the majority of the membership of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative officer or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter or to effect any variance thereof. 
B.  The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and other official actions which shall be filed in the office of the board and shall be public record. The chair of the board, or in his absence the acting chair, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(Code 1969, § 18-241; Ord. of 3-2-1987; Ord. of 11-13-17)  
Sec. 18-242. - Fee required. 
Every notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a check or cash payment to the Town in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees adopted by the Town, which shall be applied to the cost of advertising and expense incidental to reviewing and publishing the facts. In addition, the board may require the applicant to pay for the recording of the proceedings. 
(Code 1969, § 18-242)  
ARTICLE 24. - REZONING AND AMENDMENTS 
 
Sec. 18-243. - Amendments. 
The Town Council may, from time to time, amend, supplement, or change the provisions of this chapter, zone boundaries, or rezone property. Before taking any action on any proposed amendment, supplement, change, or rezoning which has been initiated by itself or a property owner, the Town Council shall submit the same to the planning commission for its recommendation and report. 
(Code 1969, § 18-243)  
Sec. 18-244. - Rezoning (changes to the zoning map). 
An application for rezoning of property may be made by the owner, contract owner or optionee of the property which is proposed to be rezoned which shall be submitted to the Town Council on a standard form, accompanied by a plat by a certified surveyor and the fee specified in the schedule of fees adopted by the Town. Such plat shall show the boundaries of the land for which rezoning is requested, the boundaries of all contiguous land in which the applicant has any interest and all abutting streets and alleys. In addition, the applicant shall furnish to the council a map showing the location of the applicant's land, the zoning classification of all abutting land and land lying on the opposite sides of streets and alleys abutting the land for which rezoning is requested and such other information as may be required by the planning commission and council to properly evaluate the application. All such plats and maps shall be current at the time the application is filed. 
(Code 1969, § 18-244)  
Sec. 18-245. - Reapplication for rezoning. 
No application for any change to the same or a less restricted classification of zoning of the same lot, plot, parcel, or portion thereof, shall be considered by the Town Council and the planning commission within 12 months of the final action of the Town Council upon the prior application. This provision, however, shall not impair the right of the Town Council to propose a change of zoning on its own motion. 
(Code 1969, § 18-245)  
Sec. 18-246. - Planning commission notice and hearing. 
A.  The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment, supplement, change, or rezoning referred to it by the Town Council for its recommendation. Notice of public hearings before the commission shall be given by publishing the time, place and notice of the hearing once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper having a paid general circulation in the Town. The public hearing shall be held not less than five nor more than 21 days after final publication. 
B.  In addition, in cases where property is proposed for rezoning, the commission shall cause the property concerned to be posted at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing before said commission. When the proposed rezoning involves 25 or fewer parcels of land, written notice by registered or certified mail shall be given by the planning commission at least five days before the hearing to the owner or owners, their agent or the occupant of each parcel involved, and to the owners, their agent or occupant of all abutting property and property immediately across the street or road from the property affected, whether such property is in the Town or county. 
C.  After the public hearing, the planning commission shall submit its recommendations to the Town Council. 
(Code 1969, § 18-246; Ord. of 11-1968; Ord. of 4-1969; Ord. of 6-1975; Ord. of 11-17-1975; Ord. of 2-25-2002)  
Sec. 18-247. - Town Council to give notice and hold hearing. 
Before considering any proposed amendment, supplement, change, or rezoning, the Town Council shall hold a public hearing thereon, notice of said hearing to be accomplished as prescribed in section 18-246. The planning commission and council may hold a joint public hearing after the public notice as set forth in section 18-246. If such joint hearing is held, then public notice as set forth above need be given only by the council. In the case of a proposed amendment to the zoning map, such public notice shall state the general usage and density range of the proposed amendment and the general usage and density range, if any, set forth in the applicable part of the comprehensive plan. 
(Code 1969, § 18-247; Ord. of 11-1968; Ord. of 12-2-1991)  
Sec. 18-248. - Protest against proposed change. 
In case of a protest against any change of zone boundaries or rezoning of property signed by 25 percent, or more, of either of the following groups: 
(1)  The owners of lots included within the area of the proposed change; or 
(2)  The owners of lots abutting the area included in such proposed change, and the owners of lots directly opposite the area included in such proposed change, where such area abuts upon a street. 
Such change shall not become effective except by a favorable two-thirds vote of the Town Council quorum present. 
For purposes of this section, a protest petition must be submitted in writing and received by the Town Clerk no later than 12:00 noon on the working day before the day of the first public hearing on the application or motion is first conducted by the Town Council. The owners of any lots submitting any such protest petition shall execute such protest petition under oath that they are the legal owner or authorized representative of any such lot owner. If the owner of any lot is a corporation or condominium, the petitioner shall submit the appropriate documentation demonstrating he/she is the authorized representative for the lot owner. 
(Code 1969, § 18-248; Ord. of 8-21-2017 , § 1)  
Sec. 18-249. - Basis for determination. 
In determining what, if any, amendments to this chapter are to be adopted, the Town Council shall give due consideration to the proper relationship of such amendments to the entire comprehensive plan for the Town, with the intent to retain the integrity and validity of the zoning districts herein described, and to avoid spot zoning changes in the zoning map. 
(Code 1969, § 18-249)  
Sec. 18-249.1. - Conditional zoning and proffers. 
As a condition to any rezoning or amendment to the zoning map, the council may suggest reasonable conditions, in addition to the regulations provided for the zoning district or zone by this Code, provided such conditions are voluntarily proffered in writing by the owner prior to public hearing before the council and provided further that: 
(a)  The rezoning itself must give rise for the need for the conditions; 
(b)  Such conditions shall have a reasonable relation to the zoning; 
(c)  Such conditions may include a cash contribution to the Town in accordance with the Virginia State Code. Cash proffers may be used for any public improvements consistent with the Town's adopted Capital Improvement Plan and/or goals set forth in the Town's Comprehensive Plan to address transportation and other public facility needs and impacts; 
(d)  Such conditions shall not include mandatory dedication of real or personal property for open space, parks, schools, fire departments or other public facilities not otherwise provided for in the Town's subdivision, site plan or other Town ordinances; 
(e)  Such conditions may include payment for or construction of off-site improvements to address transportation and public facility impacts; not already provided for in the Town's subdivision or site plan ordinances; 
(f)  Except for off-site transportation and public facility improvements, no condition shall be proffered that is not related to the physical development or physical operation of the property; and 
(g)  All such conditions shall be in conformity with the comprehensive plan. 
(Code 1969, § 18-249.1; Ord. of 9-17-1979; Ord. of 5-23-2016(2), § 1)  
ARTICLE 25. - SITE PLAN CONTROL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 18-250. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to regulate orderly and attractive development of commercial townhouse, multifamily and limited industrial land uses with the Town, to conserve property values, to preserve adequate space for the accommodation of transportation facilities usually associated with such uses, and to avoid traffic congestion. It is the further purpose of this article to recognize, in the planning of specific land uses, the densities and uses of adjacent land and the health, safety, morals, appearance and general welfare of the community. In order to achieve the aforementioned objectives, and to encourage imaginative use of land areas, certain modifications of the strict requirements of this chapter are provided for where deemed by the Town Council, after seeking the recommendation of the planning commission, to be in the public interest. 
(Code 1969, § 18-250; Ord. of 9-9-2003; Ord. of 2-23-2004)  
Sec. 18-251. - Where applicable. 
Site plan control provisions shall be applicable to the alteration or construction of any building located in a C-1, C-1A, C-1B, C-2, CM, T, RTH, RM-2, or PR zone and the alteration or construction of any building primarily used for other than a residential use in any residential zone. Additionally, the provisions for replacement of trees as set forth in section 18-252.E shall apply to any of the following located in the RS-16, RS-12.5, and RS-10 zones: the development of an undeveloped tract; the redevelopment of any existing tract by removal of a dwelling and replacement with a new dwelling; or the addition to an existing dwelling that results in an area of disturbed soil exceeding 2,500 square feet. 
(Code 1969, § 18-251; Ord. of 4-19-1971; Ord. of 5-10-1982; Ord. of 3-7-1994; Ord. of 9-9-2003; Ord. of 2-23-2004; Ord. No. 14-002, § 1, 5-12-2014)  
Sec. 18-251.1. - Application fee. 
An application for site plan approval or modification shall be accompanied by the fee specified in the schedule of fees adopted by the Town. 
(Code 1969, § 18-251.1; Ord. of 9-9-2003; Ord. of 2-23-2004)  
Sec. 18-252. - Site plan specifications. 
Any person, corporation, firm or other organization or association, shall, prior to or at the time of filing application for a building permit to erect or alter any structure in a C-1, C-1A, C-1B, C-2, CM, T, RTH, RM-2, or PR zone, submit to the director of public works a site plan prepared by a registered architect, registered engineer or certified land surveyor authorized by the commonwealth to practice as such. Additionally, the provisions for replacement of trees as set forth in section 18-252 E shall apply to any of the following located in the RS-16, RS-12.5, and RS-10 zones: the development of an undeveloped tract; the redevelopment of any existing tract by removal of a dwelling and replacement with a new dwelling; or the addition to an existing dwelling that results in an area of disturbed soil exceeding 2,500 square feet. 
Such plan shall include the following data: 
A.  1.  Location of all existing and proposed buildings and structures. 
2.  Boundary of the entire tract by courses and distances. 
3.  Area of the tract. 
4.  Zone of the tract. 
5.  Present record owner of the tract. 
6.  Owner, zone and present use of all contiguous property. 
7.  Width of all streets adjoining the tract (both right-of-way and pavement widths). 
8.  Location of existing edge of pavement or curbs. 
9.  Location of existing easements and underground facilities, proposed easements and buildings and their dimensions. 
10.  Number of floors, floor area and use of each building and height of each building. 
11.  A schedule showing compliance with the parking requirements of this chapter. 
12.  All off-street automobile parking space and type of surfacing (indicating size of stalls and width of aisles). 
13.  All off-street loading and pickup spaces. 
14.  Location of any poles, fire hydrants, retaining walls, pump islands, signs, doorways, window wells, guy wires, or other structures which might interfere with automobile parking or maneuvering. 
15.  The location and type of entrances and driveways which shall conform to the state department of highways and Town standards and specifications. 
16.  Location of all curbs to be constructed and specify type. 
17.  Location and width of all sidewalks. 
18.  Fencing and walls to be erected; type, height and location. 
19.  The location, type and size of all existing trees as defined in this Code. If the property is densely wooded in whole or in part, the limits of such densely wooded areas may be shown on the plan in lieu of locating individual trees within these areas. 
20.  Topography, existing and proposed (indicating areas of major grading and slopes to be maintained). 
21.  Disposition of storm water drainage (indicating all pipe sizes, types and grade elevations). 
22.  All sanitary sewerage facilities, indicating pipe size, type and grades and where connection is to be made to the Town system. 
23.  Name of architect, engineer or surveyor preparing site plan. 
24.  Specifications for the removal of trees and protection of trees during clearing and grading to include tree species, size and condition per the Town of Vienna Tree Preservation and Planting Specifications Manual. 
25.  Grade changes or other work adjacent to a tree that is to be preserved which might affect it adversely, with specifications on how the ground drainage and aeration will be maintained around said tree per the Town of Vienna Tree Preservation and Planting Specifications Manual. 
26.  Landscape planting, clearly identified by appropriate symbols, showing the location, type and size of trees, shrubbery and screening to be planted. 
B.  All information required by sections 17-14 and 17-15(a) through (o) where applicable. 
C.  A tabulation listing the site plan specifications as they compare to minimum zoning requirements shall be furnished with each copy of the site plan. 
D.  All information required by chapter 18.1, where applicable. 
E.  Provisions for replacement of trees during development as follows: 
1.  A plan for the planting and replacement of trees on site during development to the extent that, at maturity of 20 years, minimum tree canopies or covers will be provided in the respective zoning districts of the Town as follows: 
a.  Twenty percent tree canopy in the RS-16, RS-12.5, and RS-10. 
b.  Fifteen percent in the RM-2 and RTH zones. 
c.  Ten percent tree canopy in the T, C-1, C-1A, C-2, CMP, and CM zones. 
d.  Replacement trees shall be in-kind in accordance with the Tree Preservation and Planting Specifications Manual. 
2.  All trees planted shall meet the specifications of the Town of Vienna Tree Preservation and Planting Specifications Manual. The Manual will be available in hardcopy at the Department of Public Works and online available for download at www.viennava.gov. 
3.  Existing trees which are to be preserved, and with no citations having been issued by the Town of Vienna throughout the duration of the project, may be included in the plan to meet all or part of the canopy requirements if the site plan identifies such trees and the trees meet standards of desirability and life expectancy established by the Town. Town of Vienna staff will perform a minimum of two unannounced site inspections to determine compliance with tree protection and preservation regulations during construction. 
4.  The Town Council may grant reasonable exceptions or deviations from the requirements of this section when strict application of the requirements would result in unnecessary or unreasonable hardship to the developer, or to allow for reasonable development of the following: 
a.  Areas devoid of woody materials. 
b.  Dedicated school sites. 
c.  Playing fields and other non-wooded areas and uses of a similar nature. 
5.  Violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor punishable by fine of not more than $250.00, and each day after the first during which such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1969, § 18-252; Ord. of 4-1968; Ord. of 4-19-1971; Ord. of 2-25-1974; Ord. of 7-6-1981; Ord. of 1-4-1982; Ord. of 9-1989; Ord. of 7-1991; Ord. of 3-7-1994; Ord. of 9-9-2003; Ord. of 2-23-2004; Ord. No. 14-002, § 1, 5-12-2014)  
Sec. 18-253. - Site plan to conform with Code. 
All features and elements of the site plan required by this article shall in all respects conform to all applicable provisions of the Code of Virginia and this Code. 
(Code 1969, § 18-253; Ord. of 9-9-2003; Ord. of 2-23-2004)  
Sec. 18-254. - Building permit and occupancy permit; issuance requirements. 
A.  No building permit for any development or building subject to the provisions of this article shall be issued until all approvals required by this Code shall have been made. No occupancy permit for any development or building subject to the provisions of this article shall be issued until the director of public works and the zoning administrator of the Town shall have found, after an on-site inspection, that such development or building is complete and conforms in all material respects to the approved site plan. 
B.  Where a particular development consists of two or more separate buildings or is a commercial group building development, the Town Manager may, upon recommendation of the director of public works and the zoning administrator, authorize the progressive issuance of occupancy permits for individual buildings within the said development as each is satisfactorily completed and prior to total completion of the development as hereinabove required, provided he first makes written findings that the following exist: 
1.  Except for the completion of one or more other buildings shown on the approved site plan, all other elements of the approved site plan and common to the buildings shown thereon, including structures, improvements and features designed to protect abutting or nearby residential properties have been completed; or 
2.  That to require immediate completion of all such common elements and structures, improvements and features designed to protect abutting or nearby residential properties would constitute a hardship and that a bond has been posted either in cash or with surety acceptable to the Town, guaranteeing completion of all such common elements and protective works as shown on the said approved site plan within a reasonable time next following issuance of the occupancy permit or permits. 
(Code 1969, § 18-254; Ord. of 4-19-1971; Ord. of 4-1-1974; Ord. of 9-9-2003; Ord. of 2-23-2004)  
Sec. 18-254.1. - Site location on corner lots. 
Where any person, corporation, firm or other organization or association which proposes the location of a residential building on a corner lot wherein the actual front of said building shall not also be the legal front of said lot, then such building location shall not be approved by the director of public works; provided, however, that an application for a variance to the provisions of this section may be immediately made to the board of zoning appeals in accordance with section 18-233, which board shall, if a variance is granted, designate the legal front of said lot. 
(Code 1969, § 18-254.1; Ord. of 1-1967; Ord. of 9-9-2003; Ord. of 2-23-2004)  
Sec. 18-255. - Approval; factors to be considered by the director of public works. 
Except as provided elsewhere in this Code, the director of public works shall approve all elements of any required site plan. In passing on any site plan, the director of public works shall consider: 
A.  The location and design of driveways providing vehicular ingress to and egress from the site, in relation to streets giving access to the site and in relation to pedestrian traffic. 
B.  The traffic circulation features within the site and the location of automobile parking areas. The director of public works may make such requirements with respect to any of such matters as will ensure: 
1.  Safety and convenience of both vehicular and pedestrian traffic, both within the site and in relation to access streets. 
2.  Satisfactory and harmonious relations between the development on the site and the existing and prospective development of contiguous land and adjacent neighborhoods. 
C.  All in furtherance of the purposes of this chapter, the director of public works may require landscaping, ornamental masonry walls, fences, sidewalks, curb and gutter, storm drainage facilities and walls in pursuance of these objectives, and the same shall be provided and maintained as a condition of the establishment and the continued maintenance of any use to which they are appurtenant. 
(Code 1969, § 18-255; Ord. of 4-19-1971; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 9-9-2003; Ord. of 2-23-2004)  
Sec. 18-256. - Modification of requirements. 
Where an applicant for a building permit subject to the requirements of this article can demonstrate to the council that the most practical, efficient or aesthetic development of the site involved cannot be achieved within the requirements of this chapter, the council, after receiving the recommendation of the planning commission, or not less than 30 days after requesting such recommendation in writing, may modify such requirements upon a finding that the integrity of this chapter and the health, safety and morals of the Town will not be thereby impaired. Such modifications may apply to yard, lot area, lot coverage, parking, number of units, unit floor area, screening, frontage, and similar requirements, but this section shall not be construed to permit any modifications of the uses permitted in any zone or of the maximum building height permitted for any building. 
(Code 1969, § 18-256; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 9-9-2003; Ord. of 2-23-2004)  
Sec. 18-257. - Procedure for requesting modification. 
A.  Requests for modifications authorized under section 18-256 shall be submitted to the director of public works in writing and shall be accompanied by a written statement setting forth the reasons therefor. Each such request shall also be accompanied by a site plan, including thereon all of the information required by this article shown to indicate the development as modified or building as it is proposed for construction by the applicant. The granting or denial of any such modification shall be discretionary with the council and this article shall not be deemed to create any right to any such modification. 
B.  Prior to the Town Council granting or denying any such modification, notification letters by certified mail to adjoining property owners and those abutting across a public street shall be sent not less than five days prior to council's consideration of the request for modification. 
C.  Approval by the Town Council of any such modified site plan, shall constitute authority for the director of public works to issue the necessary building permits therefor, provided other applicable provisions of law have been complied with. 
(Code 1969, § 18-257; Ord. of 9-9-2003; Ord. of 2-23-2004)  
ARTICLE 26. - HISTORIC DISTRICTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Citizens are alerted that on June 10, 2010, the Circuit Court of Fairfax County determined that the historic district provisions were constitutionally valid. 
 
Sec. 18-258. - Intent. 
For the purpose of promoting the general welfare, education and recreational pleasure of the public, through the perpetuation of those geographical areas or parcels of land or individual structures and premises which have been officially designated by the Town Council as having historic or architectural significance, historic districts are created. Regulations within such districts are intended to protect against destruction of or encroachment upon such areas, structures, and premises; to encourage uses which will lead to their continuance, conservation and improvement in a manner appropriate to the preservation of the cultural, social, economic, political, architectural, or archeological heritage of the Town; to prevent creation of environmental influences adverse to such purposes; and to ensure that new structures and uses within each such district will be in keeping with the existing character of the district to be so preserved and enhanced by this article. 
(Code 1969, § 18-258; Ord. of 2-1975; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984)  
Sec. 18-259. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alteration means changing or altering the exterior architectural character of a building or structure to that degree which requires obtaining a building permit. 
Historic district means any public or private property within the on which is located a neighborhood, site, building, structure, object or artifact which the Town Council identifies as reflecting significantly, and considers of such outstanding importance as to warrant conservation and preservation, the lives of historic personages, some great idea or ideal of the people, or the archeological, architectural, cultural, economic, ethnic, military, natural, political, religious or social heritage of the community, state or nation. 
Officially designated means a landmark, building structure which has been duly designated by the state historic landmarks commission or by other recognized historical preservation organizations or by the Town Council. 
(Code 1969, § 18-259; Ord. of 2-1975; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984)  
Sec. 18-260. - Historic district boundaries generally. 
The historic district boundaries shall in general be drawn so as to include all lands closely related to and bearing upon the character of an historic site, thus providing a landscape unit and affording transitional regulations needed to control potentially adverse environment all influences. No such historic district shall extend farther than one-quarter mile from the property line of the land pertaining to any such historic landmark, building or structure. 
(Code 1969, § 18-260; Ord. of 2-1975; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984)  
Sec. 18-261. - Establishment of and amendments to historic district boundaries and regulations. 
Amendments to the provisions of this section, as well as to any historic district shall be in accordance herewith. The planning commission or any interested citizen may propose to the Town Council, or the council of its own initiative may propose, such amendments as deemed appropriate, including the establishment of historic districts. Upon receipt of said proposal, the Town Council shall refer the same to the planning commission. The planning commission shall prepare and submit to the Town Council recommendation in the form of a written report on the proposed amendment. Such report shall establish and define the historic district boundaries as well as the historic and/or architectural significance of the buildings, structures, or sites to be protected, and describe present trends, conditions and desirable public objectives for preservation. In addition, such report shall include the following specific matters: 
a.  An analysis of existing structures by period of construction, architectural style, condition, and other matters relating to planning or regulating future development, such as location on lots, location of yards and other open spaces, access to interior of lots, and off-street parking provided. In addition to general analysis, two specific and detailed descriptions shall be entered: 
(1)  A description of individual structures and premises of substantial public interest, with maps, photographs and other data indicating the public importance of their preservation and the particular features it is desired to preserve. 
(2)  A description of existing structures, premises and uses likely to have an adverse effect on the desired character of the district, including those near and visually related to the district, with maps, photographs and other data indicating the reasons for such an effect. 
b.  An analysis of lands not occupied by structures, including lands near and visually related to the district. For public lands, ownership, use, and location shall be indicated. For private lands, assessed valuation shall be added as well as existing zoning and planned land use. 
c.  Recommendations concerning detailed regulations, if any, to be applied within the district, to supplement or modify general regulations set forth herein, providing such regulations shall promote the general intent of this article and shall be made only for the express purpose of preventing changes which are architecturally incompatible with the buildings, structures, or sites to be preserved. 
d.  In preparation of the said report, the planning commission shall be entitled to call upon the services of the architectural review board, the zoning administrator and the department of public works. 
(Code 1969, § 18-261; Ord. of 2-1975; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984)  
Sec. 18-262. - Action by the Town Council. 
If the Town Council creates an historic district, its action shall include a declaration that the landmarks, buildings, structures, or sites to be preserved are in fact of historical and/or architectural significance requiring protection against destruction and encroachment. Such action shall amend the zoning map by placing such historic district thereon, overlaying the existing zoning district. Such action shall also include adoption, in the manner provided for by general law, of such regulations and development policies as may be deemed necessary by the Town Council. Upon adoption, such development policies and regulations for a given historic district, which shall supplement or modify the schedule of regulations for the underlying district, shall be presented as an appendix to this chapter. Such appendix shall be incorporated as part of this chapter by reference as if it were completely presented herein. 
(Code 1969, § 18-262; Ord. of 2-1975; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984)  
Sec. 18-263. - Uses permitted. 
A.  Within historic district boundaries, all uses may be permitted pursuant to the regulations governing the zone prior to such overlaying and general regulations shall be the same as provided in the chapter except where such regulations are modified or amended hereafter. 
B.  No use permitted by right or by the board of zoning appeals shall be permitted where the operational characteristics of the use would tend to destroy or encroach upon the historic character of the district as established and specifically recorded in the recommendations made pursuant to section 18-261.c and adopted pursuant to section 18-262. 
(Code 1969, § 18-263; Ord. of 2-1975; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984)  
Sec. 18-264. - Lot regulations. 
Lots or portions of lots existing in historic districts may be combined, but no existing lot, or combination of lots, parcels, or portions thereof, in single ownership at the time of district creation, shall be reduced in width, depth, or area without the approval of the Town Council. 
(Code 1969, § 18-264; Ord. of 2-1975; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984)  
Sec. 18-265. - Height regulations. 
Height regulations shall be in accordance with those governing the zone prior to overlaying of the historic district except where such heights would tend to encroach upon the historic landmark or otherwise be in conflict with the recommendations adopted pursuant to section 18-262. 
(Code 1969, § 18-265; Ord. of 2-1975; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984)  
Sec. 18-266. - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking regulations shall be in accordance with those governing the permitted use except that no required off-street parking or loading space shall be located in any required front yard. It is the intent of this regulation to permit off-site where on-site parking would have an adverse effect on appearance of the property or the district in general. It is also intended to encourage provision of such off-site parking in grouped facilities in interior parking lots, courts, or at other appropriate locations which will be convenient for users, reduce interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and generally promote public safety. 
(Code 1969, § 18-266; Ord. of 2-1975; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984)  
Sec. 18-267. - Signs; exterior illumination. 
All regulations pursuant to article 19 of this chapter applicable to the permitted use shall be adhered to; henceforth, no sign shall be permitted except for advertising to or informing the public of service, business, occupation, or profession conducted on, in, or about the premises. 
(Code 1969, § 18-267; Ord. of 2-1975; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984)  
Sec. 18-268. - New construction; reconstruction and exterior alterations. 
No building or structure, including signs, shall be erected, reconstructed, substantially altered or restored within any historic district unless the same is approved by the Town Council, acting upon the advice of the architectural review board as being architecturally compatible with the historical and/or architectural aspects of the landmark. 
(Code 1969, § 18-268; Ord. of 2-1975; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984)  
Sec. 18-269. - Razing or demolition. 
No officially designated historic landmark, building, or structure within any such district shall be razed or demolished until such action is approved by the Town Council acting upon the advice of the Board of Architectural Review. 
(Code 1969, § 18-269; Ord. of 2-1975; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984)  
Sec. 18-270. - Moving or relocation. 
No officially designated historic landmark, building, or structure within any such historic district shall be moved or relocated unless the same is approved by the Town Council acting upon the advice of the Board of Architectural Review. 
(Code 1969, § 18-270; Ord. of 2-1975; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984)  
Sec. 18-271. - Administration. 
Upon creation of an historic district with regulations for the district as provided in section 18-262, administrative procedures shall be as generally provided hereafter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-271; Ord. of 2-1975; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984)  
Sec. 18-272. - Role of zoning administrator. 
(1)  The zoning administrator shall not authorize a permit for any erection, reconstruction, exterior alteration, restoration, demolition, or razing of a building or structure in an historic district until the same has been approved by the Town Council following the procedure set forth hereafter. 
(2)  Upon receipt of an application for such permit in an historic district, the zoning administrator shall act in accordance with the existing procedures of his office, except as those procedures are necessarily modified by the following requirements: 
a.  He shall forward to the planning commission or the architectural review board, as appropriate, a copy of the application for such a permit, together with a copy of the site plan and the building plans and specifications filed by the applicant. 
b.  He shall maintain in his office a record of all such applications and of his handling and final disposition of the same, which shall be in addition to and appropriately cross-referenced to his other records. 
c.  He shall require applicants to submit a sufficient number of additional copies of material required to permit compliance of the foregoing. 
(Code 1969, § 18-272; Ord. of 2-1975; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984)  
Sec. 18-273. - Material to be submitted for review. 
By general rule or by specific request in a particular case, the zoning administrator, planning commission, architectural review board and Town Council may require submission of any or all of the following in connection with the application: architectural plans, site plans, landscaping plans, proposed signs with appropriate detail as to character, proposed exterior lighting arrangements, elevations of all portions of structures with important relationships to public view (with indications as to visual construction materials, design of doors or windows, colors, and relationships to adjoining structures) and such other exhibits and reports as are necessary for its determinations. 
(Code 1969, § 18-273; Ord. of 2-1975; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984)  
Sec. 18-274. - Matters to be considered in determining appropriateness of erection, etc., of buildings. 
(1)  The Town Council shall not consider interior arrangements, relative size of the building or structure, detailed design, or features not subject to any public view and shall not make any requirements except for the purpose of preventing developments architecturally incompatible with the historic aspects of the historic district. 
(2)  The Town Council shall consider the following in determining the appropriateness of architectural features: 
a.  Exterior architectural features, including all signs, which are subject to public view from a public street, way or place. 
b.  General design, arrangement, texture, material, color and fenestration of the proposed building or structure and the relation of such factors to similar features of buildings or structures in the immediate vicinity of the historic landmark. 
c.  The extent to which the building or structure would be harmonious with or architecturally incompatible with the historic landmark. 
d.  The extent to which the building or structure will preserve or protect historic places and areas of historic significance in the Town. 
e.  The extent to which the building or structure will promote the general welfare of the Town and all citizens by the preservation and protection of historic places and areas of historic interest in the Town. 
f.  The extent to which said preservation and protection will promote the general welfare by maintaining and increasing real estate values; generating business; creating new positions; attracting tourists; students, writers, historians, artists and artisans; attracting new residents; encouraging study and interest in American history; stimulating interest and study in architecture and design; educating citizens in American culture and heritage; and making the Town a more attractive and desirable place in which to live. 
(Code 1969, § 18-274; Ord. of 2-1975; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984)  
Sec. 18-275. - Matters to be considered in determining whether to grant permit to raze, etc., historic building. 
The Town Council, upon receiving an application for a permit to raze or demolish, shall review the circumstances and the condition of the structure or part proposed for demolition and shall report its finding based on consideration of any and all of the following criteria: 
a.  Is the building of such architectural or historical interest that its removal would be to the detriment of the public interest? 
b.  Is the building of such old and unusual or uncommon design, texture and material that it could not be reproduced or be reproduced only with great difficulty? 
c.  Would retention of the building help preserve and protect a historic place or area of historic interest in the Town? 
d.  Would retention of the building promote the general welfare by maintaining and increasing real estate values; generating business; creating new positions; attracting tourists, students, writers, historians, artists and artisans; attracting new residents; encouraging study and interest in American History; stimulating interest and study in architecture and design; educating citizens in American culture and heritage; or making the Town a more attractive and desirable place in which to live? 
(Code 1969, § 18-275; Ord. of 2-1975; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984)  
Sec. 18-276. - Matters to be considered in determining appropriateness of moving, etc., historical building. 
The Town Council, in determining the appropriateness of moving a historical building, shall base its decision on consideration of any and all of the following criteria: 
a.  Would the proposed relocation have a detrimental effect on structural soundness of the landmark? 
b.  Would the proposed relocation have a detrimental effect on the historical aspects of other landmarks in the historic district? 
c.  Would relocation provide new surroundings that would be harmonious with or incongruous to the historical and architectural aspects of the landmark, structure or building? 
d.  Would relocation of the building help preserve and protect a historic place or area of historic interest in the Town? 
e.  Would relocation of the building promote the general welfare by maintaining and increasing real estate values; generating business; creating new positions; attracting tourists, students, writers, historians, artists and artisans; attracting new residents; encouraging study and interest in American history; stimulating interest and study in architecture and design; educating citizens in American culture and heritage; and making the Town a more attractive and desirable place in which to live? 
(Code 1969, § 18-276; Ord. of 2-1975; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984)  
Sec. 18-277. - Reports of planning commission concerning applications for permits to erect, etc., historical buildings. 
(1)  If the planning commission and the architectural review board, or either, on the basis of information received from the applicant, the determining consideration set forth in sections 18-274, 18-275 and 18-276 and from their general background and knowledge, such commission and/or board decides to counsel against the granting of a permit, it shall indicate to the applicant the changes in plans and specifications, if any, which in the opinion of the commission or board would protect and/or preserve the historical aspects of the landmark, building, structure or district. If the applicant determines that he will make the suggested changes, he shall so advise the planning commission and architectural review board which shall counsel the Town Council accordingly. 
(2)  The planning commission and the architectural review board, as appropriate, shall submit to the Town Council in writing and within 60 days after receipt of the application, their counsel concerning the appropriateness of authorizing a permit for the erection, reconstruction, exterior alteration; restoration, razing, or demolition or relocation of all or a part of any building within an historic district. The written report shall include but not be limited to the following matters: 
a.  The exact location of the area in which the work is to be done. 
b.  The exterior changes to be made or the exterior character of the structure to be erected (where applicable). 
c.  The effect of the proposed action upon the historical and/or architectural aspects of the district. 
d.  The appropriateness of the exterior architectural features which can be seen from a public street or way only. 
e.  The opinion of the planning commission and the architectural review board (including any dissent) as to the appropriateness of the action proposed as it will preserve or destroy the historic aspects of the landmark, building, or structure in question. 
f.  The specific counsel of the planning commission and the architectural review board as to the granting or denying of the permit by the Town Council. 
(Code 1969, § 18-277; Ord. of 2-1975; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984)  
Sec. 18-278. - Action of Town Council concerning application for permits. 
A.  Upon receipt of the written counsel pursuant to section 18-277, the Town Council shall consider at a regular or special meeting the question of authorizing the zoning administrator to grant or deny a permit for the action specified in the application. The applicant shall be notified by the zoning administrator of the time and place of the meeting at which his application will be considered and shall have the right to attend and be heard as to his reasons for filing the same. 
B.  In determining whether to authorize a permit for the proposed erection, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, razing or demolition, or moving or relocation, the Town Council may consider those factors set forth in sections 18-274, 18-275 and 18-276 and the reports of the planning commission and the architectural review board and shall be guided by the general standard of "architectural compatibility." If the Town Council approves the application, it shall authorize the zoning administrator to issue a permit for the work so specified in said application. If the Town Council disapproves, it shall do so in writing and copies shall be given to the applicant and the zoning administrator. The disapproval shall indicate what changes in the plans and specifications would meet the conditions for protecting and preserving the historical character of the district. In the case of disapproval, the application shall not be resubmitted for consideration until 12 months has elapsed from the date of disapproval unless the indicated changes in plans and specifications required to meet the conditions for protecting the district have been incorporated into the application. 
(Code 1969, § 18-278; Ord. of 2-1975; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984)  
Sec. 18-279. - Duties of zoning administrator concerning permits. 
A.  Upon receipt of the Town Council's written disapproval, the zoning administrator shall disapprove the application for the required permit and so advise the applicant. The applicant may appeal from the disapproval as provided by law and section 18-280. 
B.  The zoning administrator shall have the power to institute any proceedings at law or in equity necessary for the enforcement of this section in the same manner as in his enforcement of the other sections of this chapter as presently enacted and as the same may be amended. 
(Code 1969, § 18-279; Ord. of 2-1975; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984)  
Sec. 18-280. - Appeal to circuit court. 
Any person jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Town Council, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the circuit court of the county for review by filing a petition at law setting forth the alleged illegality of the action of the Town Council, provided such petition is filed within 30 days after the final decision is rendered by the council. The filing of the said petition shall stay the decision of the Town Council pending the outcome of the appeal to the court, except that the filing of such petition shall not stay the decision of the Town Council if such decision denies the right to raze or demolish an historic landmark, building, or structure. The court may reverse or modify the decision of the Town Council in whole or in part if it finds upon review that the decision is arbitrary and constitutes an abuse of discretion, or it may affirm the decision of the Town Council. 
(Code 1969, § 18-280; Ord. of 2-1975; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984)  
Sec. 18-280.1. - Windover Heights Historic District—Purpose. 
The purpose of this section and sections 18-280.2 to 18-280.13 is to recognize and designate by an overlay to the zoning map of the Town of Vienna, the Windover Heights Historic District of the Town, which district contains buildings and places in which historic events occurred and which have special public value because of notable architectural features and other features which relate to the cultural and artistic heritage of Vienna, and to provide for the preservation of that district and sites therein; the Town Council recognizing that the district is a single-family residential neighborhood which has changed little since the turn of the century, which consists mostly of older homes, open spaces and meandering streets lined with mature trees and shrubs which constitutes one of the original residential sections of historic old Vienna and which housed citizens who were prominent in the development of the Town. 
(Code 1969, § 18-280.1; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984; Ord. of 7-6-1992)  
Sec. 18-280.2. - Same—Boundaries. 
A.  The Windover Heights Historic District is hereby created and the boundaries of such district are drawn so as to include all lands closely related to and bearing upon the character of the area known for a long period of time as the "Windover Area," "Windover Heights," or "The Hill." 
B.  The boundaries of this district shall be as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of Lawyers Road, NW, and the creek east of Stowe's Addition to Windover Heights; thence southeasterly along the southwesterly right-of-way line of said Lawyers Road, NW, to the southerly line of 210 Lawyers Road, NW; thence westerly along said property line to the westerly line of said parcel; thence northerly along said property line to the southeasterly line of Lovers Lane, NW; thence southwesterly along said right-of-way line to the easterly line of Lot 48, Block 5 of Windover Heights; thence southeasterly along said property line to the southerly line thereof; thence southwesterly along said line and the southerly line of Lots 47 through 40, Block 5, to the westerly line of said Lot 40 of Block 5; thence northwesterly along said property line to the southeasterly line of Lovers Lane, NW; thence southwesterly along said right-of-way line to its point of intersection with the northeasterly line of Pleasant Street, NW; thence southeasterly along said right-of-way line to its point of intersection with the northwesterly line of Lot 34, Block 5, Windover Heights; thence northeasterly along said line to the northeasterly line of said Lot 34; thence southeasterly along said line and the northeasterly lines of Lots 33 through 29 of Block 5 to the northwesterly line of Church Street, NW; thence southwesterly along said right-of-way line to the northeasterly line of Pleasant Street, NW; thence northwesterly along said right-of-way line to the prolongation of the southeasterly line of 130 Pleasant Street, NW; thence southwesterly along said line, also being the boundary between the residential and commercial zones to Lewis Street, NW; thence northwesterly along said Lewis Street to Windover Avenue, NW; thence northeasterly along said Windover Avenue to Knoll Street, NW; thence along the back of those lots on the westerly side of Windover Avenue, NW, to 346 Orchard Street, NW; thence along the westerly boundary of this lot to Orchard Street, NW; thence easterly along said Orchard Street to the rear boundary of 277 Windover Avenue, NW; thence northerly along the rear boundaries of 277 and 261 Windover Avenue, NW, to the rear boundary of 322 West Street, NW; thence westerly along the rear boundary of said lot and the rear property lines of 324 and 326 West Street, NW, to the westerly property line of said 326 West Street, NW; thence northeasterly along the previously-mentioned creek to its intersection with Lawyers Road, NW; said point also being the point of beginning. 
(Code 1969, § 18-280.2; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984; Ord. of 3-18-1991; Ord. of 7-6-1992; Ord. of 8-1998)  
Sec. 18-280.3. - Same—Public improvements. 
A.  No new construction projects, the purpose of which shall be the installation of new public improvements and publicly-owned utilities not in existence at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which sections 18-280.1 to 18-280.13 are derived shall be commenced in the Windover Heights Historic District until the Town Council shall first conduct an advertised public hearing concerning the necessity of the improvement, at which hearing the recommendations of the Windover Heights Board of Review, if available, shall be included in the record. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to maintenance or repair of existing public improvements or utilities. 
(Code 1969, § 18-280.3; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984; Ord. of 7-6-1992)  
Sec. 18-280.4. - Same—Certification of appropriateness required. 
A.  A certificate of appropriateness shall be required before any of the following, except as provided in subsection B of this section, may be performed within the district: 
1.  Erection of a building, accessory building, structure, fence or sign. 
2.  Changing or altering the exterior architectural character of an existing building, accessory building, or structure to that degree which requires obtaining a building permit. 
B.  A certificate of appropriateness shall not be required in the following cases: 
1.  Repair or replacement of any part of an existing building, including accessory building, structure, fence or sign when using substantially similar materials and maintaining the same architectural features. 
2.  Repair or replacement of a roof on an existing building or accessory building even if different colors or materials are used. However, any change to the existing roofline or profile of the roof shall require a certificate of appropriateness. 
3.  Repair or replacement of existing stoops, porches, entryways, windows, or doors; or the repair, replacement or addition of screens, storm doors, or storm windows. 
4.  Erection of a shed or other accessory structure which does not require a building permit. 
5.  Construction of an in-ground swimming pool. However, a pool constructed so that any part, excepting handrails or diving boards, is more than 18 inches above ground shall require a certificate of appropriateness. 
6.  The painting or repainting of an existing building, accessory building, structure, fence or sign. 
7.  Erection, alteration or reconstruction of buildings, accessory buildings, structures, fences or signs when no part of such improvement is subject to public view at any time of the year from a public street, way or place. 
(Code 1969, § 18-280.4; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984; Ord. of 7-6-1992)  
Sec. 18-280.5. - Same—Creation of Windover Heights Board of Review. 
A.  For the purpose of making effective the provisions of this section, there is hereby created a board to be known as the Windover Heights Board of Review. 
B.  Membership of board. The board of review shall consist of five members, one registered professional architect whose qualifications are compatible with historic preservation and restoration and who need not be a resident of the Town, one member of the Board of Architectural Review, one member of the planning commission, one member of the beautification commission and one person selected from the community at large. In making all appointments to the board, the Town Council shall give consideration to persons who have evidenced an interest in and an appreciation for the cultural heritage and history of the Town. Except for the registered professional architect, all members of the board shall be residents of the Town. Initially, three members of the board shall be appointed for a term of one year and two shall be appointed for a term of two years. Thereafter, all appointments to the board, except for those to fill an unexpired term, shall be for a period of two years. All members shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1969, § 18-280.5; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984; Ord. of 7-6-1992)  
Sec. 18-280.6. - Same—Rules of the board. 
A.  The board shall elect from its membership a chair, and vice-chair, at the first meeting of the board which shall be within 45 days of adoption of the ordinance from which sections 18-280.1 to 18-280.13 are derived and thereafter at the first meeting of each year. The chair shall preside over the board and have the right to vote. The vice-chair shall perform the duties of the chair in his absence. An accurate record of the proceedings of the board shall be kept and a permanent record of all resolutions, motions, transactions and determinations, which records shall be delivered to the Town clerk within seven days following each meeting and shall be records of the Town. 
B.  The board shall hold a regular meeting at least once a month. Special meetings may be held at other times at the call of the chair, or two members of the board. Meetings also shall be called at the direction of the Town Council. 
(Code 1969, § 18-280.6; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984; Ord. of 7-6-1992)  
Sec. 18-280.7. - Same—Procedures for applications and review. 
A.  Applications for a certificate of appropriateness shall be made to the office of the zoning administrator for the Town. The application shall be accompanied by a house location survey or dimensional drawing of the subject property showing the following: 
1.  The location of all existing buildings, accessory buildings, structures, fences or signs, and any proposed additions or alterations thereto. 
2.  The location of proposed buildings, accessory buildings, fences or signs to be erected. 
B.  Upon the filing of an application that complies with the requirements of subsection A of this section, the zoning administrator shall within ten working days thereafter, forward the application, together with his recommendations on the same, to the Windover Heights Board of Review. 
C.  The board shall consider the application at the first regular meeting after receipt of the recommendations of the zoning administrator. 
D.  The board shall approve or disapprove such application forwarded by the zoning administrator at that regular meeting, unless time is extended by mutual agreement between the board and the applicant. If such application is approved, a certificate of appropriateness signed by the chair or vice-chair, shall be attached to the application for certificate of appropriateness and, within two working days, transmitted to the zoning administrator, or designee, for issuance. 
E.  If the board disapproves of an application, it shall make findings of fact and state its findings and reasons therefor in writing and transmit a record of same to the zoning administrator and to the applicant. If the board disapproves of an application, it may offer advice regarding appropriate changes that would address identified deficiencies. 
(Code 1969, § 18-280.7; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984; Ord. of 7-6-1992)  
Sec. 18-280.8. - Same—Matters to be considered by the board. 
A.  In its review of any application for a certificate of appropriateness, the Windover Heights Board of Review, or the council, on appeal, shall consider the following aspects of a building, accessory building, structure, fence or sign: 
1.  Exterior architectural features, including all signs, which are subject to public view at any time of the year from a public street, way or place. 
2.  General design and arrangement. 
3.  Texture and material. 
4.  The relation to similar features of buildings, accessory buildings, structures, fences or signs in the immediate surroundings. 
5.  Harmony or incongruity with the old and historic aspect of the surroundings. 
6.  The extent to which historic places and areas of historic interest in the district will be preserved or protected. 
7.  Special public value because of architectural and other features which relate to the cultural and artistic heritage of the Town. 
B.  The board shall not consider interior arrangement, or relative size of the building, accessory building, structure, fence or sign. 
(Code 1969, § 18-280.8; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984; Ord. of 7-6-1992)  
Sec. 18-280.9. - Same—Exceptions. 
Nothing in sections 18-280.1 to 18-280.13 shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance and repair or sale of any structure within the district, nor shall anything in sections 18-280.1 to 18-280.13 be construed to prevent the construction, alteration, moving or demolition of any structure under any permit issued prior to the passage of the ordinance from which sections 18-280.1 to 18-280.13 are derived. 
(Code 1969, § 18-280.9; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984; Ord. of 7-6-1992)  
Sec. 18-280.10. - Same—Appeal to Town Council. 
A.  Any person jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board, including any applicant, any citizen of the Town and the Town through its zoning administrator, may appeal such decision to the Town Council by filing with the Town clerk a written request for appeal. Such appeals shall be filed within 30 days after the decision has been made by the board. 
B.  The Town Council shall within 30 days of receipt of such written request, or within a longer period if agreed upon by the applicant, grant such applicant a full hearing at a public meeting. 
C.  Within 30 days of such hearing, and after consultation with the board, the council may reverse or modify the decision of the board, in whole or in part, or it may affirm the decision of the board. 
(Code 1969, § 18-280.10; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984; Ord. of 7-6-1992)  
Sec. 18-280.11. - Same—Appeals to circuit court. 
Any person jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Town Council or any citizen of the Town may appeal such decision to the circuit court of the county for review by filing a petition at law setting forth the alleged illegality of the action of the Town Council, providing such petition is filed within 30 days after the final decision is rendered by the council. The filing of the said petition shall stay the decision of the Town Council pending the outcome of the appeal to the court. The court may reverse or modify the decision of the Town Council in whole or in part, if it finds upon review that the decision is arbitrary and constitutes an abuse of discretion or it may affirm the decision of the Town Council. 
(Code 1969, § 18-280.11; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984; Ord. of 7-6-1992)  
Sec. 18-280.12. - Same—Penalty for violation. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of sections 18-280.1 to 18-280.11 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $250.00, and each day after the first during which such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1969, § 18-280.12; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984; Ord. of 7-6-1992)  
Sec. 18-280.13. - Same—Validity. 
Should any section, clause or provision of sections 18-280.1 to 18-280.12 be declared by the court to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of sections 18-280.1 to 18-280.12 as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid. 
(Code 1969, § 18-280.13; Ord. of 4-1979; Ord. of 6-1984; Ord. of 7-6-1992)  
ARTICLE 27. - PENALTIES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Penalty, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2286.A.5. 
 
Sec. 18-281. - Violation; punishable offense. 
A.  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $1,000.00. If the violation is uncorrected at the time of the conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in compliance with this chapter, within a period established by the court. Failure to remove or abate a zoning violation within the specified time period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $1,000.00, and any such failure during any succeeding ten-day period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense for each ten-day period punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,500.00. 
B.  However, any conviction resulting from a violation of provisions regulating the number of unrelated persons in single-family residential dwellings shall be punishable by a fine of up to $2,000.00. Failure to abate the violation within the specified time period shall be punishable by a fine of up to $5,000.00 and any such failure during any succeeding ten-day period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense for each ten-day period punishable by a fine of up to $7,500.00. However, no such fine shall accrue against any owner or managing agent of a single-family residential dwelling unit during the pendency of any legal action commenced by such owner or managing agent of such dwelling unit against a tenant to eliminate an overcrowding condition in accordance with chapter 13 or chapter 13.2 of Virginia State Code title 55 (Code of Virginia, ch. 55-13 or ch. 55-13.2), as applicable. A conviction resulting from a violation of provisions regulating the number of unrelated persons in single-family residential dwellings shall not be punishable by a jail term. 
(Code 1969, § 18-281; Ord. of 5-2009)  
Sec. 18-281.1. - Civil penalties. 
A.  A violation of the following scheduled provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an infraction and shall be punishable by a civil penalty of $100.00: 
Section 18-9 	Uses 
Section 18-153 	Overnight Parking of Commercial Vehicles in Residential Zone 
Section 18-154 	Display of Merchandise 
Section 18-159 	Obstruction to Vision at Corner Residential Zone Prohibited 
Section 18-173 	Home Occupations 
Article 19 of this chapter 	Nameplates and Signs 
Section 18-209 	Conditions Placed on Conditional Use 
Section 18-229 	Violation to Act Without Permit or Certificate of Occupancy When One Required 
 
B.  Each day during which any violation of the provisions scheduled in subsection A of this section is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. However, in no event shall any such violation arising from the same set of operative facts be charged more frequently than once in any ten day period, nor shall a series of such violations arising from the same set of operative facts result in civil penalties which exceed a total of $3,000.00. 
C.  The designation of a particular violation of this chapter as an infraction under this section shall preclude the prosecution of such as a criminal misdemeanor, except for any violation resulting in injury to any person, which may be so prosecuted as well. 
D.  The zoning administrator shall notify by written summons a person committing or suffering the existence of an infraction. Such notice may be served in person or by certified mail return receipt requested. The summons shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the person charged. 
(2)  The nature of the infraction and the ordinance provision being violated. 
(3)  The location, date and time that the infraction occurred or was observed. 
(4)  The amount of the civil penalty assessed for the infraction. 
(5)  The manner, location and time in which the civil penalty may be paid to the Town. 
(6)  The right of the recipient of the summons to elect to stand trial for the infraction and the date for such trial. 
E.  The summons shall provide that any person summoned for a violation may, within 14 days from personal service or of mailing of the summons, elect to pay the civil penalty by making an appearance in person or in writing by mail to the Town's director of finance at least 72 hours prior to the time and date fixed for trial by the summons and, by such appearance, may enter a waiver of trial, admit liability, and pay the civil penalty established for the offense charged. In the alternative, the person may elect to stand trial. Such summons shall inform the persons summoned of their right to stand trial for the violation charged and provide that a signature to an admission of liability shall have the same force and effect as a judgment of court; however, an admission shall not be deemed a criminal conviction for any purpose. 
F.  If a person charged with a violation does not elect to enter a waiver of trial and admit liability, and does not elect to stand trial, the Town shall then cause the appropriate official to serve the summons on the person charged in the manner prescribed by law for service of civil summons. The violation shall be tried in the general district court in the same manner and with the same right of appeal as provided by law. A finding of liability shall not be deemed a criminal conviction for any purpose. 
G.  The remedies provided for in this section are cumulative and not exclusive and, except as provided above, shall be in the addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(Code 1969, § 18-281.1; Ord. of 11-1987; Ord. of 4-17-1989; Ord. of 6-1991)  
ARTICLE 28. - INTERPRETATION 
 
Sec. 18-282. - Provisions of this chapter control when more restrictive than other existing laws. 
Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of land, buildings, or premises, or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger yards, courts, or other open spaces than are required by other existing provisions of law or ordinance, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Code 1969, § 18-282)  
Sec. 18-283. - Deed restrictions greater than required by this chapter not superseded by this chapter. 
Where private building restrictions in recorded deeds are greater than those required by this chapter, they are not superseded by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18-283)  
Sec. 18-284. - Permits approved prior to adoption of this chapter. 
Any permit approved prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall adhere to the regulations of the zoning ordinance which was in effect prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, provided that after six months from the issuance of any such permit, it shall be void unless actual on-site construction has commenced. 
(Code 1969, § 18-284)  
ARTICLE 29. - VALIDITY 
 
Sec. 18-285. - Severability. 
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any part or provision thereof, other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Code 1969, § 18-285)  
Sec. 18-286. - Repealer. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Code 1969, § 18-286)  
Chapter 18.1 - FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Citizens are alerted that the floodplain and flood damage prevention provisions were adopted by ordinance on August 16, 2010. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 18.1-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Vienna Floodplain Ordinance." 
(Code 1969, § 18.1-1; Ord. of 8-16-2010)  
Sec. 18.1-2. - Statutory authorization and purpose. 
The ordinance from which this chapter is derived is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to localities by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2280. The purpose of these provisions is to prevent: the loss of life and property, the creation of health and safety hazards, the disruption of commerce and governmental services, the extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection and relief, and the impairment of the tax base by: 
A.  Regulating uses, activities, and development which, alone or in combination with other existing or future uses, activities, and development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights, velocities, and frequencies; 
B.  Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities, and development from locating within districts subject to flooding; 
C.  Requiring all those uses, activities, and developments that do occur in floodprone districts to be protected and/or floodproofed against flooding and flood damage; and 
D.  Protecting individuals from buying land and structures which are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards. 
(Code 1969, § 18.1-2; Ord. of 8-16-2010)  
Sec. 18.1-3. - Applicability. 
These provisions shall apply to all privately and publicly owned lands within the jurisdiction of the Town and identified as being floodprone. 
(Code 1969, § 18.1-3; Ord. of 8-16-2010)  
Sec. 18.1-4. - Compliance and liability. 
A.  No land shall hereafter be developed and no structure shall be located, relocated, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, or structurally altered except in full compliance with the terms and provisions of this chapter and any other applicable ordinances and regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter. 
B.  The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study, but does not imply total flood protection. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that districts outside the floodplain district or land uses permitted within such district will be free from flooding or flood damages. 
C.  Records of actions associated with administering this chapter shall be kept on file and maintained by the director of public works. 
D.  This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Town or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Code 1969, § 18.1-4; Ord. of 8-16-2010)  
Sec. 18.1-5. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter supersedes any ordinance currently in effect in floodprone districts. Any ordinance, however, shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that its provisions are more restrictive. 
(Code 1969, § 18.1-5; Ord. of 8-16-2010)  
Sec. 18.1-6. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. The remaining portions shall remain in full force and effect; and for this purpose, the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. 
(Code 1969, § 18.1-6; Ord. of 8-16-2010)  
Sec. 18.1-7. - Penalty for violations. 
A.  Any person who fails to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of this chapter or directions of the zoning administrator or any authorized employee of the Town shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and subject to the penalties therefor. 
B.  In addition to the penalties of subsection A of this section, all other actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or noncompliances within a reasonable time. Any structure constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered or relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the Town to be a public nuisance and abatable as such. Flood insurance may be withheld from structures constructed in violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 18.1-7; Ord. of 8-16-2010)  
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 18.1-8. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation means the Federal Emergency Management Agency designated 100-year water surface elevation. The water surface elevation of the base flood in relation to the datum specified on the community's flood insurance rate map. For the purposes of this chapter, the 100-year flood or one percent annual chance flood shall be the regulated floodplain. 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Board of zoning appeals means the Town board of zoning appeals, appointed to review appeals made by individuals with regard to decisions of the zoning administrator in the interpretation of this chapter. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Director of public works means the Town director of public works. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, or columns (posts and piers). 
Encroachment means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
Flood or flooding means: 
1.  A general or temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or 
c.  Mudflows which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in subsection 1.b of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. 
2.  The collapse or subsistence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in subsection 1.a of this definition. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that is made available digitally is called a digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM). 
Flood insurance study (FIS) means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudflow and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization in the watershed. When a freeboard is included in the height of a structure, the flood insurance premiums will be significantly cheaper. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3. 
Manufactured home is as defined in section 18-4. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after February 3, 1982, or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Shallow flooding area means a special flood hazard area with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Special flood hazard area means the land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given year as determined in section 18.1-9. 
Start of construction, for other than new construction and substantial improvement, under the Coastal Barriers Resource Act (P.L. 97-348), means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The term "actual start" means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of the construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 
2.  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the Code of Federal Regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Watercourse means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. The term "watercourse" includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
Zoning administrator means the Town zoning administrator. 
(Code 1969, § 18.1-8; Ord. of 8-16-2010)  
ARTICLE 3. - ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 18.1-9. - Description of districts. 
A.  Basis of districts. The various floodplain districts shall include special flood hazard areas. The basis for the delineation of these districts shall be the flood insurance study (FIS) and the flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) for the Town prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance Administration, dated September 17, 2010, and any subsequent revisions or amendments thereto. The boundaries of the special flood hazard area and floodplain districts are established as shown on the flood insurance rate map which is declared to be a part of this chapter and which shall be kept on file at the Town offices. 
1.  The floodway district is delineated, for purposes of this chapter, using the criterion that certain areas within the floodplain must be capable of carrying the waters of the 100-year flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point. The areas included in this district are specifically defined in Table 2 of the above-referenced flood insurance study and shown on the accompanying flood insurance rate map. 
2.  The special floodplain district shall be those areas identified as an AE zone on the maps accompanying the Flood Insurance Study for which 100-year flood elevations have been provided. 
3.  The approximated floodplain district shall be those areas identified as an A or A99 zone on the maps accompanying the flood insurance study. In these zones, no detailed flood profiles or elevations are provided, but the 100-year floodplain boundary has been approximated. 
4.  The shallow flooding district shall be those areas identified as zone AO or AH on the maps accompanying the flood insurance study. 
B.  Overlay concept. 
1.  The floodplain districts described in subsection A of this section shall be overlays to the existing underlying districts as shown on the official zoning map, and as such, the provisions for the floodplain districts shall serve as a supplement to the underlying district provisions. 
2.  If there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the floodplain districts and those of any underlying district, the more restrictive provisions and/or those pertaining to the floodplain districts shall apply. 
3.  In the event any provision concerning a floodplain district is declared inapplicable as a result of any legislative or administrative actions or judicial decision, the basic underlying provisions shall remain applicable. 
(Code 1969, § 18.1-9; Ord. of 8-16-2010)  
Sec. 18.1-10. - District boundary changes. 
The delineation of any of the floodplain districts may be revised by the Town where natural or manmade changes have occurred and/or where more detailed studies have been conducted or undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other qualified agency, or an individual documents the need for such change. However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(Code 1969, § 18.1-10; Ord. of 8-16-2010)  
Sec. 18.1-11. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
Initial interpretations of the boundaries of the floodplain districts shall be made by the zoning administrator. Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of any of the districts, the board of zoning appeals shall make the necessary determination. The person questioning or contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to the board and to submit his own technical evidence if he so desires. 
(Code 1969, § 18.1-11; Ord. of 8-16-2010)  
Sec. 18.1-12. - Submitting technical data. 
A community's base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information becomes available, a community shall notify the Federal Insurance Administration of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data. Such a submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements will be based upon current data. 
(Code 1969, § 18.1-12; Ord. of 8-16-2010)  
ARTICLE 4. - DISTRICT PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 18.1-13. - Permit and application requirements. 
A.  Permit requirement. All uses, activities, and development occurring within any floodplain district, including placement of manufactured homes, shall be undertaken only upon the issuance of a building permit. Such development shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with all other applicable codes and ordinances, as amended, such as the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code (VA USBC) and the Town's subdivision regulations set forth in chapter 17. Prior to the issuance of any such permit, the director of public works shall require all applications to include compliance with all applicable state and federal laws and shall review all sites to ensure they are reasonably safe from flooding. Under no circumstances shall any use, activity, and/or development adversely affect the capacity of the channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system. 
B.  Site plans and permit applications. All applications for development within any floodplain district and all building permits issued for the floodplain shall incorporate the following information: 
1.  The elevation of the base flood at the site. 
2.  The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement). 
3.  For structures to be floodproofed (nonresidential only), the elevation to which the structure will be floodproofed. 
4.  Topographic information showing existing and proposed ground elevations. 
(Code 1969, § 18.1-13; Ord. of 8-16-2010)  
Sec. 18.1-14. - General standards. 
The following provisions shall apply to all permits: 
A.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be according to the VA USBC, and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
B.  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
C.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
D.  New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
E.  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, including duct work, shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
F.  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
G.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
H.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
In addition to subsections A through H of this section, in all special flood hazard areas, the additional provisions shall apply: 
I.  Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any channels or of any watercourse, stream, etc., within this jurisdiction, a permit shall be obtained from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the state department of environmental quality, and the state marine resources commission (a joint permit application is available from any of these organizations). Furthermore, in riverine areas, notification of the proposal shall be given by the applicant to all affected adjacent jurisdictions, the Department of Conservation and Recreation (Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management) and the Federal Insurance Administration. 
J.  The flood carrying capacity within an altered or relocated portion of any watercourse shall be maintained. 
(Code 1969, § 18.1-14; Ord. of 8-16-2010)  
Sec. 18.1-15. - Specific standards. 
In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations have been provided in the flood insurance study or generated according section 18.1-18, the following provisions shall apply: 
A.  Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation (recommend greater than or equal to one foot freeboard). 
B.  Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation (recommend greater than or equal to one foot freeboard). Buildings located in all A1-30, AE, and AH zones may be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated provided that all areas of the building components below the elevation corresponding to the BFE plus one foot are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification, including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed, shall be maintained by the director of public works. 
C.  Elevated buildings. Fully enclosed areas, of new construction or substantially improved structures, which are below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall: 
1.  Not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door), or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). 
2.  Be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials below the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
3.  Include, in zones A, AO, AE, and A1-30, measures to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum design criteria: 
a.  Provide a minimum of two openings on different sides of each enclosed area subject to flooding. 
b.  The total net area of all openings must be at least one square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. 
c.  If a building has more than one enclosed area, each area must have openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and exit. 
d.  The bottom of all required openings shall be no higher than one foot above the adjacent grade. 
e.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other opening coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
f.  Foundation enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is considered an enclosure and requires openings as outlined above. 
D.  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
1.  All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on individual lots or parcels, in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, in a new manufactured home park or subdivision or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the elevation and anchoring requirements in section 18.1-14.A and B, and subsection A of this section. 
2.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions); or 
c.  Meet all the requirements for manufactured homes in section 18.1-14 and this subsection D. 
(Code 1969, § 18.1-15; Ord. of 8-16-2010)  
Sec. 18.1-16. - Standards for the floodway district. 
The following provisions shall apply within the floodway district: 
A.  Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments are prohibited unless certification such as hydrologic and hydraulic analyses (with supporting technical data) is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently-accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the director of public works. Development activities which increase the water surface elevation of the base flood may be allowed, provided that the developer or applicant first applies, with the Town's endorsement, for a conditional flood insurance rate map and floodway revision, and receives the approval of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
B.  If section 18.1-14 is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
C.  The placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes) is prohibited, except in an existing manufactured homes (mobile homes) park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, provided the anchoring, elevation, and encroachment standards are met. 
(Code 1969, § 18.1-16; Ord. of 8-16-2010)  
Sec. 18.1-17. - Standards for the special floodplain district. 
The following provisions shall apply within the special floodplain district: 
A.  Until a regulatory floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within the areas of special flood hazard, designated as zones A1-30 and AE on the flood insurance rate map, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the Town. 
B.  Development activities in zones A1-30, AE, and AH, on the Town's flood insurance rate map which increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot may be allowed, provided that the developer or applicant first applies, with the Town's endorsement, for a conditional flood insurance rate map revision, and receives the approval of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Code 1969, § 18.1-17; Ord. of 8-16-2010)  
Sec. 18.1-18. - Standards for approximated floodplain. 
The following provisions shall apply with the approximated floodplain district: 
A.  The approximated floodplain district shall be that floodplain area for which no detailed flood profiles or elevations are provided, but where a 100-year floodplain boundary has been approximated. Such areas are shown as zone A on the maps accompanying the flood insurance study. For these areas, the 100-year flood elevations and floodway information from federal, state, and other acceptable sources shall be used, when available. It is recommended that the applicant refer to FEMA 265, "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas, A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-Year) Flood Elevations." 
B.  Where the specific 100-year flood elevation cannot be determined for this area using other sources of data, such as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Floodplain Information Reports, U.S. Geological Survey Floodprone Quadrangles, etc., an applicant for a proposed use, development and/or activity greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, shall determine this elevation. For development proposed in the approximate floodplain the applicant must use technical methods that correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts, such as point on boundary, high water marks, or hydrologic and hydraulic analyses. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the director of public works. 
C.  The director of public works reserves the right to require hydrologic and hydraulic analyses for any development. 
D.  When such base flood elevation data is utilized, the lowest floor shall be elevated to or above the base flood elevation (recommend greater than or equal to one foot freeboard). During the permitting process, the director of public works shall obtain: 
1)  The elevation of the lowest floor (including the basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; and 
2)  If the structure has been floodproofed in accordance with the requirements of this article, the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure has been floodproofed. 
(Code 1969, § 18.1-18; Ord. of 8-16-2010)  
Sec. 18.1-19. - Standards for the shallow flooding district. 
The following provisions shall apply within the shallow flooding district: 
A.  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the flood depth specified on the flood insurance rate map, above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated no less than two feet above the highest adjacent grade. When a freeboard is included in the height of a structure, the flood insurance premiums will be significantly cheaper. 
B.  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall: 
1.  Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the flood depth specified on the flood insurance rate map, above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade; or 
2.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed to the specified flood level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
C.  Adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Code 1969, § 18.1-19; Ord. of 8-16-2010)  
Sec. 18.1-20. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
A.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
B.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
C.  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
D.  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development proposals (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) that exceed 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser. 
(Code 1969, § 18.1-20; Ord. of 8-16-2010)  
ARTICLE 5. - VARIANCES 
 
Sec. 18.1-21. - Factors to be considered. 
1.  Variances shall be issued only upon: 
(i)  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
(ii)  After the board of zoning appeals has determined that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
(iii)  After the board of zoning appeals has determined that the granting of such variance will not result in unacceptable or prohibited increases in flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense; and will not create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public, or conflict with local laws or ordinances. 
2.  While the granting of variances generally is limited to a lot size less than one-half acre, deviations from that limitation may occur. However, as the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing a variance increases. Variances may be issued by the board of zoning appeals for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, in conformance with the provisions of this section. 
3.  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that the criteria of this section are met, and the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
4.  In passing upon applications for variances, the board of zoning appeals shall satisfy all relevant factors and procedures specified in sections of chapter 18, zoning, and consider the following additional factors: 
A.  The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments. No variance shall be granted for any proposed use, development, or activity within any floodway district that will cause any increase in the 100-year flood elevation. 
B.  The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or downstream to the injury of others. 
C.  The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions. 
D.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners. 
E.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community. 
F.  The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location. 
G.  The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use. 
H.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future. 
I.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area. 
J.  The safety of access by ordinary and emergency vehicles to the property in time of flood. 
K.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site. 
L.  The historic nature of a structure. Variances for repair or rehabilitation of historic structures may be granted upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
M.  Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this chapter. 
5.  The board of zoning appeals may refer any application and accompanying documentation pertaining to any request for a variance to any engineer or other qualified person or agency for technical assistance in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, and the adequacy of the plans for flood protection and other related matters. 
6.  Variances shall be issued only after the board of zoning appeals has determined that the granting of such will not result in unacceptable or prohibited increases in flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense; and will not create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public, or conflict with local laws or ordinances. 
7.  Variances shall be issued only after the board of zoning appeals has determined that the variance will be the minimum required to provide relief. 
8.  The board of zoning appeals shall notify the applicant for a variance, by written order, that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the 100-year flood elevation increases the risks to life and property and will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance. 
9.  A record shall be maintained of the notification specified in subsection 8 of this section as well as all variance actions, including justification for the issuance of the variances. Any variances that are issued shall be noted in the annual or biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(Code 1969, ch. 18.1, art. 5; Ord. of 8-16-2010)  
ARTICLE 6. - EXISTING STRUCTURES IN FLOODPLAIN AREAS 
 
Sec. 18.1-22. - Conditions of continuance. 
A structure or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed before the enactment of these provisions, but which is not in conformity with these provisions, may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
A.  Existing structures in the floodway area shall not be expanded or enlarged unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the proposed expansion would not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
B.  Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use located in any floodplain areas to an extent or amount of less than 50 percent of its market value shall conform to the Virginia Uniform Standards Building Code. 
C.  The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use, regardless of its location in a floodplain area to an extent or amount of 50 percent or more of its market value, shall be undertaken only in full compliance with this chapter and shall require the entire structure to conform to the VA USBC. 
(Code 1969, ch. 18.1, art. 6; Ord. of 8-16-2010)  
Chapter 19 - SWIMMING POOLS  
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 19-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Swimming Pool Ordinance of the Town of Vienna." 
(Code 1969, § 19-1; Ord. of 1-17-1972)  
Sec. 19-2. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to the incorporated territory of the Town, and to all constructed swimming pools, and other bathing places of permanent or semi-permanent construction for the purpose of impounding water for the immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings. 
(Code 1969, § 19-2; Ord. of 1-17-1972)  
Sec. 19-3. - Purposes. 
The primary purposes of this chapter in its application to swimming pools and other bathing places are: 
(a)  To ensure that the water in such swimming pools or other bathing places is sufficiently sanitary through proper treatment by approved chemicals to make it free from undue hazard to the health of its users and the citizens of the Town. 
(b)  To ensure that the appurtenances of such swimming pools or other bathing places are so organized and operated that they promote and protect the safety of its users and of the citizens of the Town. 
(c)  To provide a means of ensuring that these objectives are carried out and made effective both with respect to existing swimming pools and bathing places and for those which may be built in the future. 
(d)  To ensure that new construction or installation of swimming pools shall have the benefit of this chapter as a guide for persons interested in planning, organizing and building such swimming pools or other bathing places. 
(Code 1969, § 19-3; Ord. of 1-17-1972)  
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 19-4. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bathing place means any swimming pool of artificial construction and for use by the general public or the occupants or members of any institution, school, association, group, or tenants of a multiple-family apartment building consisting of ten or more families and used exclusively by such families and their guests invited to use it without payment of any fee. 
Family pool means any swimming pool of artificial construction which is of a permanent or semi-permanent nature used or intended to be used solely by the owner, and by guests invited to use it without payment of any fee or any such swimming pool exclusively owned by not more than ten families and used exclusively by such families and their guests invited to use it without payment of any fee. 
Health officer means the county health officer or his designated representative. 
Swimming pool means an artificial, permanent or semi-permanent basin or tank including all appurtenant equipment, structures and facilities, for the purpose of impounding water to a depth of more than three feet for the immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings. 
(Code 1969, § 19-4; Ord. of 1-17-1972)  
ARTICLE 3. - ADOPTION OF THE CODE OF THE COUNTY OF FAIRFAX, VIRGINIA 
 
Sec. 19-5. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 4. - FAMILY POOLS 
 
Sec. 19-6. - Applicability of plumbing, building, electrical and zoning regulations to construction of pools. 
1.  In addition to the requirements of this chapter, the requirements of chapter 69.1 of the Code of the County of Fairfax, Virginia shall also apply to the construction, maintenance and operation of swimming pools. The zoning requirements of sections 18-138.1, 18-140.1 and 18-141.1 shall also apply to family pools. 
2.  The structural and equipment provisions and requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any family pool constructed or installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived except as follows: 
(a)  When any condition exists in such family pool that would endanger the health, safety or life of any persons, the health officer shall have the authority to order such family pool closed until such condition is corrected. 
(b)  When any alteration, placement or replacement of any major equipment is made in any such family pool. Any or all portions of the recirculation system are not considered major equipment. 
(c)  The provisions and requirements of this chapter with respect to fences or other protective measures and standards of operation shall be complied with by all family pools regardless of date of construction or installation. 
(Code 1969, § 19-6; Ord. of 1-17-1972)  
Sec. 19-7. - Building permits. 
An application for a building permit shall be filed with the zoning administrator before the construction, remodeling or major alteration of any family pool. After approval of the application by the zoning administrator and the director of public works, the application will be filed by the applicant with the office of county development. Plans and specifications shall have been approved by the health officer prior to the issuance of such permit. 
(Code 1969, § 19-7; Ord. of 1-17-1972)  
Sec. 19-8. - Authority of health officer to order pools closed under certain conditions. 
When the health officer finds that the provisions of this chapter are not met or that any condition exists that endangers the life, health or safety of the users of any family pool, he may order the facility closed until the condition is corrected. 
(Code 1969, § 19-8; Ord. of 1-17-1972)  
ARTICLE 5. - DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 
 
Sec. 19-9. - Water supply. 
All water used in family pools shall be from an approved source. No piping arrangements shall exist which under any conditions will permit sewage or waste water to enter the family pool water system or water from the family pool to enter the make-up water supply. 
(Code 1969, § 19-9; Ord. of 1-17-1972)  
Sec. 19-10. - Water discharge. 
Water discharge from family pools shall not be permitted to enter the sanitary sewerage system of the Town nor to be discharged upon or across adjoining property. 
(Code 1969, § 19-10; Ord. of 1-17-1972)  
Sec. 19-11. - Location. 
The location of a pool shall in no way hinder the operations for which it is designed nor adversely affect the bather's safety or water quality. 
(Code 1969, § 19-11; Ord. of 1-17-1972)  
Sec. 19-12. - Material. 
Any materials which provide a tight tank with light color, smooth and easily cleaned surfaces may be used for a family pool structure. 
(Code 1969, § 19-12; Ord. of 1-17-1972)  
Sec. 19-13. - Protective measures. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain a family pool without taking one or a combination of the following protective measures: 
(a)  Fencing. Installation and maintenance of a woven wire, chainlink, picket, solid board, or masonry fence, a building or a combination thereof, or a fence of similar construction which will be not less than four feet in height above the ground nor more than two inches from the ground at the bottom which will reasonably serve to prevent the passage into the family pool area by children of less than six years of age. Any entryway that may exist through such fence, other than through a dwelling shall be protected by a gate or door capable of being fastened by locking or by an interior latch. Where a fence is the protective measure, it may enclose the entire residential premises or only a portion thereof if it completely surrounds the family pool. Any gate or door therein shall be kept securely locked or latched when the pool is not under effective surveillance by a responsible person. 
(b)  Pool cover. Installation and maintenance of any type of cover which will overspread the entire water area of a pool and which will support 150 pounds. Where a cover is the protective measure, such cover shall be in place at all times when the pool is not under effective surveillance by a responsible person. 
(Code 1969, § 19-13; Ord. of 1-17-1972)  
Sec. 19-14. - Steps and ladders. 
Two or more means of egress must be provided for all pools having a perimeter greater than 100 feet, and one egress for pools 100 feet or less. Treads of steps, ladders, or other means shall be of non-slip construction. 
(Code 1969, § 19-14; Ord. of 1-17-1972)  
ARTICLE 6. - RECIRCULATION SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 19-15. - Recirculation system. 
(a)  All family pools shall be equipped with a recirculation system consisting of pumps, hair and lint catchers, filters, disinfection equipment and necessary pipe connections to the inlets and outlets. The recirculation system shall be designed for at least an eight-hour turnover of the swimming pool water. Hair and lint catchers are not required where gravity filters are used. 
(b)  All underground piping in the recirculation system shall be of a type approved for such use by the health officer. 
(Code 1969, § 19-15; Ord. of 1-17-1972)  
ARTICLE 7. - ENJOYMENT OF PROPERTY RIGHTS 
 
Sec. 19-16. - Interference with enjoyment of property rights prohibited. 
No bathing place or family pool shall be so located, designed, operated, or maintained as to interfere unduly with the enjoyment of their property rights by owners of property adjoining the family pool or located in the neighborhood. 
(Code 1969, § 19-16; Ord. of 1-17-1972)  
Sec. 19-17. - Shielding lights. 
Lights used to illuminate any bathing place or family pool shall be so arranged and shaded as to reflect light away from adjoining premises. 
(Code 1969, § 19-17; Ord. of 1-17-1972)  
Sec. 19-18. - Unnecessary noise. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, suffer to be made, continue or cause to be made or continued at any bathing place or family pool, loud noise or any noise which disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others. In the operation of a bathing place or family pool, the use of, or suffering the use of, or operation of any radio, receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing of the persons who are in the bathing place or family pool premises, shall be unlawful; provided, however, that where the board of zoning appeals issues a use permit for a bathing place, compliance with the provisions of such use permit shall not be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 19-18; Ord. of 1-17-1972)  
Chapter 20 - PUBLIC PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to establish, maintain parks and playgrounds, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1806. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Director means the director of the department of parks and recreation for the Town. 
Park means a park, reservation, playground, recreation center, lake, stream, streambed, or any other area, building, or structure either within or outside of the corporate limits of the Town, owned or used by the Town, and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
Vehicle means any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered, animal-drawn or self-propelled. The term "vehicle" shall include any trailer in tow of any size, kind or description. An exception is made for baby carriages, and vehicles in the service of the Town parks. 
(Code 1969, § 20-1; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-2. - Purpose. 
The purposes of this chapter in its application to the regulation of parks and recreational facilities are: 
(a)  To protect park property and other recreational facilities of the Town from damage to grounds and structures. 
(b)  To provide for a wholesome community environment with parks and recreational facilities that are safe and secure and to promote the safety, morals, order, convenience, aesthetic appearance, public health, and welfare of the community. 
(c)  To provide the Director of Parks and Recreation with a means for ensuring that these purposes are carried out and made effective with respect to the operations and maintenance of parks and recreational facilities. 
(Code 1969, § 20-2; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-3. - Authority of Director and Police Department generally. 
The Director of Parks and Recreation is hereby delegated authority to administer this chapter and to issue supplemental rules and regulations that are in support of, and not in conflict with, the provisions of this chapter, which supplemental rules and regulations shall have the same force and effect as though fully set forth in this chapter. The Police Department and other police officers of competent jurisdiction shall enforce the provisions of these rules and regulations as they relate to crimes and offenses and shall cooperate with and assist the director in ensuring that the provisions of this chapter are fully and effectively enforced. 
(Code 1969, § 20-3; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
ARTICLE 2. - PARK PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 20-4. - Buildings and other property. 
No person in a park shall: 
(a)  Disfiguration and removal. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or remove any building, bridge, table, bench, fireplace, railing, paving or paving material, water line or other public utility or part or appurtenance thereof, sign, notice or placard, whether temporary or permanent, monument, stake, post, or other boundary marker, or other structure or equipment, facility, or park property or appurtenance whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(b)  Restrooms and washrooms. Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. No person over the age of six years shall use the restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex. 
(c)  Removal of natural resources. Dig, or remove any soil, rock, stone, tree, shrub or plant, down timber or other wood or material, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency. 
(d)  Erection of structures. Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any power, fuel line or any rope, twine or string nets, upon or across such lands except on special written permission issued hereunder. 
(Code 1969, § 20-4; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-5. - Trees; shrubbery; lawns. 
No person in a park shall: 
(a)  Injury and removal. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds, of any tree or plant. Nor shall any person attach any rope, wire, or other contrivance to any tree or plant. A person shall not dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area. 
(b)  Climbing trees, etc. Climb any tree or wall, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains, railings, fences or gun carriages or upon any other property not designated or customarily used for such purposes. 
(Code 1969, § 20-5; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-6. - Wild animals, birds, etc. 
No person in a park shall: 
(a)  Hunting. Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile, or bird; nor shall he remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs or nest, or young of any reptile or bird; nor shall he collect, remove, have in his possession, give away, sell or offer to sell, or buy or offer to buy, or accept as a gift, any specimen alive or dead of any of the group of tree snails. Exception to the foregoing is made in that snakes known to be deadly poisonous, such as rattlesnakes, moccasins, coral snakes, or other deadly reptiles, may be killed on sight. 
(b)  Feeding. Give or offer, or attempt to give to any animal or bird any alcohol, tobacco or other known noxious substances. 
(Code 1969, § 20-6; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-7. - Sanitation. 
No person in a park shall: 
(a)  Pollution of waters. Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters. 
(b)  Refuse and trash. Have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; and where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Code 1969, § 20-7; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
ARTICLE 3. - TRAFFIC 
 
Sec. 20-8. - Operation of vehicles. 
No person in a park shall: 
(a)  State motor vehicles' laws apply. Fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the state motor vehicles' traffic laws in regard to equipment and operation of vehicles, together with such regulations as are contained in this chapter and other ordinances of the Town. 
(b)  Enforcement of traffic regulations. Fail to obey all traffic officers and park employees, such persons being hereby authorized and instructed to direct traffic whenever and wherever needed in the parks and on the highways, streets, or roads immediately adjacent thereto in accordance with the provisions of these regulations and such supplementary regulations as may be issued subsequently by the director. 
(c)  Obey traffic signs. Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping, or parking, and all others posted for proper control and to safeguard life and property. 
(d)  Speed of vehicles. Ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding 15 miles per hour, except upon such roads as the director may designate, by posted signs, for speedier travel. 
(e)  Operation confined to roads. Drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the director. 
(f)  Trucks, buses, other heavy vehicles. Drive or operate any truck in excess of one-half-ton capacity, any commercial vehicle, or bus on any park area except when engaged in the transportation of persons from or to a park for recreational purposes unless special written permission is obtained from the director. An exception is made for such vehicle operation in the service of the Town parks. 
(Code 1969, § 20-8; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-9. - Parking. 
No person in a park shall: 
(a)  Designated areas. Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking area, and such use shall be in accordance with the posted directions there at and with the instructions of any attendant who may be present. 
(b)  Night parking. Park a vehicle on any roadway, parking area or park property during any hours during which the park is closed. 
(c)  Emergency procedure. Fail to immediately notify an attendant of an emergency in the nature of a breakdown requiring the assistance of a tow truck, mechanic or other persons. 
(d)  Double parking. Double park any vehicle on any road or parkway unless directed by a park official. 
(Code 1969, § 20-9; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-10. - Bicycles. 
No person in a park shall: 
(a)  Confined to roads or paths. Ride a bicycle on other than a vehicular road or path designated for that purpose. A bicyclist shall be permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand over any grassy area or wooded trail or on any paved area reserved for pedestrian use. 
(b)  Operation. Ride a bicycle other than on the right-hand side of the road paving as close as conditions permit; and bicycles shall be kept in single file when two or more are operating in a group. Bicyclists shall at all times operate their machines with reasonable regard to the safety of others, signal all turns, pass to the right of any vehicle they are overtaking, and pass to the right of any vehicles they may be meeting. 
(c)  Rider prohibited. Ride any other person on a bicycle. 
(d)  Designated racks. Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when such is provided and there is a space available. 
(e)  Immobile. Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving, or set against trees, or in any place or position where other persons may trip over or be injured by them. 
(Code 1969, § 20-10; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
ARTICLE 4. - RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES 
 
Sec. 20-11. - Weapons. 
No person in a park shall use, carry, discharge, or possess spring guns, bow-and-arrows, slings, dart devices or any other form of weapon potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human safety, or any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges, or any kind of trapping device except as specifically authorized by the director in connection with a supervised recreational activity. No person shall fire or discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm in the parks or into a park area from beyond park boundaries unless authorized by the Town Manager in writing in accordance with the provisions of section 10-43. 
(Code 1969, § 20-11; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-12. - Picnic area and use. 
No person in a park shall: 
(a)  Regulated. Picnic or lunch in a place other than those areas designated for that purpose. Attendants shall have the authority to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end. 
(b)  Availability. Violate the regulation that use of the individual fireplaces together with tables and benches follows generally the rule of "first come, first served." 
(c)  Non-exclusive. Use any portion of the picnic areas or of any of the buildings or structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such area and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded, except with a written permit issued by the department of parks and recreation. 
(d)  Duty of picnicker. Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and before all trash in the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Code 1969, § 20-12; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-13. - Camping. 
No person in a park shall set up tents, shacks, or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping; nor shall any person leave in a park, after closing hours, any movable structure or special vehicle to be used or that could be used for such purpose, such as a house-trailer, camp-trailer, camp-wagon, or the like. 
(Code 1969, § 20-13; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-14. - Games. 
No person in a park shall take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins, or model airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or comparatively dangerous games such as football, baseball, etc., is prohibited except on the fields and courts or areas provided therefor. Roller-skating shall be confined to those areas specifically designated for such pastime. 
(Code 1969, § 20-14; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-15. - Horseback riding. 
No person in a park shall ride a horse except on a road, street or designated bridle trail. Where permitted, horses shall be thoroughly broken and properly restrained and ridden with due care, and shall not be allowed to graze or go unattended. 
(Code 1969, § 20-15; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-16. - Bathing and fishing. 
No person in a park, regardless of age, sex, or manner of dress, shall swim, wade, or bathe in waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park; nor shall any person in a park fish in such waters or waterways by use of hook and lure, net, trap, spear, gig or other device except at such places designated and posted for such use. 
(Code 1969, § 20-16; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
ARTICLE 5. - BEHAVIOR 
 
Sec. 20-17. - Intoxicating beverages. 
No person in a park shall have brought alcoholic beverages, nor shall any person drink alcoholic beverages in any park at any time nor have entered into any park under the influence of intoxicating beverages; except that this section shall not apply at any specifically designated recreation facility where a license to sell or consume alcoholic beverages has been duly issued by the alcoholic beverage control board in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, title 4. 
(Code 1969, § 20-17; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-18. - Fireworks and explosives. 
No person in a park shall have brought, or have in his possession, or set off or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn, any firecrackers, torpedo, rocket, or other fireworks or explosives of inflammable material, or discharge them or throw them into any such area from land or highway adjacent thereto except as may be specifically authorized by the director in writing. This prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture, or article that in conjunction with any other substance or compound would be dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints. 
(Code 1969, § 20-18; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-19. - Domestic animals. 
No person in a park shall have been responsible for the entry of a dog or other domestic animal into areas posted by the director by signs bearing the words "Domestic Animals Prohibited." Nothing herein shall be construed as permitting the running of dogs at large. All dogs in those areas where such animals are permitted shall be restrained at all times on adequate leashes not greater than five feet in length. 
(Code 1969, § 20-19; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-20. - Obscene exposure or language. 
No person in a park shall expose his person indecently or procure another to so expose himself, or to act indecently, or to use obscene language. 
(Code 1969, § 20-20; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-21. - Solicitations. 
No person in a park shall solicit money or other thing of value or contributions for any purpose, whether public or private. 
(Code 1969, § 20-21; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-22. - Fires. 
No person in any park shall build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the director. No person shall drop, throw, or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco, paper or other inflammable material within any park area or on any highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto. 
(Code 1969, § 20-22; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-23. - Closed areas. 
No person shall enter or remain in an area posted as "Closed to the Public," nor shall any person use, or abet the use of any area in violation of posted notices. 
(Code 1969, § 20-23; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-24. - Gambling. 
No person in a park shall bet, wager or play at any game for money or other thing of value or participate in or abet any game of chance. 
(Code 1969, § 20-24; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-25. - Going on ice. 
No person in a park shall go onto the ice or any of the waters except such areas as are designated by the director and posted as skating fields, and provided a safety signal is displayed. 
(Code 1969, § 20-25; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-26. - Sleigh riding. 
No person in a park shall or suffer to permit any person to use any part of a park including the roads, streets and highways therein for purposes of sleigh riding or use of any other device to slide on ice or snow except in or on such areas as designated by the director and posted as sleigh riding areas. 
(Code 1969, § 20-26; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-27. - Loitering and boisterousness. 
No person in any park shall sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats or benches or other areas, or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language, or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace, or use without authorization therefor loudspeakers, sound amplification devices or sound-making equipment. 
(Code 1969, § 20-27; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-28. - Repair of vehicles. 
No person in any park shall change any parts, repair, wash, grease, wax, polish or clean a vehicle except in areas designated and posted for this purpose by the director. 
(Code 1969, § 20-28; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-29. - Exhibit permits. 
No person in any park shall: 
(a)  Exhibit permits. Fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the director he claims to have upon request of any authorized person who shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any ordinance or rule. 
(b)  Interference with permittees. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying any area or participating in any activity under the authority of a permit. 
(Code 1969, § 20-29; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
ARTICLE 6. - MERCHANDISING, ADVERTISING AND SIGNS 
 
Sec. 20-30. - Vending and peddling. 
No person in any park shall expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall he station or place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing. Exception is made as to any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and regulation of the director. 
(Code 1969, § 20-30; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-31. - Advertising. 
No person in any park shall announce, advertise, or call the public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire. 
(Code 1969, § 20-31; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-32. - Signs. 
No person in any park shall paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement, or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park. 
(Code 1969, § 20-32; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
ARTICLE 7. - PARK OPERATING POLICY; ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 20-33. - Park operating policy. 
(a)  Hours. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to the public every day of the year during hours designated by the director. The opening and closing hours for each individual park or section or part of a park shall be posted therein for public information. 
(b)  Closed areas. Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by the director at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the director may find reasonably necessary. 
(c)  Lost and found articles. The finding of lost articles by any person or park attendants shall be reported to the director who shall make every reasonable effort to locate the owners. The director shall make every reasonable effort to find articles reported as lost. 
(d)  Permit. A permit shall be obtained from the director or his designee before participating in any activity which has been determined by the director as requiring a permit. The director shall develop and prepare the necessary forms of application and the type of information required to be furnished by the applicant; provided, however, that the required information shall be reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should ensue hereunder. 
(e)  Standards for issuance of permits. The director shall issue a permit hereunder when he finds: 
(1)  That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park; 
(2)  That the proposed activity and use will not reasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation; 
(3)  That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct; 
(4)  That the proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operation by the Town; 
(5)  That the proposed activity or use will not unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet of any adjacent residential neighborhood; 
(6)  That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the day and hour required in the application. 
(f)  Appeal. Within five days after receipt of an application, the director shall apprise an applicant in writing of his reasons for refusing a permit, and any aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal in writing to the Town Council. Such appeal shall be filed with the Town Manager within five days from receipt of notice by the applicant of the director's refusal to issue a permit. (The notice of refusal by the director sent through the United States mail shall be presumed to have been received by the applicant within 24 hours from the time such notice was posted in an official U.S. post office mailbox.) Upon receipt of the notice of appeal by the Town Manager, he may cause the permit to be issued where he determines that the application falls within the standards set forth in subsection (e) of this section. Where the Town Manager determines that the permit should not issue, he shall place the matter on the agenda for the following meeting of the Town Council. The Town Council shall sustain or overrule the director's decision within 14 days from receipt of the notice of appeal by the Town Manager. The decision of the Town Council shall be final. 
(g)  Effect of permit. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances as fully as though the same were inserted in said permits. 
(h)  Liability of permittee. The person to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by the Town or any person whatever by reason of the negligence of the person to whom such permit shall have been issued. 
(i)  Revocation. The director shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance, or upon good cause shown. 
(Code 1969, § 20-33; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-34. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Officials. The Town Police Department, other police officers of competent jurisdictions, the director, and park attendants shall, in connection with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Ejectment. The director and any park attendant shall have the authority to eject from the park any person acting in violation of this chapter. 
(c)  Seizure of property. The director and any park attendant shall have the authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in the park, or used, in violation of this chapter. 
(d)  Adults. Any person 18 years or older, including the parents or guardians of any child who shall cause or encourage such child under 18 years of age to violate the provisions of this chapter, or any parent or guardian of any child under 18 years of age who shall suffer such child to violate the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 20-34; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-35. - Unlawful assemblies. 
The provisions of sections 10-46 through 10-58 shall be applicable to parks as though fully set out herein. 
(Code 1969, § 20-35; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Sec. 20-36. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or the provisions of the supplemental rules or regulations issued by the director in accordance with the authority contained in section 20-3 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1969, § 20-36; Ord. of 3-20-1972; Ord. of 7-12-2004)  
Chapter 21 - VIENNA BIKEWAY PLAN[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local authority to license bicycles and certain other vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1720; local ordinance requiring wearing of helmets, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-906.1 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 21-1. - Purpose. 
This chapter provides for the administration and enforcement of the Town bikeway plan established hereby. 
(Code 1969, § 21-1)  
Sec. 21-2. - Authority. 
The directors of the departments of public safety, and parks and recreation are authorized to administer this chapter and to issue supplemental regulations which shall have the same force and effect as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 21-2)  
Sec. 21-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bicycle means a device propelled solely by human power, upon which a person may ride either on or astride a regular seat attached thereto, having two or more wheels in tandem, including children's bicycles, except a toy vehicle intended for use by young children. 
Bicyclist means any person operating a bicycle. 
Bikeway plan means the Town bikeway plan which consists of this chapter, a bicycle safety education program, traffic control devices, and markings and the Town bikeway map. 
Bike path means a path or trail in a Town park, in the stream valley system, or on the VEPCO (W&OD) right-of-way for the joint use of bicyclists and pedestrians. 
Bike route means any road, street, or way which is specifically designated as being open to bicycle travel. 
Roadway means that portion of the street available for vehicular traffic, and where curbs are laid, being the portion from face to face of curbs. 
(Code 1969, § 21-3)  
ARTICLE 2. - OPERATION OF BICYCLES 
 
Sec. 21-4. - General applicability of state law. 
Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall be subject to the provisions of Code of Virginia, title 46.2, applicable to the driver of a vehicle. 
(Code 1969, § 21-4; Ord. of 6-1996) 
State Law reference— Bicycle riders subject to state laws applicable to drivers of other vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-800.  
Sec. 21-5. - Motorcycles and mini-bikes prohibited. 
No person shall operate a motorcycle or mini-bike on a bike path or bike route except for authorized Town personnel engaged in enforcement, emergency or maintenance operations. 
(Code 1969, § 21-5)  
Sec. 21-6. - Responsibility of parents and guardians. 
The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize nor knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 21-6)  
Sec. 21-7. - Accidents. 
Any bicyclist involved in an accident in which there is personal injury or property damage shall give his name and address to the other party and shall make, within 24 hours, a written report to the Police Department of any accident resulting in death or personal injury. 
(Code 1969, § 21-7)  
Sec. 21-8. - Prohibited or restricted activities. 
1.  No bicyclist shall: 
(a)  Operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent. 
(b)  While riding a bicycle, attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(c)  Ride two or more abreast upon a roadway. 
(d)  Perform any acrobatics or stunt riding on a bike route or roadway. 
(e)  Carry another rider unless seated upon a carrier attached to the bicycle. 
2.  Riders of bicycles, electric personal assistance mobility devices and electric power-assisted bicycles to wear helmets. 
(a)  Riders of bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, toy vehicle and electric power-assisted bicycles 14 years of age or younger shall wear a protective helmet that at least meets the Consumer Product Safety Commission standard whenever riding or being carried on a bicycle, an electric personal assistive mobility device, a toy vehicle, or an electric power-assisted bicycle on any highway as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, a sidewalk, roadway, bike route or public bicycle path. 
(b)  Violation of any such ordinance shall be punishable by a fine of $25.00. However, such fine shall be suspended (i) for first-time violators and (ii) for violators who, subsequent to the violation but prior to imposition of the fine, purchase helmets of the type required by the ordinance. 
(c)  Violation of any such ordinance shall not constitute negligence, or [be] admissible in evidence, or be the subject of comment by counsel in any action for the recovery of damages arising out of the operation of any bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, toy vehicle, or electric power-assisted bicycle, nor shall anything in this section change any existing law, rule, or procedure pertaining to any civil action. 
(Code 1969, § 21-8; Ord. of 9-26-2011, § 1)  
Sec. 21-9. - Traffic control requirements. 
Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall: 
(a)  Ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
(b)  Clearly signal his intention to stop or turn. 
(c)  Obey instructions of traffic officers and traffic control devices. 
(d)  Yield the right-of-way to pedestrians crossing such roadway within any marked crosswalk or pedestrian crossing at the end of a block except at intersections where traffic movement is being regulated by traffic officers or traffic control devices. 
(e)  Upon entering the roadway from a driveway, yield the right-of-way to approaching vehicles. 
(f)  When making a left-hand turn across an intersection, yield the right-of-way to approaching vehicles. (When turning, drivers of vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to bicyclists proceeding ahead across intersections.) 
(Code 1969, § 21-9)  
Sec. 21-10. - Riding on sidewalks and bike paths. 
(a)  Children under 11 years of age may ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk. 
(b)  Bicyclists of any age may ride a bicycle on sidewalks wherever it is hazardous to ride in the roadway. 
(c)  No person shall ride a bicycle on a sidewalk in any private shopping center. 
(d)  Bicyclists shall be required at all times to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians on sidewalks and, before overtaking and passing pedestrians, shall give an audible horn or bell signal. 
(e)  In addition to complying with all other provisions of this chapter, bicyclists riding on bike paths shall observe the requirements of this section. 
(f)  No sidewalk shall be designated as part of a bike route. 
(Code 1969, § 21-10)  
Sec. 21-11. - Parking and securing of bicycles. 
(a)  No bicycle may be parked or left where it will obstruct or create a hazard for pedestrian or vehicular movement. 
(b)  No person shall secure a bicycle to a fire hydrant, police or fire call box, or traffic signal pole. 
(Code 1969, § 21-11)  
Sec. 21-12. - Penalties. 
Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter may be punished as the court may deem proper. 
(Code 1969, § 21-12)  
ARTICLE 3. - BICYCLE EQUIPMENT AND MAINTENANCE 
 
Sec. 21-13. - In general. 
All bicycles must be equipped as specified in this article. 
(Code 1969, § 21-13)  
Sec. 21-14. - Lamps. 
Every bicycle, when in use between sunset and sunrise, shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible in clear weather from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by the superintendent of the department of state police which shall be visible from all distances in clear weather from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible in clear weather from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in lieu of or in addition to the red reflector. 
(Code 1969, § 21-14)  
Sec. 21-15. - Brakes. 
Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the brake wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(Code 1969, § 21-15)  
Sec. 21-16. - Signal device. 
Every bicycle shall be equipped with a horn or bell capable of giving a signal which is audible for a distance of at least 100 feet. No bicycle shall be equipped, nor shall any person use upon a bicycle, any siren or whistle. 
(Code 1969, § 21-16)  
Sec. 21-17. - Passenger carrier. 
An additional seat must be provided for any passenger to be carried on a bicycle. 
(Code 1969, § 21-17)  
ARTICLE 4. - INSPECTION AND LICENSING 
 
Sec. 21-18. - Optional for residents. 
At their option, bicyclists resident in the community may have their bicycles inspected and licensed by the community services officer of the Police Department. 
(Code 1969, § 21-18)  
Sec. 21-19. - Bicycle rental agencies. 
No bicycle rental agency shall offer for riding any bicycle unless it is inspected and licensed by the community services officer and is equipped as required in article 3 of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 21-19)  
Chapter 22 - MASSAGE SALONS, HEALTH CLUBS, ETC. 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Certified massage therapist means a person who meets the qualifications specified in Code of Virginia, § 54.1-3029, and who is currently certified by the board of nursing of the commonwealth. 
Health club means any establishment which offers service in the form of massage, baths, exercises, or similar services in combination to club members, or to the public for a charge. The term "health club" does not include: 
(1)  Hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics or the offices or quarters of a physician, surgeon, or an osteopath; 
(2)  Exercise clubs exclusively for members or clientele of one sex alone where the services, without massage in any form, are performed by persons of the same sex as the members or clientele; 
(3)  Barbershops and beauty parlors; or 
(4)  The offices of a massage therapist who has completed a massage training program at an approved school and made appropriate application as defined in sections 22-5, 22-6, and 22-7. 
Massage means a manual manipulation of the human body, and including holding, positioning, causing movement, and applying touch and pressure to the body. 
Massage therapy means the treatment of soft tissues for therapeutic purposes by the application of massage and bodywork techniques based on the manipulation or application of pressure to the muscular structure or soft tissue of the human body. The terms "massage therapy" and "therapeutic massage" do not include the diagnosis or treatment of illness or disease or any service or procedure for which a license to practice medicine, nursing, chiropractic therapy, physical therapy, occupational therapy, acupuncture, or podiatry is required by law. 
Masseur and masseuse mean a person who practices any one or more of the arts of body massage, either by hand or mechanical apparatus, oil rubs, corrective gymnastics, mechanotherapy, including color therapy, dietetics, hot packs, cabinet, tub, shower, sitz, vapor, steam or any other special type of bath. The terms "masseur" and "masseuse" do not include massage therapists as defined herein, physical therapists or occupational therapists duly licensed by the board of medicine of the commonwealth. 
(Code 1969, § 22-1; Ord. of 12-1-1975; Ord. of 11-8-1994; Ord. of 10-28-1996)  
Sec. 22-2. - Authority for chapter; purpose of chapter. 
The ordinance from which this chapter is derived is enacted pursuant to the provisions of section 2.1 of the Town Charter for the purpose of securing and promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the people of the Town. 
(Code 1969, § 22-2; Ord. of 12-1-1975)  
Sec. 22-3. - Policy. 
It is hereby declared that the business of operating health clubs are businesses affecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Code 1969, § 22-3; Ord. of 12-1-1975)  
Sec. 22-4. - Permit and license required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or engage in the business of operating any massage salon or health club within the Town without first having obtained a permit and license and complying with all the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 22-4; Ord. of 12-1-1975)  
Sec. 22-5. - Application for permit. 
Applicants for permit and license under this chapter shall file with the Town Manager an application in writing and in duplicate on a form to be furnished by the Town Manager, establishing the following: 
1.  Name and description of the applicant and proof that applicant is 21 years of age or more. 
2.  Applicant's permanent home address and full local address. 
3.  Health certificates from a licensed medical doctor of the commonwealth. 
4.  The information provided in subsections 1, 2 and 3 of this section with respect to all proposed employees of applicant and all future employees. 
5.  A complete and detailed description of the facilities for the proposed massage salon or health club. 
6.  The qualifications and training of the applicant and all proposed employees as masseurs and masseuses. 
7.  Application shall be executed under oath. 
(Code 1969, § 22-5; Ord. of 12-1-1975)  
Sec. 22-6. - Investigation of applicant; issuance of license. 
A.  Upon receipt of an application, the original shall be referred to the chief of police who shall cause to be conducted an investigation of the applicant's character, reputation, moral integrity, physical and mental condition, and of all proposed employees of applicant, the results of which investigation shall be reduced to writing and returned to the Town Manager within 15 days. 
B.  If the Town Manager is thereupon satisfied that the character, reputation, moral integrity, physical and mental conditions of the applicant or his employees is inimical to public health, safety, morals or general welfare, or that facilities for the proposed massage salon or health club are inadequate from the standpoint of public health, safety and welfare, or personnel to be employed as masseurs and masseuses are not properly trained, he shall deny the application in writing, stating his reasons for the denial and notifying the applicant within seven days that his application is disapproved. 
C.  If the Town Manager is satisfied as a result of the said investigation that the character, reputation, moral integrity or physical and mental conditions of the applicant are not a detriment to the public safety, health and welfare, he shall approve the said application and notify the applicant within seven days, in writing, of such approval. 
D.  Any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the Town Manager may appeal to the Town Council within 20 days of the Town Manager's decision, provided that his appeal be filed in written form stating his grievances and his reasons for contesting the ruling of the Town Manager. The council thereupon shall grant applicant a full and public hearing and may overrule the decision of the Town Manager by a two-thirds vote of all members of council. 
(Code 1969, § 22-6; Ord. of 12-1-1975)  
Sec. 22-7. - Training of masseur or masseuse or massage therapist. 
No person shall give or offer or hold oneself out to offer a massage as a masseur, masseuse, or massage therapist within the meaning of this chapter or employ or engage as an independent contractor any masseur, masseuse, or massage therapist who gives, or offers, or holds oneself out to offer, a massage unless such person shall have satisfactorily completed a course of study in body massage in an approved school of instruction or training within the criteria and guidelines set forth below: 
A.  Said courses shall pertain to anatomy, physiology, hygiene, first aid, exercise therapy, massage techniques and related aspects of the art and science. 
B.  A course of study in body massage shall constitute 1,000 hours of study in connection with an approved school: 
(1)  500 hours of which shall be accredited instructional hours pertaining to: 
(a)  Classroom or clinical training in therapeutic massage and techniques; 
(b)  Classroom or clinical instruction or contraindications for massage; 
(c)  Classroom or clinical or laboratory instruction to develop a knowledge of the anatomy and physiology of the systems of the body with emphasis on the muscular and skeletal systems; and 
(2)  The additional 500 hours may be accomplished simultaneously with the academic, clinical or classroom or laboratory training by virtue of what is commonly known as "on-the-job training" or can be certified to by an employer of a masseur or masseuse by sworn affidavit as having been accomplished during or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(a)  Such training shall pertain to understanding the benefits of massage; and 
(b)  Assisting the students in developing an awareness of massage as a therapeutic process. 
C.  A school or institution shall constitute an approved school for the purposes of this chapter when it meets the following criteria: 
(1)  Is certified as a school or educational institution by the state board of education, or like board in the state where located or the District of Columbia; 
(2)  Is approved or recognized by, or affiliated with: 
(a)  The American Massage Therapy Association, Inc.; or 
(b)  The National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodyworks; 
(3)  Is licensed to do business as a school or educational institution where located; and 
(4)  Provides the requisite training herein described. 
Compliance with this section shall first be determined by the Town Manager with the same rights of appeal and hearing to the Town Council as elsewhere granted in this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 22-7; Ord. of 12-1-1975; Ord. of 11-8-1994)  
Sec. 22-7.1. - Authority to practice. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 22-7, any certified massage therapist may be authorized to practice massage therapy. 
(Code 1969, § 22-7.1; Ord. of 12-1-1975; Ord. of 10-28-1996)  
Sec. 22-8. - Permits. 
A.  No permit shall be issued for any massage salon or health club except to an owner or manager who is either: 
(1)  A physician; 
(2)  A registered nurse with at least two years' nursing experience; 
(3)  A licensed practical nurse with at least four years' nursing experience; 
(4)  A registered physical therapist; or 
(5)  Other licensed doctor or medical person. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to own or manage a massage salon or health club as defined herein, or to give a massage within the Town, or to offer to give a massage in the Town, or to offer to give a massage elsewhere if such offer is made within the Town, or for any masseur or masseuse to give or offer a massage without a valid non-suspended permit issued pursuant to this chapter. Said permit must be conspicuously posted in the massage salon or health club; that is, so that the permit may be readily seen by persons entering the premises in the public room thereof; or if said massage is given in other than a health club, said permit must be available on request. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain or operate a health club in which he or a masseur or masseuse who does not have a valid non-suspended permit pursuant to this chapter performs, or offers to perform, or where it is offered to perform massages, or to offer a massage in the Town or elsewhere except as provided for in this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 22-8; Ord. of 12-1-1975)  
Sec. 22-9. - Expiration. 
A.  All licenses issued hereunder shall be annual and expire on December 31 of the year issued, and be subject to all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
B.  All licenses issued hereunder shall be deemed null and void upon the sale, lease, or transfer of any interest in the said massage salon or health club for which issued. 
(Code 1969, § 22-9; Ord. of 12-1-1975)  
Sec. 22-10. - Sanitation. 
A.  All equipment, shower stalls, toilets, lavatories, and any other such accoutrements of the establishment shall be of non-porous materials and regularly treated with disinfectants and shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. 
B.  Health inspectors shall be given access to any part of the quarters of a health club for purposes of inspection at all reasonable times. 
C.  Each health club shall be equipped with toilet and lavatory facilities for patrons and separate, readily available toilet and lavatory facilities for personnel. 
D.  Either the club quarters or the floor of the building on which the quarters are located shall be equipped with a lavatory for custodial services. In multiple-storied but small buildings, the custodial lavatory may be located within 100 feet of the club quarters. 
(Code 1969, § 22-10; Ord. of 12-1-1975)  
Sec. 22-11. - Hygiene. 
A.  No person shall practice any of the services of a health club without a certificate of good health commensurate with the nature of the services rendered. Such certificate shall be renewed every six months. 
B.  No health club shall knowingly serve any patron infected with any fungus or other skin infections; nor shall service be performed on any patron exhibiting skin inflammation or eruptions; provided, however, that a duly licensed physician may certify that a patron may be safely served, prescribing the condition thereof. 
C.  All personnel shall wash their hands in hot running water, using a proper soap or disinfectant, before giving any service or treatment to each separate patron. 
D.  All towels and tissue, all sheets or other covering shall be used singularly for each patron and discarded for laundry or disposal immediately after use. 
E.  Non-disposable tools of the trade shall be disinfected after use upon one patron. 
(Code 1969, § 22-11; Ord. of 12-1-1975)  
Sec. 22-12. - Environment. 
No part of any quarters of any health club shall be used for, or connected with, any bedroom or sleeping quarters; nor shall any person sleep in such health club except for limited periods incidental to and directly related to a massage or bath. This provision shall not preclude the location of a health club in separate quarters of a building housing a hotel or other separate businesses or clubs. 
(Code 1969, § 22-12; Ord. of 12-1-1975)  
Sec. 22-13. - Violation. 
(a)  A person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in jail not exceeding 12 months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  If any part of this chapter is found by a court to be insupportable in law, such part is separable and shall not affect the chapter as to its other parts. 
(c)  This chapter shall be construed to be compatible with and not in conflict with supplementary sections of chapter 8, pertaining to licenses, and chapter 10, pertaining to miscellaneous offenses. 
(Code 1969, § 22-13; Ord. of 12-1-1975)  
Chapter 23 - ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROLS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, adopted May 12, 2014, effective July 1, 2014, in effect repealed the former chapter 23, §§ 23-1—23-10, and enacted a new chapter 23 as set out herein. The former chapter 23 pertained to erosion and siltation control and derived from the Code of 1969, §§ 23-1—23-10; Ord. of February 23, 1976; Ord. of December, 1977; Ord. of October, 1980; Ord. of August, 1981; Ord. of June, 1989; Ord. of June, 1990; Ord. of June, 1989; Ord. of June, 1991; Ord. of November, 1993; Ord. of December, 1996; Ord. of October 26, 2009 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sediment Control Law, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560 et seq.; local erosion and sediment control programs, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-562; establishment of stormwater management programs by localities, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-603.3; erosion and sediment control regulations, 4 VAC 50-30-10 et seq.; minimum standards, 4 VAC 50-30-40. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 23-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to conserve the land, water and other natural resources of the Town and promote the public health and welfare of the people by establishing requirements for the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of stormwater, and by establishing procedures whereby these requirements shall be administered and enforced. 
(Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 23-2. - Authority and administration. 
A.  This chapter is authorized under Code of Virginia § 62.1-44.15:27 et seq. (Virginia Stormwater Management Act), Code of Virginia § 62.1-44.15:51 et seq. (Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law), and their attendant regulations. 
B.  The director of public works is hereby delegated authority to administer this chapter, and to issue supplementary rules and regulations that are in support of, and not in conflict with, the provisions of this chapter. Said supplemental rules and regulations shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 23-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means the VSMP authority including the staff person responsible for administering the VSMP on behalf of the town. The director of public works, and such duly appointed agent as may be authorized by him, is the administrator for the town. 
Agreement in lieu of an erosion and sediment control plan means a contract between the Town and the owner that specifies conservation measures that must be implemented to comply with article 2 for the construction of a single-family residence; this contract may be executed by the Town in lieu of an erosion and sediment control plan. 
Agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan means a contract between the Town and the owner that specifies methods that must be implemented to comply with article 3 for the construction of a single-family residence; this contract may be executed by the Town in lieu of a stormwater management plan. 
Applicant means any person requesting approval for a land disturbing activity that is subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
Best management practice or BMP means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices, including both structural and nonstructural practices, to prevent or reduce the pollution of surface waters and groundwater systems from the impacts of land disturbing activities. 
Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act land disturbing activity means a land disturbing activity including clearing, grading, or excavation that results in a land disturbance equal or greater than 2,500 square feet and less than one acre in all areas of the Town designated as Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas by the Town Council under chapter 18 and subject to the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act, Code of Virginia § 62.1-44.15, et seq. 
Clean Water Act or CWA means the federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C § 1251 et seq.), formerly referred to as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Public Law 92-500, as amended by Public Law 95-217, Public Law 95-576, Public Law 96-483, and Public Law 97-117, or any subsequent revisions thereto. 
Clearing means any activity that removes the vegetative ground cover. 
Common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules. 
Control measure means any best management practice or stormwater facility, or other method used to minimize the discharge of pollutants to state waters. 
Development means land disturbance and the resulting landform associated with the construction of residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreation, transportation or utility facilities or structures or the clearing of land for non-agricultural or non-silvicultural purposes. 
Director means the director of public works. 
Erosion impact area means an area of land not associated with current land disturbing activity but subject to persistent soil erosion resulting in the delivery of sediment onto neighboring properties or into state waters. This definition shall not apply to any lot or parcel of land of 10,000 square feet or less used for residential purposes or to shorelines where the erosion results from wave action or other coastal processes. 
Erosion and sediment control plan means a document containing material for the conservation of soil and water resources of a unit or group of units of land. It may include appropriate maps, an appropriate soil and water plan, inventory and management information with needed interpretations, and a record of decisions contributing to conservation treatment. The plan shall contain all major conservation decisions to ensure that the entire unit or units of land will be so treated to achieve the conservation objectives. 
Excavating means any digging, scooping or other methods of removing earth materials. 
Filling means any depositing or stockpiling of earth materials. 
General permit means the state permit titled General Permit for Discharges of Stormwater from Construction Activities found in 9VAC25-880-70 of the Virginia Stormwater Management Regulations authorizing a category of discharges under the CWA and the Virginia Stormwater Management Act within a geographical area of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
Grading means any excavating or filling of earth materials or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled condition. 
Land disturbing activity means a man-made change to the land surface that potentially changes its runoff characteristics including clearing, grading, or excavation or any man-made change to the land surface that may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands in the Commonwealth, including, but not limited to, clearing, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, except that the term shall not include those exemptions in section 23-5 as applied in article 2 and those exemptions in section 23-12 as applied in article 3. 
Land disturbing permit means a permit issued by the Town for clearing, filling, excavating, grading or transporting, or any combination thereof. 
Layout means a conceptual drawing sufficient to provide for the specified stormwater management facilities required at the time of approval. 
Local erosion and sediment control program means an outline of the various methods employed by a district or locality to regulate land disturbing activities and thereby minimize erosion and sedimentation in compliance with the state program and may include such items as local ordinances, policies and guidelines, technical materials, inspection, enforcement, and evaluation. 
Minor modification means an amendment to an existing general permit before its expiration not requiring extensive review and evaluation including, but not limited to, changes in EPA promulgated test protocols, increasing monitoring frequency requirements, changes in sampling locations, and changes to compliance dates within the overall compliance schedules. A minor general permit modification or amendment does not substantially alter general permit conditions, substantially increase or decrease the amount of surface water impacts, increase the size of the operation, or reduce the capacity of the facility to protect human health or the environment. 
Operator means the owner or operator of any facility or activity subject to regulation under this chapter. 
Owner means the owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person in control of a property. 
Permittee means the person to whom the permit authorizing land disturbing activities is issued or the person who certifies that the approved plans will be followed. 
Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, state, municipality, commission, or political subdivision of a state, governmental body, including federal, state, or local entity as applicable, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Plan approving authority means the Town Council or the department of public works, responsible for determining the adequacy of plans submitted for land disturbing activities on a unit or units of land and for approving plans. 
Regulations mean the Virginia Stormwater Management Program Regulations, 9VAC25-870 et seq., as amended. 
Site means the land or water area where any facility or land disturbing activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used or preserved in connection with the facility or land disturbing activity. 
Stabilization is defined as 90 percent permanent ground cover established to a height of two inches and having survived for 12 months without need of replanting or repair. The 90 percent shall be equally distributed over the entire project area with no evident bare spots. 
State means the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
State board or SWCB means the State Water Control Board. 
State permit means an approval to conduct a land disturbing activity issued by the state board in the form of a state stormwater individual permit or coverage issued under a state general permit or an approval issued by the state board for stormwater discharges from an MS4. Under these state permits, the state imposes and enforces requirements pursuant to the federal Clean Water Act and regulations and the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and regulations. 
State waters means all waters on the surface and under the ground wholly or partially within or bordering the commonwealth or within its jurisdiction, including wetlands. 
State Water Control Law means Chapter 3.1 (62.1-44.2 et seq.) of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
Stormwater means precipitation that is discharged across the land surface or through conveyances to one or more waterways and that may include stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
Stormwater management plan means a document containing material describing methods for complying with the requirements of section 23-14. 
Stormwater pollution prevention plan or SWPPP means a document that is prepared in accordance with good engineering practices and that identifies potential sources of pollutants that may reasonably be expected to affect the quality of stormwater discharges from the land disturbing activity, and otherwise meets the requirements of this chapter. In addition the document shall identify and require the implementation of control measures, and shall include, but not be limited to the inclusion of, or the incorporation by reference of, an approved erosion and sediment control plan, an approved stormwater management plan, and a pollution prevention plan. 
Subdivision has the meaning as defined in section 17-1 of the Vienna Subdivision Ordinance. 
Total maximum daily load or TMDL means the sum of the individual wasteload allocations for point sources, load allocations for nonpoint sources, natural background loading, and a margin of safety. TMDLs can be expressed in terms of either mass per time, toxicity, or other appropriate measure. The TMDL process provides for point versus nonpoint source tradeoffs. 
Transportation means any moving of earth materials from one place to another other than such movement incidental to grading when such movement results in destroying the vegetative cover either by tracking or the buildup of earth materials to the extent that erosion and sedimentation will result. 
Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law means Article 2.4 (§ 62.1-44.15:51 et seq.) of Chapter 3.1 of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
Virginia Stormwater Management Act means Article 2.3 (§ 62.1-44.15:24 et seq.) of Chapter 3.1 of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse website means a website that contains detailed design standards and specifications for control measures that may be used in Virginia to comply with the requirements of the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and associated regulations. 
Virginia Stormwater Management Program or VSMP means a program approved by the SWCB after September 13, 2011, that has been established by a locality to manage the quality and quantity of runoff resulting from land disturbing activities and shall include such items as local ordinances, rules, permit regulations, annual standards and specifications, policies and guidelines, technical materials, and requirements for plan review, inspection, enforcement, where authorized by this article, and evaluation consistent with the requirements of the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and associated regulations. 
Virginia Stormwater Management Program authority or VSMP authority means an authority approved by the SWCB after September 13, 2011, to operate a Virginia Stormwater Management Program. 
(Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
ARTICLE 2. - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL 
 
Sec. 23-4. - Erosion and sediment control program. 
A.  There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing standards and specifications on a variety of erosion and sedimentation control practices for use on construction sites, and similarly disturbed areas, chapter 3 of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, most recent edition, as adopted by the state board, and Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations adopted by the state board, which shall be filed and available in the office of the Town clerk and may be viewed during the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, inclusive except holidays, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out in length herein. 
B.  Violations of any regulations or order of the state board, any provision of this program, any condition of a permit, or any provision of this article shall be subject to a civil penalty. The civil penalty for any one violation shall be $100.00, except that the civil penalty for commencement of land disturbing activities without an approved plan as provided in section 23-5 shall be $1,000.00. Each day during which the violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. In no event shall a series of specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts result in civil penalties which exceed a total of $3,000.00, except that a series of violations arising from the commencement of land disturbing activities without an approved plan for any site shall not result in civil penalties which exceed a total of $10,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 23-5. - Regulated land disturbing activities. 
A.  Except as provided in subsections 23-5.B, 23-5.C and 23-5.D, no person shall engage in any land disturbing activity until he has submitted to the department of public works an erosion and sediment control plan for such land disturbing activity and until that plan has been reviewed, approved and all fees are paid. Where land disturbing activities involve lands under the jurisdiction of more than one local control program an erosion and sediment control plan may, at the option of the applicant, be submitted to the state board for review and approval rather than to each jurisdiction concerned. Where the land disturbing activity results from the construction of a single-family residence, an agreement in lieu an erosion and sediment control plan may be substituted for an erosion and sediment control plan if executed by the director. 
B.  The following land disturbing activities shall not be regulated under this article: 
1.  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs and maintenance work; 
2.  Individual service connections; 
3.  Installation, maintenance, or repair of any underground public utility lines when such activity occurs on an existing hard surfaced road, street or sidewalk, provided such land disturbing activity is confined to the area of the road, street or sidewalk which is hard surfaced; 
4.  Septic tank lines or drainage fields unless included in an overall plan for land disturbing activity relating to construction of the building to be served; 
5.  Disturbed land areas for commercial or noncommercial uses less than 2,500 square feet in size; 
6.  Installation of fence and sign posts or telephone and electric poles and other kinds of posts and poles; 
7.  Emergency work to protect life, limb or property; 
8.  Exploration or drilling for oil and gas including the well site, roads and off-site disposal areas and feeder lines; 
9.  Tilling, planting or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or forest crops or livestock feedlot operation, including engineering operations as follows: construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds, ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage and land irrigation; however, this exception shall not apply to harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which harvesting occurs is reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1100 et seq., or is converted to bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1163(B); 
10.  Repair or rebuilding of the tracks, right-of-way, bridges, communication facilities and other related structures and facilities of a railroad company; 
11.  Agricultural engineering operations including, but not limited to, the construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds not required to comply with the Virginia Dam Safety Act (Code of Virginia, § 10.1-604 et seq.), ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage and land irrigation; and, 
12.  Surface or deep mining. 
C.  Any person who owns, occupies or operates private agriculture or forest lands shall not be deemed to be in violation of this article for land disturbing activities which result from the normal functioning of these lands. 
D.  Any state agency that undertakes a project involving a land disturbing activity shall comply with the provisions of Code of Virginia § 62.1-44.15:56 and all other provisions applicable to state agencies. 
E.  Whenever a land disturbing activity is proposed to be conducted by a contractor performing construction work pursuant to a construction contract, the preparation, submission and approval of the required erosion and sediment control plan shall be the responsibility of the owner of the land. 
F.  To prevent further erosion, in accordance with Code of Virginia § 62.1-44.15:55.F the director may require approval of an erosion and sediment control plan for any land identified in the Town as an erosion impact area. 
(Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 23-6. - Action on erosion and sediment control plans. 
A.  Timeframe for approval; certificate of competence required. 
1.  The director shall, within 45 days, approve any erosion and sediment control plan submitted to him if he determines that the plan meets the standards of the Town's erosion and sediment control program, if the person responsible for carrying out the plan certifies that he will properly perform the measures included in the plan and will comply with the provisions of this article and all fees are paid. When a plan is determined to be inadequate, written notice of disapproval stating the specific reasons for disapproval shall be communicated to the applicant within 45 days. If no action is taken within the time specified above, the plan is deemed to be approved. In addition, as a prerequisite to engaging in the land disturbing activities shown on the approved plan, the person responsible for carrying out the plan shall provide the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence to the director, as provided by the Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:52, who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out the land disturbing activity as required by the Town's land disturbance permit. However, the director may waive the certificate of competence requirement for an agreement in lieu of an erosion and sediment control plan for construction of a single-family residence. If a violation occurs during the land disturbing activity, then the person responsible for carrying out the agreement in lieu of an erosion and sediment control plan shall correct the violation and provide the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence, as provided by the Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:52. 
2.  Failure to provide the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence prior to engaging in land disturbing activities may result in revocation of the approval of the plan and the person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be subject to the penalties provided in this article. 
3.  Any person engaging, in more than one jurisdiction, in the creation and operation of wetland mitigation or stream restoration banks, which have been approved and are operated in accordance with applicable federal and state guidance, laws, or regulations for the establishment, use, and operation of wetlands mitigation or stream restoration banks, pursuant to a mitigation banking instrument signed by the department of environmental quality, the marine resources commission, or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, may, at the option of that person, file general erosion and sediment control specifications for wetland mitigation or stream restoration banks annually with the state board for review and approval consistent with guidelines established by the state board. 
4.  The state board shall have 60 days in which to approve the specifications. If no action is taken by the state board within 60 days, the specifications shall be deemed approved. Individual approval of separate projects under this subsection A is not necessary when approved specifications are implemented through a project-specific erosion and sediment control plan. Projects not included in this subsection A shall comply with the requirements of the appropriate local erosion and sediment control program. The state board shall have the authority to enforce approved specifications. Approval of general erosion and sediment control specifications by the state board does not relieve the owner or operator from compliance with any other local ordinances and regulations including requirements to submit plans and obtain permits as may be required by such ordinances and regulations. 
B.  The approved plan may be changed in the following cases: 
1.  When inspection has revealed the inadequacy of the plan to accomplish the erosion and sediment control objectives of the plan, and appropriate modifications to correct the deficiencies shall be made on the erosion and sediment control plan. 
2.  Where the person responsible for carrying out the approved plan finds that, because of a change in circumstances, the approved plan cannot be carried out effectively and the proposed amendments to the plan are approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 23-7. - Issuance of land disturbing permit. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection 23-7.B, no person shall engage in any land disturbing activity until he has acquired a land disturbing permit from the director. 
B.  Any person grading, filling or excavating on privately owned, occupied or operated agriculture or forest lands is not required to secure a land disturbing permit. 
C.  The director shall not issue any land disturbing or building permit for activities which involve land disturbing activities unless the applicant therefore submits with its application the approved erosion and sediment control plan, certification that such plan will be followed and all fees are paid. Prior to issuance of any permit, the Town may also require an applicant to submit a reasonable performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement acceptable to the Town, to ensure that measures could be taken by the Town at the applicant's expense should he fail, after proper notice, within the time specified to initiate or maintain appropriate conservation action which may be required of him by the approved plan as a result of his land disturbing activity. The amount of the bond or other surety for performance shall not exceed the total of the estimated cost to initiate and maintain appropriate conservation action based on the unit price for new public or private sector construction in the Town and a reasonable allowance for estimated administrative costs and inflation which shall not exceed 25 percent of the estimated cost of the conservation action. If the Town of Vienna takes such conservation action upon such as failure by the permittee, the Town of Vienna may collect from the permittee for the difference should the amount of the reasonable cost of such action exceed the amount of the security held. Within 60 days of the achievement of adequate stabilization of the land disturbing activity in any project or section thereof, the bond, cash escrow, letter of credit or other legal arrangement, or the unexpended or unobligated portion thereof, shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated based upon the percentage of stabilization accomplished in the project or section thereof. These requirements are in addition to all other provisions of law relating to the issuance of such permits and are not intended to otherwise affect the requirements of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 23-8. - Monitoring; reports; inspections. 
A.  The director shall cause, at least once in every two-week period, within 48 hours following any runoff producing storm event, and at the completion of the project prior to the release of any performance bonds, the inspection of land disturbing activities to ensure compliance with the approved plan, and to determine that the measures required in that plan are effective in controlling erosion. The right of entry to conduct such inspections shall be expressly reserved in the permit. The owner, permittee or person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be given notice of the inspection. 
B.  If the director determines that the permit holder has failed to comply with the plan, the director shall immediately serve upon the permit holder, by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or in the plan certification, or by delivery at the site of the permitted activities to the agent or employee of the permittee supervising such activities, a notice to comply. Such notice shall set forth specifically the measures needed to comply and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the permit holder fails to comply within the time specified, he may be subject to the revocation of his permit; furthermore, he shall be deemed to be in violation of this article and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties provided by this article. 
C.  Provisions for revoking permit. 
1.  Upon receipt of a sworn complaint of a substantial violation from the director, the Town Manager may, in conjunction with or subsequent to a notice to comply as specified in subsection B of this section, issue a stop work order requiring that all or part of the land disturbing activities permitted on the site be stopped until the specified corrective measures have been taken. Whenever the director determines there has been a failure to comply with a notice to comply or stop work order, the director may order or recommend that any other permit associated with the land disturbing permit, or license issued to the permittee, and any associated activity, be revoked and suspended until such time as the permittee is once again determined by the director to be in compliance with the approved plan. Additionally, this provision shall be deemed authority for any appropriate official of the county to revoke other permits or licenses. Such other permits or licenses shall include, but are not limited to, building permits, zoning permits and clearances, health permits and other land disturbing activity permits. In the event of the revocation of a land disturbing permit, the owner or applicant shall be required to re-apply for the permit and submit the required permit fees based on fee schedule at the time of revocation for the permit, or as amended, and successfully pass a site compliance inspection. 
2.  Where the alleged noncompliance is causing or is in imminent danger of causing harmful erosion of lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the commonwealth, such an order may be issued without regard to whether the permittee has been issued a notice to comply as specified in subsection B of this section. Otherwise, such an order may be issued only after the permittee has failed to comply with such a notice to comply. The order shall be served in the same manner as a notice to comply, and shall remain in effect for a period of seven days from the date of service pending application by the Town or permit holder for appropriate relief to the circuit court of the county. If the alleged violator has not obtained an approved plan or any required permits within seven days from the date of service of the order, the director may issue an order to the owner requiring that all construction and other work on the site, other than corrective measures, be stopped until an approved plan and any required permits have been obtained. Such an order shall be served upon the owner by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or the land records of the county. The owner may appeal the issuance of an order to the circuit court of the county. Any person violating or failing, neglecting or refusing to obey an order issued by the director may be compelled in a proceeding instituted in the circuit court of the county to obey same and to comply therewith by injunction, mandamus or other appropriate remedy. Upon completion of corrective action, the order shall be immediately lifted. Nothing in this section shall prevent the Town Manager from taking any other action permitted by law. 
D.  Acceptance of performance upon completion of adequate stabilization of an approved erosion and sedimentation control plan, the permittee shall notify the director of such completion. The director shall then inspect the work and planting and, upon his determination that they are in compliance with the approved plan, he shall issue a letter of preliminary acceptance. A condition of any such preliminary acceptance shall be that the permittee guarantee all erosion and sedimentation control work for a period of one year from the date of its preliminary acceptance, or for a period of one year from any repair or replanting ordered by the director, or until such time that all control structures and a minimum of 90 percent of all plantings shall have survived for a year without need of further replanting or repair. During the one year period of the guarantee, the director may order in writing such replanting or repair work as shall be deemed necessary to enforce compliance with the approved plan or the guarantee. Such an order shall serve to revoke the preliminary acceptance and shall cause the permittee to renew the guarantee for an additional one year from the date of replanting or repair. Final acceptance shall occur when preliminary acceptance has remained unrevoked for a period of one year, or when all control structures and a minimum of 90 percent of all plants have survived for a period of one year without need for further replanting or repair. For purposes of this section, normal cleaning of silt basins alone shall not be construed to be repair work. 
(Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 23-9. - Administrative appeal. 
A.  Final decisions of the director under this article shall be subject to review by the Town Council, provided an appeal is filed with the Town Manager within 30 days from the date of any written decision by the director which adversely affects the rights, duties or privileges of the persons engaging in or proposing to engage in land disturbing activities. 
B.  All appeals must be in writing and must contain sufficient information to acquaint the Town Council with the facts involved. 
C.  Final decisions of the Town Council shall be subject to judicial review in the Circuit Court of Fairfax County, provided that an appeal is filed within 30 days from the date of any written decision adversely affecting the rights, duties, or privileges of the person engaging in or proposing to engage in land disturbing activities. 
(Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 23-9.1. - Charges. 
The cost of the engineering services rendered by the department of public works including studies, approval of plans, permit issuance, supervision and inspection of construction, are described in the fee schedule in section 1-13 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 23-10. - Penalties; injunctions. 
A.  A violation of this article shall be deemed a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
B.  Any person who violates any regulations or order of the state board, any condition of a permit, any provisions of its program, or any provisions of this article, shall, upon finding of an appropriate general district court, be assessed a civil penalty in accordance with section 23-4.B. The director may issue a summons for collection of the civil penalty and the action may be prosecuted by the Town. In any trial for a scheduled violation, it shall be the burden of the Town to show the liability of the violator by a preponderance of the evidence. An admission or finding of liability shall not be a criminal conviction for any purpose. Any civil penalties assessed by a court shall be paid into the treasury of the Town. 
C.  The director may apply to the circuit court of the county for injunctive relief to enjoin a violation or a threatened violation of this article without the necessity of showing that there does not exist an adequate remedy at law. 
D.  In addition to any criminal or civil penalties provided under this chapter article, any person who violates any provisions of this article may be liable to the Town, or the state board, as appropriate in a civil action for damages. 
E.  Without limiting the remedies which may be obtained in this section, any person violating or failing, neglecting or refusing to obey any injunction, mandamus or other remedy obtained pursuant to this section shall be subject, in the discretion of the court, to a civil action not to exceed $2,000.00 for each violation. A civil penalty for such violation or failure may be brought by the Town. Any civil penalties assessed by the court shall be paid to the treasury of the Town. 
F.  With the consent of any person who has violated or failed, neglected or refused to obey any regulation or order of the state board, or any condition of a permit or any provision of this article, the state board, the director, or the Town may provide, in an order issued by the state board or the Town against such person, for the payment of civil charges for violations in specific sums, not to exceed the limit specified in subsection E of this section. Such civil charges shall be instead of any appropriate civil penalty which could be imposed under subsection B or E of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
ARTICLE 3. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 23-11. - Stormwater management program. 
A.  There is hereby adopted a stormwater management program to ensure the general health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Town of Vienna, to protect the quality and quantity of state waters from the potential harm of unmanaged stormwater, including protection from a land disturbing activity causing unreasonable degradation of properties, water quality, stream channels, and other natural resources, and to establish procedures whereby stormwater requirements related to water quality and quantity shall be administered and enforced. 
B.  This article is intended to integrate the Town's stormwater management requirements into a unified stormwater program that also includes applicable elements of article 2 of this chapter (Erosion and Sediment Control) and article 21.1 of chapter 18 (Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas). 
(Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 23-12. - Stormwater management requirements; exemptions. 
A.  Except as provided herein, no person may engage in any land disturbing activity, and no land disturbing or building permit shall be issued until the director has reviewed and approved all requirements in accordance with this article. These requirements include: 
1.  An application that includes a general permit registration statement if such statement is required under Code of Virginia § 62.1-44.15:34; 
2.  An erosion and sediment control plan approved in accordance with article 2 of this chapter (Erosion and Sediment Control); 
3.  An approved stormwater management plan that meets the requirements of section 23-14; 
4.  Evidence that general permit coverage has been obtained, if such general permit is required; 
5.  All fees must be paid pursuant to section 1-13 and section 23-24; 
6.  A performance bond, if required, must be posted pursuant to section 23-23; 
7.  Approval of all plans and performance criteria required in article 21.1 of chapter 18 (Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas); and 
8.  The application demonstrates that all land clearing, construction, disturbance, land development and drainage will be done according to this article. 
B.  The permittee must develop prior to the land disturbing activity, implement, and keep at the site for inspection a stormwater pollution prevention plan that meets the requirements set forth in section 23-13 and a pollution prevention plan that meets the requirements set forth in section 23-16. 
C.  A land disturbing activity that results in a land disturbance equal or greater than 2,500 square feet and less than one acre that is not part of a larger common plan of development or sale shall be exempt from section 23-13 (stormwater pollution prevention plan), section 23-16 (pollution prevention plan), and the requirement to obtain a general permit unless otherwise required by this Code or state or federal law. 
D.  The following shall be exempt from the requirements of this article unless otherwise required by this Code or state or federal law: 
1.  Land disturbing activities resulting in less than 2,500 square feet of land disturbance that are not part of a common plan of development or sale except as may be required under the provisions of article 21.1 of chapter 18. 
2.  Discharges to a sanitary sewer or a combined sewer system. 
3.  Routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original construction of a project. The paving of an existing road with a compacted or impervious surface and re-establishment of associated existing ditches and shoulders shall be deemed routine maintenance if performed in accordance with this subsection. 
4.  Conducting land disturbing activities in response to a public emergency where the related work requires immediate authorization to avoid imminent endangerment to human health or the environment. In such situations, the director shall be advised of the disturbance within seven days of commencing the land disturbing activity and compliance with this article shall be required within 30 days of commencing the land disturbing activity. 
5.  Permitted surface or deep mining operations and projects, or oil and gas operations and projects conducted under the provisions of Title 45.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
6.  Land clearing for agricultural or silvicultural purposes, and related activities, in accordance with Code of Virginia § 62.1-44.15:34.C.2. 
7.  Activities under a state or federal reclamation program to return an abandoned property to an agricultural or open land use. 
(Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 23-13. - Stormwater pollution prevention plan contents. 
A.  The SWPPP shall include the content specified by Section 9VAC25-870-54 and must also comply with the requirements and general information set forth in Section 9VAC25-880-70, Section II of the general permit. 
B.  The SWPPP shall be amended by the operator whenever there is a change in design, construction, operation, or maintenance that has a significant effect on the discharge of pollutants to state waters which is not addressed by the existing SWPPP. 
C.  The SWPPP must be maintained by the operator at a central location onsite. If an onsite location is unavailable, notice of the SWPPP's location must be posted near the main entrance at the construction site. Operators shall make the SWPPP available for public review in accordance with Section II of the general permit, either electronically or in hard copy. 
(Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 23-14. - Stormwater management plan contents. 
A.  The stormwater management plan must apply the stormwater management technical criteria set forth in section 23-17 to the entire land disturbing activity. Individual lots or parcels in a residential, commercial, or industrial common plan of development or sale shall not be considered to be separate land disturbing activities. Instead, the common plan, as a whole, shall be considered to be a single land disturbing activity. The plan must also consider all sources of surface runoff and all sources of subsurface and groundwater flows converted to surface runoff, and include the following information: 
1.  Information on the type and location of stormwater discharges; information on the features to which stormwater is being discharged including surface waters, and the predevelopment and postdevelopment drainage areas; 
2.  Contact information including the name, address, and telephone number of the owner and the tax reference number and parcel number of the property or properties affected; 
3.  A narrative that includes a description of current site conditions and final site conditions; 
4.  A general description of the proposed stormwater management facilities and the mechanism through which the facilities will be operated and maintained after construction is complete; 
5.  A stormwater management facility maintenance agreement as required in section 23-18; 
6.  Information on the proposed stormwater management facilities including: 
a.  The type of facilities; 
b.  Location, including geographic coordinates; 
c.  Acres treated; and 
d.  The surface waters into which the facility will discharge. 
7.  Hydrologic and hydraulic computations, including runoff characteristics; 
8.  Documentation and calculations verifying compliance with the water quality and quantity requirements of section 23-17; 
9.  A map or maps of the site that depicts the topography of the site and includes: 
a.  All contributing drainage areas; 
b.  Existing streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, wetlands, other water bodies, and floodplains; 
c.  Soil types, forest cover, and other vegetative areas; 
d.  Current land use including existing structures, roads, and locations of known utilities and easements; 
e.  Sufficient information on adjoining parcels to assess the impacts of stormwater from the site on these parcels; 
f.  The limits of clearing and grading, and the proposed drainage patterns on the site; 
g.  Proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, and stormwater management facilities; and 
h.  Proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses, including but not limited to planned locations of utilities, roads, and easements. 
B.  If an operator intends to meet the water quality and/or quantity requirements through the use of off-site compliance options as set forth in subsection C or D of section 23-17, then a letter of availability from the off-site provider must be included. Approved off-site options must achieve the necessary nutrient reductions prior to the commencement of the applicant's land disturbing activity except as otherwise allowed by Code of Virginia § 62.1-44.15:35. 
C.  Elements of the stormwater management plan that include activities regulated under Chapter 4 (§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia pursuant to Article 1 (§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
D.  A construction record drawing for permanent stormwater management facilities shall be submitted to the director. The construction record drawing shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia, certifying that the stormwater management facilities have been constructed in accordance with the approved plan. 
E.  The director may execute an agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan with the owner to comply with the requirements of this section for the construction of a single-family residence. Any such agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan shall be considered a stormwater management plan for the purpose of implementing and enforcing this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 23-15. - Stormwater management plan review. 
A.  The director shall review stormwater management plans and shall approve or disapprove a stormwater management plan according to the following: 
1.  The director shall determine the completeness of a plan in accordance with section 23-14 and shall notify the applicant, in writing, of such determination, within 15 calendar days of receipt. If the plan is deemed to be incomplete, the above written notification shall contain the reasons the plan is deemed incomplete. 
2.  The director shall have an additional 60 calendar days from the date of the communication of completeness to review the plan, except that if a determination of completeness is not made within the time prescribed in subdivision 1, then the plan shall be deemed complete and the director shall have 60 calendar days from the date of submission to review the plan. 
3.  The director shall review any plan that has been previously disapproved, within 45 calendar days of the date of resubmission. 
4.  During the review period, the plan shall be approved or disapproved and the decision communicated in writing to the person responsible for the land disturbing activity or his designated agent. If the plan is not approved, the reasons for not approving the plan shall be provided in writing. Approval or denial shall be based on the plan's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
5.  If a plan meeting all requirements of this article is submitted and no action is taken within the time provided above in subdivision 2 for review, the plan shall be deemed approved. 
B.  Approved stormwater plans may be modified as follows: 
1.  Modifications to an approved stormwater management plan shall be allowed only after review and written approval by the director. The director shall have 60 calendar days to respond in writing either approving or disapproving such request. 
2.  The director may require that an approved stormwater management plan be amended, within a time prescribed by the director, to address any deficiencies noted during inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 23-16. - Pollution prevention plan contents. 
A.  The pollution prevention plan shall include the content specified by Section 9VAC25-870-56, shall be developed, implemented, and updated as necessary, and must detail the design, installation, implementation, and maintenance of effective pollution prevention measures to minimize the discharge of pollutants. At a minimum, such measures must be designed, installed, implemented, and maintained to: 
1.  Minimize the discharge of pollutants from equipment and vehicle washing, wheel wash water, and other wash waters. Wash waters must be treated in a sediment basin or alternative control that provides equivalent or better treatment prior to discharge; 
2.  Minimize the exposure of building materials, building products, construction wastes, trash, landscape materials, fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, detergents, sanitary waste, and other materials present on the site to precipitation and to stormwater; and 
3.  Minimize the discharge of pollutants from spills and leaks and implement chemical spill and leak prevention and response procedures. 
B.  The pollution prevention plan shall include effective best management practices to prohibit the following discharges: 
1.  Wastewater from washout of concrete, unless managed by an appropriate control; 
2.  Wastewater from washout and cleanout of stucco, paint, form release oils, curing compounds, and other construction materials; 
3.  Fuels, oils, or other pollutants used in vehicle and equipment operation and maintenance; and 
4.  Soaps or solvents used in vehicle and equipment washing. 
C.  Discharges from dewatering activities, including discharges from dewatering of trenches and excavations, are prohibited unless managed by appropriate controls. 
(Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 23-17. - Technical criteria for regulated land disturbing activities. 
A.  All land disturbing activities regulated pursuant to this article shall comply with the technical criteria for land disturbing activities set forth in Section 9VAC25-870-62 (applicability), Section 9VAC25-870-63 (water quality design criteria requirements), Section 9VAC25-870-65 (water quality compliance), Section 9VAC25-870-66 (water quantity), Section 9VAC25-870-69 (offsite compliance options), Section 9VAC-25-870-72 (design storms and hydrologic methods), Section 9VAC25-870-74 (stormwater harvesting), Section 9VAC25-870-76 (linear development), Section 9VAC25-870-85 (stormwater management impoundment structures or facilities), and Section 9VAC25-870-92 (comprehensive stormwater management plans). In addition, the following shall apply: 
1.  Limitations applied to stormwater management facilities in the most recent edition of the Fairfax County Public Facilities Manual and subsequently approved by the department of environmental quality shall also apply in the Town unless waived by the director. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A above, a land disturbing activity as defined in Section 9VAC25-870-48 shall be grandfathered and meet the technical criteria in Sections 9VAC25-870-93 through 9VAC25-870-99 except that the more stringent of the technical criteria in Sections 9VAC25-870-93 through 9VAC25-870-99 or the Town Code in effect prior to July 1, 2014 shall apply to the land disturbing activity. 
C.  The director shall allow operators to utilize off-site compliance options in accordance with Section 9VAC25-870-69 under the following conditions: 
1.  Less than five acres of land will be disturbed; 
2.  The post construction phosphorus control requirement is less than 10 pounds per year; or 
3.  At least 75 percent of the required phosphorus nutrient reductions are achieved on-site. If at least 75 percent of the required phosphorus nutrient reductions cannot be met on-site, and the operator can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director that: 
a.  Alternative site designs have been considered that may accommodate on-site best management practices; 
b.  On-site best management practices have been considered in alternative site designs to the maximum extent practicable; 
c.  Appropriate on-site best management practices will be implemented; and 
d.  Full compliance with postdevelopment nonpoint nutrient runoff compliance requirements cannot practicably be met on-site, then the required phosphorus nutrient reductions may be achieved, in whole or in part, through the use of off-site compliance options. 
D.  The director may establish criteria in addition to those established in subsection C of this section to allow an operator to use nutrient credits in accordance with Code of Virginia § 62.1-44.15:35 to meet required phosphorus reductions. 
E.  Notwithstanding subsections C and D this section, offsite options shall not be allowed: 
1.  Unless the selected offsite option achieves the necessary nutrient reductions prior to the commencement of the operator's land disturbing activity. In the case of a phased project, the operator may acquire or achieve offsite nutrient reductions prior to the commencement of each phase of land disturbing activity in an amount sufficient for each phase. 
2.  In contravention of local water quality-based limitations at the point of discharge that are consistent with the determinations made pursuant to subsection B of Code of Virginia § 62.1-44.19:7, contained in the Town's MS4 program plan accepted by the department of environmental quality, or as otherwise may be established or approved by the state board. 
F.  The director may grant exceptions to the technical requirements of subsection A provided that the exception is the minimum necessary to afford relief, reasonable and appropriate conditions are imposed so that the intent of this article are preserved, granting the exception will not confer any special privileges that are denied in other similar circumstances, and exception requests are not based upon conditions or circumstances that are self-imposed or self-created. Economic hardship alone is not sufficient reason to grant an exception from the requirements of this article. 
1.  Exceptions to the requirement that the land disturbing activity obtain required general permit shall not be given by the director, nor shall the director approve the use of a BMP not found on the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse website, or any other control measure duly approved by the Department of Environmental Quality. 
2.  Exceptions to requirements for phosphorus reductions shall not be allowed unless offsite options otherwise permitted pursuant to Section 9VAC25-870-69 have been considered and found not available. 
(Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 23-18. - Maintenance of permanent stormwater management facilities. 
A.  The director shall require the provision of long-term responsibility for and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and other techniques specified to manage the quality and quantity of runoff. 
B.  All land owners required to maintain a stormwater management facility shall sign, deliver, and record in the Fairfax County Land Records an agreement with the Town that sets forth maintenance and inspection responsibilities and permits the Town to inspect and maintain these facilities at the landowners' expense, if they do not maintain them according to recognized engineering standards found at the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse website. Such maintenance agreement shall be recorded prior to general permit termination or earlier as required by the director and shall at a minimum: 
1.  Be submitted to the director for review and approval prior to the approval of the stormwater management plan; 
2.  Be stated to run with the land; 
3.  Provide for all necessary access to the property for purposes of maintenance and regulatory inspections; 
4.  Provide for inspections and maintenance and require the owner or his designee to submit an inspection and maintenance report. The frequency of the reports and the qualifications for the individual completing the reports shall be appropriate for the stormwater management facility and be included in the agreement except that the report schedule shall be no less than once every five years; and, 
5.  Be enforceable by all appropriate governmental parties. 
C.  A developer or landowner who installs stormwater facilities shall be responsible for facility maintenance until the time of conveyance and shall provide the successor landowner, the builder if different from the developer (if applicable), and the Town with maintenance schedules and maintenance procedures, known as a maintenance manual, for all facilities used in the development. 
(Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 23-19. - Monitoring and inspections. 
A.  The director shall inspect the land disturbing activity during construction for: 
1.  Compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; 
2.  Compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
3.  Development, updating, and implementation of a pollution prevention plan; and 
4.  Development and implementation of any additional control measures necessary to address a TMDL. 
B.  The director may, at reasonable times and under reasonable circumstances, enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of obtaining information or conducting surveys or investigations necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
C.  In accordance with a performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement or instrument, the director may also enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of initiating or maintaining appropriate actions which are required by the permit conditions associated with a land disturbing activity when a permittee, after proper notice, has failed to take acceptable action within the time specified. 
D.  Pursuant to Code of Virginia § 62.1-44.15:40 the director may require any person subject to the requirements under this article, to furnish when requested such application materials, plans, specifications, and other pertinent information as may be necessary to determine the effect of his discharge on the quality of state waters, or such other information as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this article. 
E.  Post-construction inspections of stormwater management facilities required by the provisions of this article shall be conducted by the director pursuant to procedures developed by the director and shall occur, at minimum, at least once every five years. 
(Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 23-20. - Hearings. 
A.  Any person subject to this article aggrieved by any action of the Town taken without a formal hearing, or by inaction of the Town, may demand in writing a formal hearing by the Town Council, provided a petition requesting such hearing is filed with the Town Manager within 30 days after notice of such action is given by the director. 
B.  The hearings held under this section shall be conducted by the Town Council at a regular or special meeting of the Town Council, or by at least one member of the Town Council designated by the Town Council to conduct such hearings on behalf of the Town Council at any other time and place authorized by the Town Council. 
C.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of such hearings shall be taken and filed with the Town Council. Depositions may be taken and read as in actions at law. 
D.  The Town Council or its designated member, as the case may be, shall have power to issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum, and at the request of any party shall issue such subpoenas. The failure of a witness without legal excuse to appear or to testify or to produce documents shall be acted upon by the Town Council, or its designated member, whose action may include the procurement of an order of enforcement from the circuit court. Witnesses who are subpoenaed shall receive the same fees and reimbursement for mileage as in civil actions. 
(Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 23-21. - Appeals. 
Appeals to this article shall be conducted in the same manner as prescribed in section 23-9. 
(Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 23-22. - Enforcement and penalties. 
A.  If the director determines that there is a failure to comply with the conditions of this article or determines there is an unauthorized discharge, notice shall be served upon the person responsible for carrying out the conditions of this article by any of the following: verbal warnings and inspection reports, notices of corrective action, consent special orders, and notices to comply. Written notices shall be served by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the general permit or land disturbing permit or by delivery at the site of the development activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities. 
1.  The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the permit conditions and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. Upon failure to comply within the time specified, a stop work order may be issued in accordance with subsection B or land disturbing permits may be revoked by the director. 
2.  If a person fails to comply with a notice issued in accordance with this section within the time specified, the director may issue an order requiring the owner or person responsible for carrying out an approved plan, or the person conducting the land disturbing activities without an approved plan or required permit to cease all land disturbing activities until the violation of the permit has ceased, or an approved plan and required permits are obtained, and specified corrective measures have been completed. 
Such orders shall become effective upon service on the person by certified mail, return receipt requested, sent to his address specified in the land records of the Town, or by personal delivery by an agent of the director. However, if the director finds that any such violation is grossly affecting or presents an imminent and substantial danger of causing harmful erosion of lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the Commonwealth or otherwise substantially impacting water quality, it may issue, without advance notice or hearing, an emergency order directing such person to cease immediately all land disturbing activities on the site and shall provide an opportunity for a hearing, after reasonable notice as to the time and place thereof, to such person, to affirm, modify, amend, or cancel such emergency order. If a person who has been issued an order is not complying with the terms thereof, the director may institute a proceeding for an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate remedy in accordance with subsection C. 
B.  In addition to any other remedy provided by this article, if the director determines that there is a failure to comply with the provisions of this article, he may initiate such informal and/or formal administrative enforcement procedures in a manner that is consistent with policies adopted by the Town. 
C.  Any person violating or failing, neglecting, or refusing to obey any rule, regulation, ordinance, order, approved standard or specification, or any permit condition issued by the director may be compelled in a proceeding instituted in court by the Town to obey same and to comply therewith by injunction, mandamus or other appropriate remedy. 
D.  Any person who violates any provision of this article or who fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with any order of the director, shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $32,500.00 for each violation within the discretion of the court. Each day of violation of each requirement shall constitute a separate offense. 
1.  Violations for which a penalty may be imposed under this subsection shall include but not be limited to the following: 
a.  No general permit registration statement; 
b.  No SWPPP; 
c.  Incomplete SWPPP; 
d.  SWPPP not available for review; 
e.  No approved erosion and sediment control plan; 
f.  Failure to install stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls; 
g.  Stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls improperly installed or maintained; 
h.  Operational deficiencies; 
i.  Failure to conduct required inspections; 
j.  Incomplete, improper, or missed inspections; and, 
k.  Discharges not in compliance with the requirements of Section 9VAC25-880-70 of the general permit. 
2.  The director may issue a summons for collection of the civil penalty and the action may be prosecuted in the appropriate court. 
3.  In imposing a civil penalty pursuant to this subsection, the court may consider the degree of harm caused by the violation and also the economic benefit to the violator from noncompliance. 
4.  Any civil penalties assessed by a court as a result of a summons issued by the Town shall be paid into the treasury of the Town to be used for the purpose of minimizing, preventing, managing, or mitigating pollution of the waters of the Town and abating environmental pollution therein in such manner as the court may, by order, direct. 
E.  Notwithstanding any other civil or equitable remedy provided by this section or by law, any person who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article, any order of the director, any condition of a permit, or any order of a court shall, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by confinement in jail for not more than 12 months or a fine of not less than $2,500.00 nor more than $32,500.00, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 23-23. - Performance bonds. 
Prior to any land disturbing activity the applicant may be required by the director to submit a performance bond in the amount of $2,500.00 with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement acceptable to the Town attorney to ensure that measures could be taken by the Town at the applicant's expense should he fail, after proper notice, within the time specified to initiate or maintain appropriate actions which may be required of him by the permit conditions as a result of his land disturbing activity. If the Town takes such action upon such failure by the applicant, the Town may collect from the applicant for the difference should the amount of the reasonable cost of such action exceed the amount of the security held, if any. Within 60 days of the completion of the requirements of the permit conditions, including but not limited to the submittal of a construction record drawing in accordance with section 23-14.D, such bond, cash escrow, letter of credit or other legal arrangement, or the unexpended or unobligated portion thereof, shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated. 
(Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 23-24. - Fees. 
A.  No land disturbing or building permit shall be issued until applicable fees have been submitted to the Town in accordance with this section and section 1-13 concerning stormwater management. 
B.  Fees associated with an initial land disturbing permit issuance shall be in accordance with the table in section 1-13 titled "Stormwater Management Fees — Initial Permit Issuance." When a site or sites has been purchased for development within a previously permitted common plan of development or sale, the applicant shall be subject to fees in accordance with the disturbed acreage of their site or sites in the aforementioned table section. 
C.  Fees for the modification or transfer of general permit registration statements issued by the state board shall be imposed in accordance with the table in section 1-13 titled "Stormwater Management Fees — Modifications or Transfers." If the general permit modifications result in changes to stormwater management plans that require additional review by the Town, such reviews shall be subject to the fees set out in the aforementioned table section. The fee assessed shall be based on the total disturbed acreage of the site. In addition to the modification fee, modifications resulting in an increase in total disturbed acreage shall pay the difference in the initial permit fee paid and the permit fee that would have been applied for the total disturbed acreage in accordance with subsection B. 
D.  General permit coverage maintenance fees shall be paid annually to the Town by April 1 of each year, in accordance with the table in section 1-13 titled "Stormwater Management Fees — Permit Maintenance." No permit will be reissued or automatically continued without payment of the required fee. General permit coverage maintenance fees shall be applied until the permit coverage is terminated. Permit maintenance fees shall apply to expired permits that have been administratively continued. 
E.  Persons whose coverage under the general permit has been revoked shall apply to the department of environmental quality for an individual permit for discharges of stormwater from construction activities. 
F.  Fees shall not be assessed to the following: 
1.  Permittees who request minor modifications to general permits as defined in section 23-3. Permit modifications at the request of the permittee resulting in changes to the stormwater management plan that require additional review by the director shall not be exempt pursuant to this subsection. 
2.  Permittees whose general permits are modified or amended at the initiative of the department of environmental quality, excluding errors in the registration statement identified by the director or errors related to the acreage of the site. 
G.  All incomplete payments will be deemed as nonpayments, and the applicant shall be notified of any incomplete payments. Interest shall be charged for late payments at the underpayment rate set forth in Code of Virginia § 58.1-15 and is calculated on a monthly basis at the applicable periodic rate. A ten percent late payment fee shall be charged to any delinquent account, defined as over 90 days past due. The Town is entitled to all remedies under the Code of Virginia in collecting any past due amount. 
(Ord. No. 2014-006, § 1, 5-12-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)  
Chapter 24 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of locality to grant cable franchises and regulate cable systems, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2108.20. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSES OF THE ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Vienna Cable Communications Ordinance." 
(Code 1969, § 24-1; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-2. - Purposes. 
The purposes of this chapter are to: 
(a)  Provide for the franchising and regulation of cable television systems within the Town; 
(b)  Provide for the payment of a fee and other valuable consideration to the Town for the construction and operation of cable television systems; 
(c)  Provide for the regulation by the Town of the rates to be charged to subscribers for cable television service; 
(d)  Provide for the development of cable television as a means to improve communication between and among the members of the public and public institutions of the Town; 
(e)  Provide remedies and prescribe penalties for violation of this chapter and the franchise granted hereunder; and 
(f)  Preserve public confidence in government by providing for disclosure of actual and potential conflicts of interests. 
(Code 1969, § 24-2; Ord. of 10-20-1980; Ord. of 12-7-1981)  
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 24-3. - Definitions. 
The following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning; when not inconsistent with the context, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The term "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Application expenses means expenses paid or incurred by a person who applies for a cable television franchise. Such expenses include: 
(1)  Expenses paid for engineering or other consultant services utilized in preparing the application filed with the Town for a cable television franchise; 
(2)  Legal expenses paid or incurred for services utilized in preparing the application filed with the Town for a cable television franchise; 
(3)  Readily identifiable salaries (or portions thereof), or compensation in any form, of employees of the applicant whose services have been used to further, in any way, the application; provided that if the amount of a salary or value of compensation of an employee (which is attributable to such services) is less than $1,000.00 in the reporting period as described in section 24-5.1, then such a salary or compensation need not be included as an application expense; 
(4)  Assignment, issuance, promise of assignment or issuance to any person, or any ownership interest in the applicant, and the consideration, if any, paid or promised therefor; provided, however, that such ownership interests need not include security interests which are registered pursuant to the provisions of the securities act of 1933, 15 USC 77, and which are either traded on a recognized securities exchange or are regularly traded and the trading activity of which is reported by the National Association of Securities Dealers throughout NASDAQ, its automated communications system; provided, however, that the previous proviso shall not exclude assignments, issuances, promises of assignments or issuance of ownership interests for a consideration less than the fair market value thereof. Any person who acquires an ownership interest without payment of good and valuable consideration therefor shall be specifically identified; and 
(5)  Payments, or promises of payment, of money or any other thing of value, to any person used to further in any way the application. The disclosure required by this subsection of this definition shall not include those expenses disclosed pursuant to subsections (1) through (4) of this definition. 
Basic cable service shall, at a minimum, consist of: 
(i)  All domestic television broadcast signals carried in fulfillment of the requirements of 47 USC 534 and 535 (except any signal secondarily transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the local service area of such station, regardless of how such signal is ultimately received by the cable system); 
(ii)  Any public, educational, and governmental access programming required by the franchise of the cable system to be provided to subscribers as basic service; and 
(iii)  Any additional video programming signals or service added to basic service by the cable operator. 
Board means the Board of Supervisors of the County of Fairfax, Virginia. 
Business associates includes any person with whom one is jointly or mutually engaged in any profit-seeking enterprise or endeavor; and any person, corporation, partnership, syndicate, joint venture, or other entity in which one or one's immediate family is an officer, director, employee, or holder of a legal, equitable, actual or beneficial interest. 
Cable service means: 
(1)  The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming services; and 
(2)  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service. 
Cable television administrator means that person so designated by the Town Council; and until such time as a cable television administrator is designated by the council, the cable television administrator for the county shall serve as the Town cable television administrator with the authority pertaining thereto, and such authority shall terminate upon appointment of a cable television administrator by the Town Council. 
Cable television system means a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the Town except that such definition shall not include: 
(1)  A system which serves fewer than 20 subscribers; 
(2)  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
(3)  A facility which serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership, control or management unless such facility or facilities use any public right-of-way; 
(4)  A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 USC 201 et seq., except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; 
(5)  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric systems; or 
(6)  Any portion of a system that serves fewer than 50 subscribers in the Town where such portion is a part of a larger system franchised in an adjacent county, city or town. 
Council means the Town Council of the Town of Vienna. 
County means the County of Fairfax, Virginia, for the purposes of submitting and processing a franchise application for the operation of an integrated cable television system serving both the Town and county, and for so long as a grantee holds a franchise from both the Town and the county serving both jurisdictions with one integrated cable television system. If the grantee's cable television serves or should ever come to serve only the Town, the term "county" or "County of Fairfax" shall be synonymous with the term "Town." 
Fair market value means the price which property will bring when it is offered for sale by one who desires, but is not obligated, to sell it and is bought by one who is under no necessity of having it. 
Federal Communications Commission or FCC means that federal agency as presently constituted by the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, or any successor agency. 
Franchise means the non-exclusive initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the Town which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable television system for the term specified in section 24-7 along the public ways in the Town, or within specified areas in the Town, and is not intended to include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the Town as may be required by other ordinances and laws of the Town. 
Grantee means the natural person, domestic or foreign corporation, partnership, limited liability company, association, joint venture or organization of any kind granted a franchise by the council under this chapter and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee. 
Gross revenues means those revenues derived from the supplying of regular subscriber service, monthly or periodic charges for service, installation fees and reconnect fees, revenues derived from per-program or per-channel charges, leased channel revenues, advertising revenues, and any other revenues received by the grantee, its employees, agents, successors, assignees, and lessees for cable television service rendered by the system within the Town. 
Immediate family includes the spouse and every other relative living in a person's household. 
Interest, as that term is used in section 24-44, includes any relationship, whether by ownership, employment, gift, fee, or otherwise; whether present, promised, or reasonably expected; whether direct or indirect; whether legal or equitable; whether actual or beneficial; from or because of which a person, his immediate family or his business associates have received financial benefit or have a right of reasonable expectation, whether or not legally enforceable, whether vested or contingent, to receive financial benefit in the future, directly or indirectly. 
Net profit means the amount remaining after deducting from gross revenues all of the actual, direct and indirect, expenses associated with operating the cable television system including the franchise fee, interest, depreciation and federal or state income taxes. 
Officer or employee includes members of the council, the cable television administrator, members of the county consumer protection commission, members of any franchise evaluation committee, all officers and directors of any consulting firm hired by the Town or county for cable television purposes and any other persons designated by ordinance. 
Public way means the surface, the air space above the surface, and area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive or other public right-of-way, and any temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now or hereafter held by the Town which shall entitle the Town and the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing and maintaining the grantee's cable television system. 
Rate regulated services means basic cable service, all equipment provided by a cable operator to a subscriber's home which is used to receive basic cable service, regardless of whether such equipment is used to receive other regulated or unregulated services, and the installation of all equipment which is used to receive basic cable service. Such equipment shall include, but is not limited to, converter boxes, remote control units, connections for additional television receivers and other cable home wiring. 
Regular subscriber service means the distribution to subscribers of signals over a cable television system on all channels except those for which a per-program or per-channel charge is made, two-way services, and those intended for reception by equipment other than a television broadcast receiver. 
Service tier means a category of cable service or other services provided by a grantee's cable television system and for which a separate rate is charged by the grantee. 
Subscriber means any member of the general public who receives or contracts with a grantee to receive the regular subscriber service and/or any one or more of such other services as may be provided by the grantee's cable television system, and does not further distribute such service. 
Video programming means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station. 
(Code 1969, § 24-3; Ord. of 10-20-1980; Ord. of 12-7-1981; Ord. of 2-7-1994)  
ARTICLE 3. - GRANT OF AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 24-4. - Requirement of a franchise. 
No person shall construct, install, maintain or operate a cable television system within the confines of a public way in the Town, or within the confines of any other public property of the Town, unless a franchise has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. 
(Code 1969, § 24-4; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-5. - Franchise applications. 
(a)  One or more non-exclusive franchises may be granted, by ordinance, to those applicants which in the council's judgment may best serve the public interests. No provision of this chapter shall be deemed to be construed as to require the council to grant a franchise. 
(b)  An application for a cable television franchise shall be submitted to the council, or its designee, on a written application form or forms furnished or prescribed by the Town or its designee and in accordance with procedures and schedules to be established by the Town or its designee. Application forms may request facts and information the Town or its designee deems appropriate. Applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of $200.00 to the order of the "Town of Vienna," which amount shall be used by the Town to offset direct expenses incurred in the franchising and evaluation procedures including, but not limited to, Town staff time, consulting assistance, and county staff time requested by the Town. 
(c)  An applicant (grantee) to whom the council grants one or more non-exclusive franchises shall, in addition to the nonrefundable fee specified hereinabove, pay to the Town at the time the grantee files the written instrument specified in section 24-39, an amount not to exceed $1,000.00; said payment shall be nonrefundable, shall be made to the order of the "Town of Vienna" and shall be used to offset any direct costs incurred by the Town in granting the franchise not defrayed by fees forthcoming from the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 1969, § 24-5; Ord. of 10-20-1980; Ord. of 12-7-1981)  
Sec. 24-5.1. - Financial expense report. 
(a)  Every person submitting an application for a cable television franchise shall, simultaneously with the submission of the application, provide the Town with a complete statement of application expenses incurred up to the 30th day prior to the filing of any application. 
(b)  Every person submitting an application for a cable television franchise shall, on or before the 30th day following the filing of an application for a cable television franchise, provide the Town with a disclosure of application expenses incurred by the applicant for the period beginning on the 30th day prior to the filing of the application and ending at the close of business on the day of the filing of the application. 
(c)  Every person submitting an application for a cable television franchise shall, on or before the 90th day following the filing of an application for a franchise, provide the Town with a disclosure of such additional application expenses incurred by the applicant for the period beginning on the day following the filing of the application and ending on the 60th day following the filing of the application. 
(d)  Every person submitting an application for a cable television franchise shall provide the Town with a disclosure of application expenses incurred for each 60-day period following the filing of the application, and such disclosure shall be submitted to the Town on or before the 30th day following the close of each 60-day period. 
(e)  The disclosures described in subsections (a) through (d) of this section shall be in writing. Each item of expenses shall indicate the payer, payee, amount of payment, and the date of payment. A payment of money need not be itemized if the payments to the payee do not exceed $100.00 during any reporting period. Until the Town shall have rejected an application or until an applicant withdraws its application, every person submitting an application shall provide the Town with the disclosures described in this section. Failure to provide the disclosures described in this section shall be an offense. 
(Code 1969, § 24-5.1; Ord. of 10-20-1980; Ord. of 12-7-1981)  
Sec. 24-5.2. - Applicant representatives. 
Any person who files an application with the Town for a cable television franchise shall forthwith, at all times, disclose to the Town, in writing, the names, addresses and occupations of all persons who are authorized to represent or act on behalf of the applicant in those matters pertaining to the application. The requirement to make the disclosure described in this section shall continue until the Town shall have rejected an applicant's application, or until an applicant withdraws its application. Failure of any person to provide the written disclosures required by this section shall constitute an offense. 
(Code 1969, § 24-5.2; Ord. of 10-20-1980; Ord. of 12-7-1981)  
ARTICLE 4. - CABLE TELEVISION ADMINISTRATOR 
 
Sec. 24-6. - Cable television administrator; powers and responsibilities. 
A.  Day-to-day administration of cable television operations within the Town may be assigned to a cable television administrator. The administrator's powers and responsibilities may include, but need not be limited to, the following functions: 
(1)  Preparing invitations to bid for a franchise; establishing criteria for review and ranking of franchise applications; reviewing and evaluating applications for franchises and making selection recommendations to the Town Council. 
(2)  Monitoring the timely performance of grantee in making application for and obtaining all certificates, permits and agreements as provided for in this chapter. 
(3)  Monitoring the performance of grantee in meeting the construction timetable as provided for in this chapter. 
(4)  Advising and making recommendations to the council, through the Town Manager, on matters which may constitute grounds for revocation of a franchise or in the imposition of other penalties in accordance with this chapter. 
(5)  Monitoring and reviewing changes in, additions to, or reductions of subscriber fees and rates for conformity to the stipulations of this chapter and advising and making recommendations to the council, through the Town Manager, on the regulation of rates in accordance with this chapter. 
(6)  Advising and making recommendations to the Town Council, through the Town Manager, on technical, engineering, and police power regulations of CATV operations within the Town. 
(7)  Cooperating with other systems, cable television system operators, and governmental units in the development of and in the supervision of the interconnection of systems. 
(8)  Reviewing all franchise records and reports as required by this chapter as well as all franchise reports filed with the FCC and other agencies of state and local governments, and, in the administrator's discretion, require the preparation and filing of information in addition to that required therein, as may reasonably be required to accomplish the purposes of this chapter. 
(9)  Monitoring performance of grantee under any other terms of the franchise agreements and this chapter and making recommendations to the council, through the Town Manager, to ensure such compliance. 
(10)  Making an annual report to the Town Council, through the Town Manager, which shall include an account of franchise fees received, and a review of any plans submitted during the year by the grantee for development of new services in the Town. 
(11)  Conducting evaluations of the systems at least every three years, and pursuant thereto, making recommendations to the council, through the Town Manager, for amendments to this chapter or to the franchise agreement. 
(12)  Receiving and investigating complaints against grantee by any person or upon direction of the Town Council. 
(13)  Seeking recovery, with the assistance of or through appropriate legal counsel and other officers, if necessary, of liquidated damages in accordance with this chapter. 
(14)  Advising grantee of the receipt of subscriber complaints affecting the grantee's system. 
(15)  Taking steps necessary to administer the rate regulatory provisions of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-385, including the establishment of administrative rules and procedures which are consistent with applicable Federal Communications Commission Regulations, and to exercise that authority granted to the administrator by the council. 
B.  In addition to the powers and responsibilities set forth in subsection A of this section, the cable television administrator shall have authority to act on written notice from a cable television operator for any change in the price to be charged to a subscriber for inflationary and external cost adjustments as permitted by 47 CFR 76.922 and 76.923 (hereinafter "automatic adjustment"). The cable television administrator shall act on a notice of proposed automatic adjustment within 30 days of receipt of that notice or within such other time as may be allowed by the FCC. The cable television administrator shall notify the council through the Town Manager whenever notice of a proposed automatic adjustment is received, and any action taken by the cable television administrator on an automatic adjustment shall be reported to the council in the same manner. If any such notice of automatic adjustment is in strict compliance with applicable federal regulations, the cable television administrator shall approve the proposed automatic adjustment. If any such notice of automatic adjustment is not in strict compliance with applicable federal regulations, the cable television administrator shall approve that portion of the change that qualifies as an automatic adjustment and shall refer the balance of the proposed automatic adjustment to the council for consideration in accordance with section 24-20 as an application to amend the schedule of rate regulated services. 
(Code 1969, § 24-6; Ord. of 10-20-1980; Ord. of 12-7-1981; Ord. of 2-7-1994; Ord. of 7-7-1997)  
Sec. 24-6.1. - Advisory bodies to the council. 
The consumer protection commission of the county may, as directed by the council, advise and inform the council on any and issues relating to cable telecommunications, including, but not limited to, issues related to rate regulated services. 
(Code 1969, § 24-6.1; Ord. of 2-7-1994)  
ARTICLE 5. - FRANCHISE CONDITIONS 
 
Sec. 24-7. - Franchise term. 
The term of an original franchise shall be 15 years from the date the franchise is accepted by the grantee. The term of a renewed franchise shall be no more than 15 years. 
(Code 1969, § 24-7; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-8. - Notice to grantee. 
The council shall not take final action at any meeting of the council involving the review, renewal, amendment, or revocation of a grantee's franchise unless the Town has given the grantee at least 21 days' written notice of such meeting. The notice shall advise the grantee of the meeting's time, place and proposed action affecting the grantee. 
(Code 1969, § 24-8; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-9. - Franchise review. 
It shall be the policy of the Town to amend a franchise, upon application of a grantee, the recommendation of a cable television administrator, or upon the council's own motion, when necessary or advisable to enable the grantee to take advantage of advancements in the state-of-the-art which will afford it an opportunity to more effectively, efficiently, or economically serve its subscribers or the Town, and/or such other reasonable purposes as the council deems appropriate; provided that this section shall not be construed to require the Town to make any amendment for such purposes. 
(Code 1969, § 24-9; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-10. - Franchise renewal. 
(a)  The council may adopt a resolution setting forth the time and place of a council meeting to be publicly announced, the purpose of which will be to review the grantee's performance during the entire term of its franchise, to consider the adequacy of the franchise from the standpoint of the Town, the grantee, and the Federal Communications Commission Rules of Cable Television, and to determine the advisability of renewing the grantee's franchise. 
(b)  The council may hear interested persons during said council meeting and may determine whether the grantee did reasonably comply with the terms and conditions imposed by this chapter and the franchise. 
(c)  If the council determines that the grantee has been in reasonable compliance with the terms and conditions imposed by this chapter and the franchise, the council may, by ordinance, renew the grantee's franchise, with any modifications it deems desirable, for a period of time not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. The council may require a grantee to pay, as a condition of renewal of the franchise, an amount which the council determines will compensate the Town for those direct expenses above normal administrative costs incurred in connection with the renewal of the franchise. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the fact that the council may determine that the grantee has been in reasonable compliance with the terms and conditions imposed by this chapter and the franchise, it shall have the right not to renew the franchise. If the council does not renew the franchise, the council shall have an option to the extent then permitted by existing law, to acquire the assets of the grantee's cable television system located within the Town, or the option to permit a succeeding grantee to acquire such assets. The amount paid for such assets shall be the fair market value of the system as of the expiration date of the franchise. The grantee shall be entitled to no payment by reason of the value of the franchise. (Code of Virginia, § 15.1-307) The council's option to acquire such assets of the grantee or to permit a succeeding grantee to acquire such assets must be exercised within one year from the date of expiration. 
(Code 1969, § 24-10; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-11. - Franchise revocation procedure. 
(a)  Whenever a grantee shall refuse, neglect, or otherwise fail to construct, operate or maintain its cable television system in accordance with the terms of this chapter and the franchise or to comply with the conditions of occupancy of any public lands, or to make required extensions of service, or willfully or knowingly make false statements on or in connection with its franchise application, or in any other way violate the terms and conditions of this chapter, the franchise, or any rule or regulation adopted thereunder, or substantially violates any provision of the Virginia Consumer Protection Act of 1977, as amended, or if a grantee becomes insolvent, or unable to or unwilling to pay its debts, or seeks or obtains relief or is involuntarily placed under the bankruptcy laws, then, as may otherwise be permitted by law, the franchise may be revoked. 
(b)  In the event that the cable television administrator believes that grounds for revocation exist or have existed, the cable television administrator may notify the grantee, in writing, setting forth the nature and facts of such noncompliance. If within 30 days following such written notification by the cable television administrator the grantee has not furnished proof that corrective action has been taken or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, or evidence that the alleged violations did not occur, or that the alleged violations were beyond the grantee's control, the cable television administrator shall thereupon refer the matter to the Town Council through the mayor. 
(c)  The council may revoke a franchise pursuant to subsection (a) of this section by ordinance. 
(d)  The council shall not adopt an ordinance pursuant to subsection (c) of this section until it has given notice to the grantee that it proposes to adopt such an ordinance and the grounds therefor. Further, the council shall not adopt such an ordinance until the grantee, or its representative, has had reasonable opportunity to be heard before the council and show that the proposed grounds for revocation did not or do not exist as the case may be. 
(e)  A grantee shall not be subject to the sanctions of this section for any act or omission wherein such act or omission was not willful or was beyond the grantee's control. An act or omission shall not be deemed to be beyond a grantee's control if committed, omitted, or caused by a corporation or other business entity which holds a substantial or a controlling interest in the grantee, whether held directly or indirectly. Further, the inability of a grantee to obtain financing, for whatever reason, shall not be an act or omission which is "not willful" or "beyond the grantee's control." 
(f)  In the event that a franchise has been revoked by the council, the council shall have an option to the extent then permitted by existing law to either purchase the tangible assets of the grantee's cable television system in the Town previously governed by the franchise or assign such rights to purchase. Such an option must be exercised within one year from the date of revocation of the franchise, or the entry of the final judgment by a court reviewing the question of the council's revocation, or the entry of a final order upon appeal of same, whichever is later. 
(g)  The termination of a grantee's rights under a franchise shall in no way affect any other rights the Town may have under the franchise or under any provision of law. 
(Code 1969, § 24-11; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-12. - Arbitrary and capricious action by grantee. 
If a grantee arbitrarily or capriciously discontinues service to a substantial number of its subscribers, the grantee's franchise may be revoked by a resolution of the council following notice to the grantee and an opportunity to be heard. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 24-8, notice to the grantee under this section may be less than 21 days. Provided further, the Town may seek appropriate judicial or other relief and/or the Town may proceed to exercise its rights and powers as provided for herein. 
(Code 1969, § 24-12; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-13. - Provision for arbitration. 
In the event the Town elects to purchase a grantee's cable television system, or any of its assets located within the Town, and the fair market value cannot be agreed upon, the final price shall be determined by a panel of arbitrators. The panel shall be composed of one arbitrator chosen by the Town, one arbitrator chosen by the grantee, and a third arbitrator chosen by the first two. The expenses of the arbitration, including the fees of the arbitrators, shall be borne by the parties in such manner as the arbitrators provide in their award, but in no event will the Town be obligated for more than one-half the expenses. The determination of a majority of the arbitrators shall be binding on the parties. The arbitrators shall follow the rules and procedures of the American Arbitration Association except where in conflict with an express provision of this chapter. The arbitration hearing shall take place in Vienna, Virginia, unless otherwise agreed to by the parties in writing. 
(Code 1969, § 24-13; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-14. - Transfer of ownership to Town. 
(a)  In those circumstances provided for in this chapter where the Town shall have the right to purchase ownership of a grantee's cable television system or any of its assets located within the Town, the Town may give notice that it elects to exercise such right and the Town may acquire such assets, at the option of the Town, at one of the following times: 
(i)  At the time of giving notice of election of its right to purchase (in which case the assets shall automatically transfer to the Town); 
(ii)  At any time specified by the Town subsequent to the giving of notice of its election of its right to purchase (in which case, the assets shall automatically transfer to the Town at such subsequent time); or 
(iii)  At the time of payment of the fair market value thereof. 
Unless the notice of election by the Town specifically exercises a right described in subsection (a)(i) or (ii) of this section, subsection (a)(iii) of this section applies, and the question of fair market value has been submitted to arbitration, the Town may affirmatively accept the award of the arbitrators within 90 days after the rendering of the arbitrators' decision within the aforesaid 90-day period, the rights of the Town to purchase shall expire. 
(b)  In those circumstances provided for in this chapter wherein the Town shall have the right to purchase ownership of a grantee's cable television system, or any of its assets located within the Town, no question of fair market value shall be submitted to arbitration until 120 days have lapsed from the giving of such notice. Thereafter, either a grantee or the Town may submit the matter to arbitration. 
(c)  If any time lapses between the time of transfer of assets and the time of payment therefor, the grantee shall be entitled to interest during the interim at the rate of eight percent per annum. 
(Code 1969, § 24-14; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-15. - Town's right to assign. 
A franchise shall not limit the right of the Town to assign its rights to acquire any or all of the assets of a grantee's cable television system located within the Town. 
(Code 1969, § 24-15; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-16. - Grantee's obligation as trustee. 
(a)  At all times from the expiration or revocation of a franchise and until either: 
(1)  A grantee transfers to the Town or other succeeding operator of the system all of its rights, title and interest to all assets, real and personal, related to its cable television system in the Town; or 
(2)  The Town's right to either acquire or assign its rights to acquire any of the grantee's assets expires without the Town having exercised such a right, whichever occurs first, the grantee shall have a duty to the Town and such successor and the grantee shall not sell any of the system assets nor shall the grantee make any physical, material, or administrative operational changes that would tend to degrade the quality of service to the subscribers, decrease gross revenues, or materially increase expenses without the expressed permission, in writing, of the Town or its assigns. The grantee shall at all times operate the system in accordance with terms of this chapter and the terms of the franchise as if the franchise had not expired or had not been revoked. 
(b)  In the event of expiration or revocation of a franchise, this section shall not be construed to give a grantee any vested or other franchise right, but the right of the grantee in such circumstances shall exist only on a day-to-day basis until the transfer is effected. 
(c)  For its management services during this interim period as a trustee, the grantee shall be entitled to receive as compensation the net profit, as defined herein, generated during the period between the expiration or revocation of the franchise, as the case may be, and the transfer of the grantee's assets to the Town or a successor. 
(d)  Further, this section shall in no way limit the power of the Town, upon expiration or revocation of a franchise, to require the grantee to cease all operations whatsoever and/or remove its facilities, or otherwise exercise any rights the Town would otherwise have. 
(Code 1969, § 24-16; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-17. - Franchise fee. 
(a)  A grantee, in consideration of the privilege granted under a franchise for the operation of a cable television system, shall build a cable television system in accordance with the terms of its franchise and shall pay to the Town a percentage of its annual gross revenues during the period of operation under the franchise. The percentage to be paid shall be the lesser of either the maximum amount permitted under federal or state law, or the percentage of its annual gross revenues in accordance with the following schedule and formula: 
Level of Penetration 
(%) 	Percentage of Annual Gross Revenue 

(%) 
Less than 40 	5 
40 and greater and less than 55 	Percentage of Annual Gross Revenue = 
Penetration (%) - 8.3 
	3 
55 and greater 	10 
 
For the purposes of determining the percentage of annual gross revenue payable to the Town, penetration shall be defined as the ratio of the number of housing units in the franchise area subscribing to cable television to the total number of housing units in the franchising area. The number of housing units subscribing to cable television service shall be provided by the grantee and shall be the greatest number of subscribing housing units during the current calendar year. The total number of housing units in the Town shall be provided by the Town Manager and shall be the number of housing units existing on January 1 of the calendar year immediately preceding the year in which the franchise fee payment is due. A grantee shall, at all times, have the duty to forthwith take all steps and do all things that may be necessary and/or proper to relieve itself and the Town from any limitations which may exist under law including, but not limited to, applying for waivers of franchise fee limitations, etc. 
(b)  A grantee shall file with the Town, within 30 days after the expiration of each of the grantee's fiscal quarters, a financial statement clearly showing the gross revenues received by grantee for services within the Town during the preceding quarter. Payment of the quarterly portion of the franchise fee shall be made to the Town within the above-mentioned 30 days, at or before the time such financial statement is filed. A grantee shall also file, within 120 days following the conclusion of the grantee's fiscal year, the grantee's financial statements for that year, examined and reported on by an independent public accountant, certified in the commonwealth. The cost of such audit shall be borne by the grantee. 
(c)  The Town shall have the right, consistent with the provisions of section 24-21(b), to inspect a grantee's income records, the right of audit and the right to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this chapter. Any additional amounts due the Town, as indicated by the audit, plus interest as specified in subsection (d) of this section, shall be paid to the Town forthwith. 
(d)  In the event that any franchise payment is not made on or before the applicable dates heretofore specified, interest shall be charged from such due date at an annual rate of interest permitted by law. In the event that any franchise payment (or payments) totaling $5,000.00 or more is not paid by the due date, then interest shall accrue to the Town at a rate equal to the interest rate then chargeable for unpaid federal income taxes (26 USC 6221). In addition to the foregoing, the failure of the grantee to make a timely payment (as defined by Code of Virginia, § 6.1-330.26) of any amount shall subject the grantee to an additional late charge of five percent of the amount of such payment. 
(e)  In the event a franchise is revoked prior to its expiration date, the grantee shall file with the Town, within 30 days of the date of revocation, a financial statement clearly showing the gross revenues received by the grantee for services within the Town since the end of the previous fiscal quarter and shall pay within that time the franchise fees accrued as of the date of revocation. 
(Code 1969, § 24-17; Ord. of 10-20-1980; Ord. of 12-7-1981)  
Sec. 24-18. - Insurance; bond; indemnity. 
(a)  At the time of filing an application for a franchise, the applicant shall obtain, pay all premiums for, and deliver to the Town written evidence of payment of premiums and originals of bid bond or bonds running to the Town with good and sufficient sureties in the amount of $50,000.00 and in a form acceptable to the Town to protect the Town from all damages or losses arising from the failure of the applicant, if selected as a grantee, to accept the franchise in conformity with this chapter and the substance of the proposal as submitted by the applicant. 
(b)  Upon the granting of a franchise, and following simultaneously with the filing of the acceptance required under section 24-39, and at all times during the term of the franchise, including the time for removal of facilities or management as a trustee as provided for herein, the grantee shall obtain, pay all premiums for, and deliver to the Town written evidence of payment of premiums for and originals of the following: 
1.  A general comprehensive public liability policy indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the Town, its officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees from any and all claims by any person whatsoever (including the costs, defenses, attorney fees and interest arising therefrom) on account of injury to or death of a person occasioned by the operations of the grantee under the franchise herein granted, or alleged to have been so caused or occurred, with a minimum liability of $1,000,000.00 per personal injury or death of any one person and $2,000,000.00 for personal injury or death of any two or more persons in any one occurrence. 
2.  A property damage insurance policy or policies indemnifying, defending, and saving harmless the Town, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees from and against all claims by any person whatsoever (including the costs, defenses, attorney fees and interest arising therefrom) for property damage occasioned by the operation of the grantee under the franchise herein granted, or alleged to have been so caused or occurred, with a minimum liability of $500,000.00 for property damage to the property of any one person and $1,000,000.00 for property damage to the property of two or more persons in any one occurrence. 
3.  Copyright infringement insurance, indemnifying, defending, and saving harmless the Town, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees from and against all claims of any person whatsoever (including the costs, defenses, attorney fees and interest arising therefrom) for copyright infringement occasioned by the operation of the grantee under the franchise herein granted or alleged to have been caused or occurred with a minimum liability of $1,000,000.00 for the infringement of said copyrights. 
4.  A performance bond running to the Town with good and sufficient surety approved by the county in the sum of $250,000.00 conditioned upon the faithful performance and discharge of the obligations imposed by this chapter and the franchise awarded hereunder from the date thereof including, but not limited to, faithful compliance with the construction timetable proposed by the grantee in its application as incorporated into the franchise. Within six months of the filing of the acceptance required under section 24-39, or prior to the commencement of construction, whichever time is earlier, the amount of the performance bond or bonds hereinabove shall be increased to the sum of $500,000.00. The amount of the bond may be reduced to $250,000.00 when regular subscriber service is available to more than 50 percent of the occupied dwelling units within the primary service area, as described in section 24-23, as certified by the cable television administrator to the council; and may be further reduced to the sum of $50,000.00 when regular subscriber service is available to more than 90 percent of the occupied dwelling units within the primary service area, as certified by the cable television administrator to the council. The Town's right to recover under the bond shall be in addition to any other rights retained by the Town under this chapter and other applicable law. 
(c)  All bonds and insurance policies called for herein shall be in a form satisfactory to the Town attorney. The Town may at any time, if it deems itself insecure, require a grantee to provide additional sureties to any and all bonds or to replace existing bonds with new bonds with good and sufficient surety approved by the Town. No bond or insurance policy shall be cancelable. Insurance policies written for a period of less than the term of the franchise shall be renewed at least 60 days before a policy's expiration and the renewed policies and evidence of premium payments shall be delivered forthwith to the Town. 
(d)  A grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify and hold harmless the Town, its officials, boards, commissions, agents and employees against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings, and judgments for damage arising out of the operation of the cable television system under the franchise. These damages shall include, but not be limited to, penalties arising out of copyright infringements and damages arising out of any failure by a grantee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors or licensees of programs to be delivered by the grantee's cable television system whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by the franchise. Indemnified expenses shall include, but not be limited to, all out-of-pocket expenses, such as costs and attorney fees, and shall also include the reasonable value of any services rendered by the Town attorney or his assistants, any employees of the Town or any employee or agent of the county who performs services for the Town or for both the county and the Town, as well as such damages as may be awarded by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(e)  No grantee shall permit any policy or bond to expire or approach less than 30 days prior to expiration without securing and delivering to the Town a substitute, renewal or replacement policy or bond in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(f)  The Town may require bonds and insurance policies described in this section to run to the benefit of both the Town and other governmental units also served by the cable television system. 
(Code 1969, § 24-18; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-19. - Transfer of franchise. 
(a)  The franchise granted under this chapter shall be a privilege to be held in personal trust by the grantee. It shall not be assigned, transferred, sold or disposed of, in whole or in part, by voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise or by forced or involuntary sale, without prior consent of the Town expressed by ordinance and then on only such conditions as may therein be prescribed. The Town is hereby empowered to take legal or equitable action to set aside, annul, revoke, or cancel the franchise, or the transfer of the franchise, if said transfer is not made according to the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  Any sale, transfer or assignment of a franchise shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and shall be made in writing, an executed copy of which shall be filed with the cable television administrator within 30 days after such sale, transfer or assignment. The Town shall not withhold its consent unreasonably; provided, however, the proposed assignee must agree to comply with all the provisions of this chapter, the franchise, and reasonable amendments thereto, and must be able to provide proof of financial, operational, and character qualifications as determined by the council; provided further, however, that failure of the grantee to have constructed at least 25 percent of the system may be reason to refuse consent for the transfer of the franchise. 
(c)  No such consent shall be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage, or other instrument of hypothecation, in whole or in part, to secure an indebtedness except when such hypothecation shall exceed 75 percent of the fair market value of the property used by the grantee in the operation of its cable television system and except where the funds from the indebtedness are to be used for purposes other than the construction of the cable television system required to be provided by the franchise granted under the terms of this chapter. Prior consent of the council, expressed by resolution, shall be required for such transfer and said consent shall not be withheld unreasonably. This subsection shall not apply to a transfer resulting from a foreclosure or default in the conditions of such indebtedness. 
(d)  Prior approval of the council shall be required where ownership or control of 50 percent or more of the right to control of the grantee is acquired in any transaction or series of transactions by a person, group of persons, or partnerships, firms or corporation or combinations thereof acting in concert, none of whom already own or control 50 percent or more of such right of control, singularly or collectively. By its acceptance of a franchise, a grantee shall specifically grant and agree that any such acquisition occurring without prior approval of the council shall constitute a violation of the franchise by the grantee. 
(e)  The consent of the council to any sale, transfer, lease, trust, mortgage or other instrument of hypothecation shall not constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the Town under this chapter and the franchise. 
(Code 1969, § 24-19; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
ARTICLE 6. - SUBSCRIBER FEES AND RECORDS 
 
Sec. 24-20. - Subscriber fees. 
(a)  To the extent allowed by law, the council shall regulate subscriber rates and charges for rate regulated services. Except as otherwise provided herein, all rates and charges for rate regulated services shall be approved by the council. In establishing such rates and charges, the council shall comply with the Rate Regulatory Rules and Procedures adopted by the Federal Communications Commission pursuant to 47 USC 543(b). Provided, however, proposals for automatic adjustments which are in strict compliance with 47 CFR 76.922(d) may be implemented after review and approval by the cable television administrator in accordance with the procedure set forth in section 24-6. 
(b)  All charges to subscribers shall be consistent with a schedule of rates and charges for all services offered by a grantee. Except as otherwise provided by the council, any change in the schedule of rates and charges shall not take effect until at least 60 days after approval. In addition, no change in rates or charges will be implemented unless each subscriber subject to such change in rates and charges has been notified of the change at least 60 days in advance of the change. In lieu of grantee providing 60 days' written notice to each subscriber subject to the change, such notification may be cablecast to subscribers by grantee in a manner approved by the cable television administrator, but in the event a cablecast notice is provided to subscribers, grantee also shall give each subscriber subject to the change written notice of the change no less than 30 days before the change is implemented. In addition, the grantee shall provide oral or written notification of any pending changes to rates and charges to any person who requests cable television service or becomes a subscriber after any approval of changes to rates and charges but before the rate change becomes effective. 
(c)  Except as may be otherwise provided in a franchise, a grantee shall not, with regard to rates or charges, discriminate or grant any preference or advantage to any person; provided, however, that the grantee with the approval of the council may establish different rates for different classes of subscribers based upon cost of service differentials, provided that the grantee shall not discriminate between any subscribers of the same class. 
(d)  A grantee shall have the right to adjust its rates or charges to recover additional costs for copyright royalty payments in accordance with the procedure set forth in section 24-6. Such additional costs shall be limited to those costs imposed as a result of changes in royalty payments made pursuant to an action of the Royalty Tribunal (17 USC 801 et seq.), or similar tribunal, or judicial actions affecting the validity of tribunal actions. The changes or actions described in the preceding sentence shall be limited to changes or actions which have occurred since the filing of the grantee's application for its franchise. 
(e)  Grantee shall notify in writing each subscriber of all applicable fees and charges for providing cable television service prior to executing a contract of service with such subscriber or installing any equipment to serve such subscriber. 
(f)  A grantee may, for promotional purposes, at its own discretion, waive, reduce or suspend connection fees or service fees for a period of up to 90 days, except as may be otherwise approved by the cable television administrator. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit a grantee from offering free connections for a 30-day period to any new subscriber in an area where cable service is being offered for the first time as a result of construction or extension of a cable television system. 
(g)  Except as may be otherwise provided in a franchise, a subscriber shall have the right to have cable television service terminated without charge. A subscriber shall not be charged for cable television service for more than two business days following the subscriber's notice of termination to the grantee. No grantee shall enter into any agreement with a subscriber which imposes any charge following disconnection of service except for reconnection and subsequent monthly or periodic charges, and those charges shall be no greater than charges for new customers. This section shall not prevent a grantee from refusing service to any person because the grantee's prior accounts with that person remain due and owing. 
(h)  Except as may be otherwise provided in a franchise, a grantee may offer service which requires advance payments of periodic service charges for no more than one year in advance subject to the conditions contained in this subsection. A customer shall have the right, at any time, to have service disconnected without charge and with a refund of unused service charges paid to the customer within 30 days from the date of service disconnection. Refund shall be made on a pro-rata basis. Rate increases shall not be effective with respect to any subscriber until after the expiration of any period for which advance payment has been accepted by the grantee. 
(i)  A grantee shall, at least 30 days prior to the date it intends to terminate service to any subscriber because of the reason of nonpayment of subscriber fees, notify such subscriber in writing of such intention, the reason therefor and the date such termination is to be effective. 
(Code 1969, § 24-20; Ord. of 10-20-1980; Ord. of 12-7-1981; Ord. of 2-7-1994; Ord. of 7-7-1997)  
Sec. 24-21. - Books and records. 
(a)  A grantee shall: 
(1)  Within 30 days following the acceptance of a franchise; 
(2)  At least yearly thereafter; and 
(3)  Within 30 days of the change of ownership of three percent or more of the outstanding stock or equivalent ownership interest of a grantee; 
furnish the Town a list showing the names and addresses of persons owning three percent or more of the outstanding stock or equivalent ownership interest of the grantee. Such a list shall include a roster of the grantee's officers and directors (or equivalent managerial personnel) and their addresses. 
(b)  A grantee shall maintain books and records of its operations within the Town to show the following in sufficient detail, consistent with generally accepted accounting principles: 
1.  Total revenues, by service category. 
2.  Operating expenses categorized by general and administrative expenses; technical expenses; programming expenses; and overhead where applicable. 
3.  Capital expenditures, to include capitalized interest and overhead, if any. 
4.  Depreciation expenses, by category. 
(c)  A grantee shall retain such books and records, of any reasonable form, for a period of not less than 15 years. The Town shall have the right to extend the retention period through the term of any renewed franchise. 
(d)  The books and records of a grantee's operation within the Town shall be made available in the grantee's offices within the county during normal business hours for inspection and audit by the Town or the county or their designate within a reasonable period of time not to exceed 30 days after such request has been made by the Town. 
(e)  Copies of grantee's schedule of charges, contract or application forms for regular subscriber service, policy regarding the processing of subscriber complaints, delinquent subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures, and any other terms and conditions adopted as the grantee's policy in connection with its subscribers shall be filed with the Town and conspicuously posted in the grantee's local office. 
(Code 1969, § 24-21; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
ARTICLE 7. - SYSTEM OPERATIONS 
 
Sec. 24-22. - Franchise areas. 
Applications for a franchise will be received by the Town pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 24-22; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-23. - Primary service area. 
The entire Town is denominated as the primary service area. 
(Code 1969, § 24-23; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-24. - Interconnection and cooperation. 
(a)  Except as prohibited by law, the Town by resolution may require a grantee to interconnect its cable television system with other cable television systems or other broadband communications facilities (e.g., a television communication network connecting public institutions or facilities) located within the Town. Such interconnection shall be made within 90 days of a request made by the Town Council pursuant to such a resolution, or within a longer period of time as may be specified by the council in its resolution. 
(b)  A grantee shall make every reasonable effort to cooperate with cable television franchise holders in contiguous communities in order to provide cable service in areas within the Town and county. 
(c)  The Town shall make every reasonable effort to cooperate with the franchising authorities in contiguous communities, and with the grantee in order to provide cable television service in areas outside the Town. 
(Code 1969, § 24-24; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-25. - System description and service. 
(a)  The cable television system to be installed by a grantee shall comply in all respects with the technical performance requirements set forth in the FCC's rules for cable television including applicable amendments thereto. If the FCC should delete said requirements or otherwise fail to pre-empt this area of regulation, the Town hereby reserves the right to amend this chapter to incorporate technical standards. 
(b)  Applications for a franchise may include proposals for the provision of public, education, local government, and leased access channels. Such proposals by a grantee may be incorporated into the franchise granted and, to the extent so incorporated, shall subject the grantee to the following minimum requirements: 
1.  The grantee shall have available equipment for local production and presentation of cablecast programs other than automated services and permit its use for the production and presentation of public access programs. The grantee shall not enter into any contract, arrangements, or lease for use of its cablecast equipment for a substantial portion of time for public access programming. 
2.  The grantee shall have no control over the content of access cablecast programs; however, this limitation shall not prevent taking appropriate steps to ensure compliance with the operating rules described herein. 
3.  The public access channel shall be made available to residents of the Town on a nondiscriminatory basis, free of charge. Charges for equipment, personnel, and production of public access programming shall be reasonable and consistent with the goal of affording users a low-cost means of television access. A grantee shall provide without charge such production facilities and personnel to enable users of the public access channels to reasonably produce television programs not exceeding 15 minutes' duration. A grantee shall without charge also provide the replay of users' supplied videotapes on the public access channel provided that such tapes do not exceed 15 minutes' duration. The grantee may require that such tapes be in a standard format compatible with the grantee's playback facilities. The grantee shall adopt operating rules for the public access channel, to be filed with the cable television administrator prior to the activation of the channel, designed to prohibit the presentation of any advertising material designed to promote the sale of commercial products or services (including advertising by or on behalf of candidates for public office); lottery information; and obscene or indecent matter as well as a rule permitting public inspection of a complete record of the names and addresses of all persons and groups requesting access time. Such a record should be maintained for a period of two years. 
4.  The education access channel shall be made available for the use of local educational authorities free of charge. The grantee shall adopt operating rules for the education access channel designed to prohibit the presentation of any advertising material designed to promote the sale of commercial products or services (including advertising by or on behalf of candidates for public office); lottery information and obscene or indecent matter as well as a rule permitting public inspection of a complete record of the names and addresses of all persons or groups requesting access time. Such a record shall be retained for a period of two years. 
5.  The local government access channel shall be made available for the use of local government authorities free of charge. 
6.  The leased access channel shall be made available to leased users. Priority shall be given part-time users on at least one channel. The grantee shall adopt operating rules for the channel to be filed with the cable television administrator prior to activation of the channel designed to prohibit the presentation of lottery information, obscene or indecent matter and shall establish rules to this effect; and other rules requiring nondiscriminatory access, sponsorship identification, specifying an appropriate rate schedule and permitting public inspection of a complete record of the names and addresses of all persons or groups requesting time. Such a record shall be retained for a period of two years. 
(c)  A grantee shall provide without charge within the Town one service outlet activated for regular subscriber service to each fire station, public school, police station, public library, and such buildings used for public purposes as may be designated by the Town; provided, however, that if it is necessary to extend a grantee's trunk or feeder lines more than 300 feet solely to provide service to any such school or public building, the Town shall have the option either of paying the grantee's direct costs for such extension in excess of 300 feet, or constructing such extension in excess of 300 feet itself, or of releasing the grantee from or postponing the grantee's obligation to provide service to such building. Furthermore, a grantee shall be permitted to recover, from any public building owner entitled to free service, the grantee's actual cost of installing, when requested to do so, more than one outlet, or concealed inside wiring, or a service outlet requiring more than 250 feet of drop cable; provided, however, that the grantee shall not charge for the provision of regular subscriber service to the additional service outlets so installed in public schools, police stations, fire stations, public libraries, and county offices in addition to any such other facilities as are specified in the grantee's franchise. The grantee shall provide full operational capability to the service outlets in the Town in accordance with the construction schedule mandated by section 24-30, or in accordance with the construction schedule submitted with the grantee's proposal, whichever is earlier. 
(d)  The system shall be designed so that no more than two percent of the occupied dwelling units within the Town shall be more than nine air miles from a headend or distribution hub. 
(e)  A grantee shall not refuse cable television service to any person or organization who requests such service for lawful purposes. 
(f)  A grantee shall not permit the transmission of any programming under its control that is obscene or indecent. At the option of the subscriber, the grantee shall provide at cost a device capable of blocking out or otherwise disabling a television set from receiving those channels upon which the grantee imposes a charge based upon a per-program basis or a per-channel basis. This device shall be designed to permit a subscriber, by the use of a key or similar locking system, to prevent others who do not have a key from viewing or receiving the programs on the aforementioned channels. 
(Code 1969, § 24-25; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-26. - Operational requirements and records. 
(a)  A grantee shall construct, operate, and maintain the cable television system subject to full compliance with the rules and regulations including applicable amendments, of the Federal Communications Commission and all other applicable federal, state, county, or Town laws and regulations. The cable television system and all its parts shall be subject to inspection by the Town and the Town reserves the right to review a grantee's construction plans prior to commencement of construction. 
(b)  A grantee shall maintain an office within the county which shall be open and accessible to the public with adequate telephone service during normal business hours. A grantee shall employ an operator or maintain a telephone answering device 24 hours per day, each day of the year, to receive subscriber complaints. 
(c)  A grantee shall exercise its best effort to design, construct, operate, and maintain the system at all times so that signals carried are delivered to subscribers without material degradation in quality (within the limitations imposed by the technical state-of-the art). 
(d)  Copies of all correspondence, petitions, reports, applications and other documents sent or received by a grantee from federal or state agencies having appropriate jurisdiction in matters affecting cable television operation shall be promptly furnished by the grantee to the Town. 
(e)  In the case of any emergency or disaster, a grantee shall, upon request of the Town, make available its facilities to the Town or its agents or agencies for emergency use during the disaster period. The term "emergency" or "disaster" shall be limited to mean a "natural disaster," "manmade disaster," "major disaster," "state of emergency," and/or "local emergency" as defined in Code of Virginia, § 44-146.16. 
(Code 1969, § 24-26; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-27. - Tests and performance monitoring. 
(a)  Not later than 90 days after any new or substantially rebuilt portion of the system is made available for service to subscribers, technical performance tests shall be conducted by grantee to demonstrate full compliance with all technical standards including the technical standards of the Federal Communications Commission and section 24-26(c). Such tests shall be performed by or under the supervision of a registered professional engineer or an engineer with proper training and experience. A report of such tests shall be submitted to the Town describing test results, instrumentation, calibration, and test procedures, and the qualifications of the engineer responsible for the tests. 
(b)  System monitor test points shall be established at or near the output of the last amplifier in the longest feeder line, at or near trunk line extremities, and at locations to be specified in the franchise. Such periodic tests shall be made at the test points as shall be described by the cable television administrator. 
(c)  At any time after commencement of service to subscribers, the Town may require additional reasonable tests, including full or partial repeat tests, different test procedures, or tests involving a specific subscriber's terminal, at the grantee's expense to the extent such test may be performed by the grantee's employees utilizing its existing facilities and equipment; provided, however, that the Town reserves the right to conduct its own tests upon reasonable notice to the grantee; and if noncompliance is found, the expense thereof shall be borne by the grantee. The Town will endeavor to arrange its request for such special tests so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to a grantee or to subscribers. 
(d)  The Town shall have the same rights as the Federal Communications Commission has to inspect a grantee's performance test data. 
(e)  The Town shall have the right to employ qualified consultants if necessary or desirable to assist in the administration of this section or any other section of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 24-27; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-28. - Service, adjustment and complaint procedure. 
(a)  A grantee shall establish a maintenance service capable of promptly locating and correcting system malfunctions. Said maintenance service shall respond at all hours to correct system malfunctions affecting one or more percent of a grantee's total number of subscribers. 
(b)  A grantee shall maintain a listed local telephone number which shall be available to subscribers for service calls 24 hours per day. Corrective action shall be initiated by a grantee not later than the next business day after a service call is received, and corrective action shall be completed as promptly as practicable. Appropriate records shall be made of service calls showing when and what corrective action was completed. Such records shall be available to the Town during normal business hours and retained in grantee's files for not less than three years. Microfilm copies of such records shall satisfy the requirements of this section. A summary of such calls shall be prepared by the grantee and submitted to the cable television administrator annually in a form acceptable to the cable television administrator beginning 12 months after service is provided to the first subscriber. 
(c)  A grantee shall provide each subscriber, at the time service is first provided to the subscriber, written information which shall include: 
1.  Name, address, mailing address, and telephone number of the grantee's representative or representatives to whom the subscriber may submit consumer or service complaints. 
2.  Business address, mailing address, and telephone number of the cable television administrator to whom the subscriber may submit consumer or service complaints. 
(d)  The cable television administrator shall keep records of subscriber complaints for such lengths of time as may be required by the council. 
(e)  A grantee may interrupt system service after 7:00 a.m. and before 1:00 a.m. only with good cause and for the shortest time possible and, except in emergency situations, only after giving notice, reasonably calculated to reach subscribers, of service interruption at least 24 hours in advance of the service interruption. Service may be interrupted between 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. for routine testing, maintenance, and repair without notification except on Saturday, Sunday or a holiday. 
(Code 1969, § 24-28; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-29. - Street occupancy. 
(a)  A grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities whenever possible, and shall not construct or install any new, different, or additional poles, conduits, or other facilities whether on public property or on privately owned property until approval of the property owner or appropriate governmental authority is obtained. Approval of the Town shall not be unreasonably withheld. However, no location of any pole or wire-holding structure of a grantee shall be a vested interest; and such poles, structures, or facilities shall be removed, replaced or modified by a grantee at its own expense whenever the council or other governmental authority determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. 
(b)  Where the Town, other unit of government, or a public utility serving the Town desires to make use of the poles or other wire-holding structures of a grantee, but agreement therefor with the grantee cannot be reached, the council may require the grantee to permit such use for such consideration and upon such terms as the council shall determine to be just and reasonable if the council determines that the use would enhance the public convenience and would not unduly interfere with the grantee's operations. 
(c)  Unless otherwise regulated, all transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be so installed and located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of owners of property which adjoins or abuts a street, way, or other property upon which a grantee has placed its facilities and at all times such facilities shall be kept and maintained in a safe, adequate, and substantial condition, and in good order and repair. A grantee shall at all times employ at least reasonable care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other devices shall be used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the safety of all members of the public. Any poles or other fixtures placed in any public way by a grantee shall be placed in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on such public way. 
(d)  In those areas of the Town where electric and telephone utility lines have been placed underground, a grantee shall place its lines and installations underground. In areas where either telephone or electric utility facilities are above ground at the time of installation, the grantee may install its service above ground, provided that at such time as both of those facilities are placed underground, the grantee shall forthwith place its facilities underground, and the cost of same shall be paid by the grantee and no special charge shall be imposed upon any subscriber for such placing of facilities underground. 
(e)  In the event of disturbance of any road or private property by a grantee, it shall at its own expense and in a manner approved by the Town, other appropriate governmental authority, or the owner, as the case may be, replace and restore such road or private property in as good a condition as before the work causing such disturbance was done. In the event the grantee fails to perform such replacement or restoration within a reasonable time, the Town, other governmental authority, or the owner shall have the right to do so at the sole expense of the grantee. Payment to the Town, governmental authority, or owner for such replacement or restoration shall be upon demand. 
(f)  At the request of any person holding a valid building moving permit issued by the Town or any other government authority, if such a permit is required, and upon at least 48 hours' notice, grantee shall temporarily raise, lower, or cut its wires as may be necessary to facilitate such move. The direct expense of such temporary changes, including standby time, shall be paid by the permit holder, and grantee shall have the authority to require payment in advance. 
(g)  A grantee shall have the authority to trim trees on public property at its own expense as may be necessary to protect its wires and facilities, subject to the regulation, supervision and/or direction of the Town or other local government authority. 
(Code 1969, § 24-29; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-30. - Construction schedule and reports. 
(a)  Upon accepting the franchise, a grantee shall, within 60 days, apply or otherwise file the documents required to obtain all necessary federal, state and local licenses, permits and authorizations required for the conduct of its business, and the construction and installation of its facilities; and it shall submit monthly reports to the cable television administrator on progress in this respect until all such licenses, permits and authorizations are secured. 
(b)  A grantee shall commence construction of the cable system one year after acceptance of a franchise. It shall complete construction of the system and shall offer and be capable of delivering cable television service to all occupied dwelling units in the Town and all public service outlets in the franchise area as described in section 24-25(c) in accordance with the following schedule: 
No Later Than: 	Minimum Percentage of Occupied Dwelling 
Units in PSA and Minimum Percentage of 
Public Service Outlets in the Franchise Area. 
12 months after commencing construction 	20% 
24 months after commencing construction 	40% 
36 months after commencing construction 	60% 
48 months after commencing construction 	80% 
60 months after commencing construction 	100% 
 
For the purposes of this section, construction shall be deemed to have commenced when the first aerial strands of cable have been attached to a pole, or the first underground trench has been opened. The failure of a grantee to secure the necessary federal, state and local licenses, permits and authorizations required for the conduct of its business shall, in no way, relieve the grantee from the obligations of this section and the failure to observe the construction schedule above shall, in addition to the other rights of the Town, be grounds for the Town to terminate or revoke the franchise. 
(c)  Franchise applications shall include a timetable showing the percentage of occupied dwelling units within the Town that will be capable of receiving cable television service at the end of each year following the beginning of construction. Said timetable shall be incorporated into the franchise and shall be enforceable as to the grantee under the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Within three months after accepting the franchise, a grantee shall furnish the Town a construction schedule and map setting forth target dates consistent with subsections (b) and (c) of this section for commencements of service to subscribers and the areas to be served. The schedule and map shall be updated whenever substantial changes become necessary. 
(e)  Every three months after the start of construction, a grantee shall furnish the Town a report on progress of construction until complete. The report shall include a map that clearly defines the area wherein regular subscriber service is available. 
(Code 1969, § 24-30; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-31. - Protection of privacy. 
(a)  A grantee shall not permit the transmission of nor shall a grantee receive any signal, aural, visual, or digital, including polling channel selection, from any subscriber's premises without first obtaining written permission of the subscriber. This provision is not intended to prohibit the use or transmission of signals useful only for the control or measurement of system performance. 
(b)  A grantee shall not permit the installation of any special terminal equipment in any subscriber's premises that will permit transmission from subscriber's premises of two-way services utilizing aural, visual or digital signals without first obtaining written permission of the subscriber. 
(c)  A grantee shall notify in writing each subscriber what personal information the grantee shall receive or collect from each subscriber, and what use will be made of this information. The notice shall be given prior to the commencement of providing service to a subscriber, and at least once a year thereafter. The term "personal information" shall mean any item, collection, or grouping of information about an individual or subscriber that is received, collected or maintained by the grantee including, but not limited to, the individual's or subscriber's education, Social Security number, financial transactions, medical history, property, uses of cable television service or cable communications, and the information described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1969, § 24-31; Ord. of 10-20-1980; Ord. of 12-7-1981)  
ARTICLE 8. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 24-32. - Limits on grantee's recourse. 
(a)  Except as expressly provided in this chapter and the franchise, a grantee shall have no recourse against the Town for any loss, expense or damage resulting from the terms and conditions of this chapter or the franchise or because of the Town's enforcement thereof, nor the Town's failure to have the authority to grant the franchise. A grantee shall expressly agree that upon its acceptance of the franchise, it does so relying upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the Town to grant said franchise. 
(b)  A grantee, by accepting the franchise, shall acknowledge that it has not been induced to accept same by any promise, oral or written, by or on behalf of the Town or by any third person regarding any term or condition of this chapter or the franchise not expressed therein. A grantee shall further pledge that no promise or inducement, oral or written, has been made to any Town employee or official regarding receipt of the cable television franchise; and that it will not hire any individual employed full time by the Town or a consultant employed by the Town to assist the Town in the administration of this chapter. Such proscription of employment shall extend for one year following the granting of the franchise unless the council consents to such employment at an earlier date. 
(c)  A grantee shall further acknowledge by acceptance of a franchise that it has carefully read the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise and accepts without reservation the obligations imposed by the terms and conditions herein. 
(d)  Any decision or decisions of the council concerning the selection of one or more grantees and the awarding of one or more franchise is final. 
(e)  The Town shall have the authority to exercise any of its governmental, contractual and franchise powers and the performance of duties whether as a separate governmental unit or jointly with any other governmental unit served by the cable television system established by the grantee; and by the acceptance of the franchise, the grantee acknowledges his concurrence with the exercise of such powers and the performance of such duties in that manner. Upon entering into an agreement with another governmental unit for the joint exercise of governmental powers, either jurisdiction may proceed jointly or severally as they may agree; or either jurisdiction, with consent of the other, may proceed to assert the rights on behalf of the other; and the violation of a franchise provision or ordinance in another jurisdiction which pertains to the cable television system serving the Town may, at the election of the Town, be regarded as a violation of the franchise granted by the Town. 
(Code 1969, § 24-32; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-33. - Special license. 
The Town reserves the right to issue a license, easement, or other permit to anyone other than a grantee to permit that person to traverse any portion of a grantee's franchise area within the Town in order to provide service outside the Town. Such license or easement, absent a grant or a franchise in accordance with this chapter, shall not authorize nor permit said person to provide a cable television service of any nature to any home or place of business within the Town, nor to render any service or connect any subscriber within the Town to the grantee's cable television system. 
(Code 1969, § 24-33; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-34. - Franchise validity. 
A grantee shall agree, by the acceptance of a franchise, to accept the validity of the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise in their entirety, and that it will not at any time proceed against the Town in any claim or proceeding challenging any term or provision of this chapter or the franchise as unreasonable, arbitrary or void, or that the Town did not have the authority to impose such term or condition. 
(Code 1969, § 24-34; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-35. - Failure to enforce franchise. 
A grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of this chapter, or the franchise, by any failure of the Town upon any one or more occasions to insist upon the grantee's performance or to seek grantee's compliance with any one or more of such terms or conditions. 
(Code 1969, § 24-35; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-36. - Rights reserved to the Town. 
The Town hereby expressly reserves the following rights: 
1.  To exercise its governmental powers, now or hereafter, to the full extent that such powers may be vested in or granted to the Town. 
2.  To adopt, in addition to the provisions contained herein and in the franchise and in any existing applicable ordinances, such additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its police power, municipal powers and functions. 
3.  To amend this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 24-36; Ord. of 10-20-1980; Ord. of 12-7-1981)  
Sec. 24-37. - Employment requirement. 
A grantee shall not refuse to hire, nor discharge from employment nor discriminate against any person regarding compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because of age, sex, race, color, creed or national origin. A grantee shall take affirmative action to ensure that employees are treated during employments without regard to their age, sex, race, color, creed or national origin. This condition includes, but is not limited to, the following: recruitment advertising, employment interviews, employment, rates of pay, upgrading, transfer, demotion, lay-off, and termination. 
(Code 1969, § 24-37; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-38. - Time essence of agreement. 
Whenever this chapter or the franchise sets forth any time for any act to be performed by or on behalf of a grantee, such time shall be deemed of the essence and the grantee's failure to perform within the time allotted shall, in all cases, be sufficient grounds for the Town to invoke the remedies available under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise. 
(Code 1969, § 24-38; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-39. - Acceptance. 
(a)  A franchise and its terms and conditions shall be accepted by a grantee by written instrument filed with the Town Manager within 30 days after the granting of the franchise. In its acceptance, the grantee shall declare that it has carefully read the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise and accepts all of the terms and conditions imposed by this chapter and the franchise and agrees to abide by same. 
(b)  Acceptance of a franchise by a grantee shall operate as a waiver by the grantee of any claim to operate a cable television system within the Town as against the regulatory power of the Town because of the previous operation of the same, whether by franchise or otherwise. 
(Code 1969, § 24-39; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-40. - Liquidated damages. 
Notwithstanding any other remedy provided for in this chapter, or otherwise available under law, the Town shall have the power to recover monetary amounts from a grantee under certain conditions, such monetary amounts being in the nature of liquidated damages. The conditions for and amounts of such damages are listed below. By accepting a franchise, a grantee automatically agrees that the following conditions will cause damages to the Town, and that the monetary amounts are established because it is difficult to ascertain the exact amount of the damages. The damages resulting to the Town include, but are not limited to, loss of franchise fees that would have otherwise been paid to or would have become due the Town, and administrative costs incurred by the Town. 
1.  For failure to submit plans indicating expected dates of installation of various parts of the system: $100.00 per day. 
2.  For failure to commence operations in accordance with this chapter and/or the franchise: $200.00 per day. 
3.  For failure to complete construction and installation of the system within the required time limits: $300.00 per day. 
4.  For failure to supply data requested by the Town in accordance with the requirements of the franchise and this chapter, such data pertaining to installation, construction, customers, finances or financial reports, or rate review: $50.00 per day. 
5.  For failure to otherwise provide service to a subscriber in accordance with the requirements of this chapter: $10.00 per day per subscriber affected, but not to exceed $50.00 per subscriber per month, and further, not to exceed $1,000.00 per day in aggregate. This amount shall be reduced by any refunds of subscriber fees made to subscribers affected by the failure, etc., to provide service. 
(Code 1969, § 24-40; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-41. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to attach or affix or to cause to be attached or affixed any equipment or devices which allows access or use of the cable television service without payment to the grantee for same. 
(Code 1969, § 24-41; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-42. - Penalties. 
(a)  The following acts shall be deemed Class 1 misdemeanors under this chapter. Each day of a continuing offense is a separate offense: 
1.  Willful failure, refusal or neglect by a grantee to construct, operate, or maintain its cable television system in accordance with the terms of this chapter or the franchise granted pursuant to this chapter. 
2.  Transmission or reception by a grantee of a signal from a subscriber's premises in violation of section 24-31. 
3.  The attaching or affixing or causing to be attached or affixed any equipment or device as described in section 24-31. The attaching of or affixing of each unit of such equipment or device shall constitute a separate offense. 
4.  Noncompliance with the provisions of sections 24-44 and 24-45. 
(b)  The violation of any other provision of this chapter shall be subject to such other penalties as shall be prescribed by law or ordinance. Each day of a continuing offense is a separate offense. 
(Code 1969, § 24-42; Ord. of 10-20-1980; Ord. of 12-7-1981)  
Sec. 24-43. - Severability. 
If any section of this chapter or the franchise, or any portion thereof, is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction or administrative agency, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof except as otherwise provided for herein. 
(Code 1969, § 24-143; Ord. of 10-20-1980)  
Sec. 24-44. - Financial disclosure by applicants. 
(a)  Every request for proposal shall require, and every cable franchise application shall contain, a complete and detailed listing, under oath, of the following information: 
1.  The names and positions with the Town or the county of all Town or county officers and employees known to the applicant to have any interest in the entity making application, and the extent of such interest. 
2.  The names and last-known addresses of all persons who have acted as attorney, broker, consultant, or agent of the applying entity with respect to the application. 
3.  The names and last-known addresses of all persons who own or control any interest in the applying entity; in the case of a partnership or joint venture or syndicate, the names and last-known addresses of all partners or participants; in the case of a corporation having fewer than 200 stockholders, the names and last-known addresses of all stockholders; and in the case of a corporation having more than 200 stockholders, the names and last-known addresses of 200 stockholders who own or control the greatest percentage of voting ownership interest in the applying entity; except that corporations having more than 2,000 stockholders and whose stock is traded on a national stock exchange shall disclose only those stockholders owning a stock interest of one percent or more; provided, however, that if any person so identified is other than an individual, the name and last-known addresses of all persons who own or control any interest in such person shall be stated; provided further, that if any statement of ownership discloses an interest held by a person other than an individual, a similar disclosure statement shall be provided. For the purpose of this subsection, a person holding any ownership interest as a trustee shall not be deemed to be an individual, and all persons who may have any interest under the trust, whether vested or contingent, shall be included in the required statements. 
4.  The names and last-known addresses of all holders of debt of the applying entity, other than stockholders or suppliers of goods and services paid on current account, in excess of $5,000.00 or one percent of the total outstanding indebtedness of the entity, whichever is the lesser. 
5.  The name and position of each Town or county officer or employee to whom, or to whose immediate family, the applying entity or any person described in subsection (a)3 of this section has made any gift or donation of $100.00 or more within three years preceding the filing of the application, the name of the donor, and the amount or value of the gift or donation. As to elected Town or county officials, this requirement includes disclosure of donations to their "principal campaign committees" and "authorized committees" as defined by 2 USC 431, and campaign committees formed pursuant to Virginia Code § 24.2-945 et seq. 
(b)  The Town Council in its discretion shall eliminate from consideration any applicant for the award of a cable television franchise within the Town who is not in compliance with the provisions of the disclosure requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1969, § 24-44; Ord. of 12-7-1981)  
Sec. 24-45. - Financial disclosure by officers and employees. 
(a)  Within 30 days after receipt of notification that application for a franchise has been received by the Town, and again within 30 days after notification of the adoption of an ordinance granting a cable television franchise, each Town officer and employee shall file with the Town clerk a complete and detailed statement, under oath, to the best of their information, knowledge and belief after a duly diligent search, containing the following information: 
1.  The name of each entity which has applied for a franchise in which the Town officer or employee, a member of his immediate family or any of his business associates, has any interest; the amount, nature, and extent of the interest; and the name of the person possessing such interest. 
2.  The name of any partner, participant, stockholder, officer, or employee, or any member of the immediate family of any of them, of any applying entity who has made any gift or donation of $100.00 or more to the officer or employee or to a member of his immediate family within three years prior to the filing of the entity's franchise application, and the name of the recipient and amount or value of the gift or donation. 
(Code 1969, § 24-45; Ord. of 12-7-1981)  
ORDINANCE CABLE FRANCHISE  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Statement of applicability. 
This ordinance establishes the criteria, procedures and standards by which the [Locality] will grant and enforce an ordinance cable franchise to a provider of cable services pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2108 et seq., as an alternative to a negotiated cable franchise pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2108.20. The Town, on request by an applicant, will continue to grant a negotiated cable franchise in accordance with Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47 USC 521 et seq., and as provided by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2108.20. The ability to seek an ordinance cable franchise under this ordinance shall be available to: 
A.  A cable operator with previous consent to use the public rights-of-way to provide cable services whose negotiated franchise with the Town is up for renewal and who seeks to renew that franchise pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2108.30; 
B.  A certificated provider of telecommunications services with previous consent to use the public rights-of-way in the Town through a franchise; and 
C.  A certificated provider of telecommunications services that lacked previous consent to provide cable service in the Town but provided telecommunications services over facilities leased from an entity having previous consent to use of the public rights-of-way in the Town through a franchise.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. All terms used herein, unless otherwise defined, shall have the same meaning as set forth in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2108.19 et seq., and if not defined therein, then as set forth in Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 USC 521 et seq., and if not defined therein, their common and ordinary meaning. In addition, references in this ordinance to any federal or state law shall include amendments thereto as are enacted from time to time. 
Act means the Communications Act of 1934. 
Affiliate, in relation to any person, means another person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with, such person. 
Basic service tier means the service tier that includes (i) the retransmission of local television broadcast channels and (ii) public, educational, and governmental channels required to be carried in the basic tier. 
[Board] means the governing body of the Town. [Use either Board definition or Council; not both.] 
Cable administrator means the local government official who is responsible for the administration of the ordinance cable franchise for the Town. 
Cable operator means any person or group of persons that (i) provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system or (ii) otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of a cable system. Cable operator does not include a provider of wireless or direct-to-home satellite transmission service. 
Cable service means the one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video programming or (ii) other programming service, and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. Cable service does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC 332(d). 
Cable system or cable television system means any facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, except that such definition shall not include (i) a system that serves fewer than 20 subscribers; (ii) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (iii) a facility that serves only subscribers without using any public rights-of-way; (iv) a facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 USC 201 et seq., except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; (v) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric systems; (vi) any portion of a system that serves fewer than 50 subscribers in any [Locality], where such portion is a part of a larger system franchised in an adjacent [Locality]; or (vii) an open video system that complies with section 653 of Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47 USC 573. 
Certificated provider of telecommunications services means a person holding a certificate issued by the State Corporation Commission to provide local exchange telephone service. 
[Council] means the governing body of the Town. [Use either Board definition or Council; not both.] 
Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by a franchising authority, including the Town or the commonwealth transportation board, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, that authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system, a telecommunications system, or other facility in the public rights-of-way. A negotiated cable franchise is granted by a [Locality] after negotiation with an applicant pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2108.20. An ordinance cable franchise is granted by a [Locality] when an applicant provides notice pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2108.21 that it will provide cable service in the Town. 
Franchisee means a person that has been granted a cable television franchise by the Town pursuant to this ordinance or any predecessor ordinance or franchise agreement. 
Force majeure means an event or events reasonably beyond the ability of cable operator to anticipate and control. "Force majeure" includes, but is not limited to, acts of God, incidences of terrorism, war or riots, labor strikes or civil disturbances, floods, earthquakes, fire, explosions, epidemics, hurricanes, tornadoes, governmental actions and restrictions, work delays caused by waiting for utility providers to service or monitor or provide access to utility poles to which cable operator's facilities are attached or to be attached or conduits in which cable operator's facilities are located or to be located, and unavailability of materials or qualified labor to perform the work necessary. 
Gross revenue means all revenue, as determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, that is actually received by the cable operator and derived from the operation of the cable system to provide cable services in the franchise area; however, in an ordinance cable franchise "gross revenue" shall not include: (i) refunds or rebates made to subscribers or other third parties; (ii) any revenue which is received from the sale of merchandise over home shopping channels carried on the cable system, but not including revenue received from home shopping channels for the use of the cable service to sell merchandise; (iii) any tax, fee, or charge collected by the cable operator and remitted to a governmental entity or its agent or designee, including without limitation a local public access or education group; (iv) program launch fees; (v) directory or Internet advertising revenue including, but not limited to, yellow page, white page, banner advertisement, and electronic publishing; (vi) a sale of cable service for resale or for use as a component part of or for the integration into cable services to be resold in the ordinary course of business, when the reseller is required to pay or collect franchise fees or similar fees on the resale of the cable service; (vii) revenues received by any affiliate or any other person in exchange for supplying goods or services used by the cable operator to provide cable service; and (viii) revenue derived from services classified as noncable services under federal law, including, without limitation, revenue derived from telecommunications services and information services, and any other revenues attributed by the cable operator to noncable services in accordance with rules, regulations, standards, or orders of the Federal Communications Commission. 
[Incumbent cable franchise] means the franchise agreement between the Town and [Incumbent franchisee], dated _______, _____. 
[Incumbent franchisee] means the franchisee under the [Incumbent franchise]. 
Interactive on-demand services means a service providing video programming to subscribers over switched networks on an on-demand, point-to-point basis, but does not include services providing video programming prescheduled by the programming provider. 
Person means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, organization, corporation, or any other legal entity, but such term does not include the Town. 
Public rights-of-way means the surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway, waterway, easement, or similar property in which the Town or the commonwealth now or hereafter holds any property interest, which, consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purpose of installing and maintaining cable facilities. No reference herein, or in any franchise, to a "public rights-of-way" shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the Town that its interest or other right to control the use of such property is sufficient to permit its use for such purposes, and a franchisee shall be deemed to gain only those rights to use as are properly in the Town and as the Town may have the undisputed right and power to give. 
Transfer means any transaction in which (i) an ownership or other interest in the cable operator is transferred, directly or indirectly, from one person or group of persons to another person or group of persons, so that majority control of the cable operator is transferred; or (ii) the rights and obligations held by the cable operator under the cable franchise granted under this ordinance are transferred or assigned to another person or group of persons. However, notwithstanding clauses (i) and (ii) of the preceding sentence, a transfer of the cable franchise shall not include (a) transfer of an ownership or other interest in the cable operator to the parent of the cable operator or to another affiliate of the cable operator; (b) transfer of an interest in the cable franchise granted under this ordinance or the rights held by the cable operator under the cable franchise granted under this ordinance to the parent of the cable operator or to another affiliate of the cable operator; (c) any action that is the result of a merger of the parent of the cable operator; (d) any action that is the result of a merger of another affiliate of the cable operator; or (e) a transfer in trust, by mortgage, or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of the cable operator in the cable franchise or the system used to provide cable in order to secure indebtedness. 
VDOT means the Virginia Department of Transportation. 
Video programming means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to, programming provided by a television broadcast station.  
Sec. 1-3. - Procedures to obtain an ordinance cable franchise. 
A.  In order to obtain an ordinance cable franchise, an applicant shall first file with the chief administrative officer a request to negotiate the terms and conditions of a negotiated cable franchise under Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2108.20 and [applicable Locality ordinance, if any]. 
B.  An applicant shall request in writing and make itself available to participate in cable franchise negotiations at least 45 calendar days prior to filing a notice electing an ordinance cable franchise pursuant to subsection C of this section unless the applicant already holds a negotiated cable franchise from the Town or chooses not to negotiate. 
C.  After the 45-day period set forth in subsection B of this section, an applicant, through its president or chief executive officer, shall file written notice with the Town that the applicant elects to receive an ordinance cable franchise at least 30 days prior to offering cable service in the Town. The notice shall be accompanied by a map or a boundary description showing: 
1.  The initial service area in which the applicant intends to provide cable service in the Town within the three-year period required for an initial service area; and 
2.  The area in the Town in which the applicant has its telephone facilities, if any. 
The map or boundary description of the initial service area may be amended by the applicant by filing with the Town a new map or boundary description of the initial service area. 
D.  [Unless the Locality has already adopted an ordinance like this one.] The Town will adopt an ordinance within 120 days of the applicant's filing of the notice required in subsection C of this section. An ordinance adopted under this section that relates to a applicant's provision of cable service shall apply to such applicant retroactively to the date on which the applicant began to offer cable service in the Town pursuant to this ordinance. 
E.  Notice of any ordinance that requires a public hearing shall be advertised once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town. The advertisement shall include a statement that a copy of the full text of the ordinance is on file in the office of the Town clerk. All costs of such advertising shall be assessed against the applicant or franchisee.  
Sec. 1-4. - Redlining, reporting and inspection. 
A franchisee shall assure that access to cable services is not denied to any group of potential residential cable subscribers because of the income of the residents of the local area in which such group resides. The Town shall have the right to monitor and inspect the deployment of cable services, and the franchisee shall submit semiannual progress reports to the Town pursuant to section 3-3-2(A) detailing the franchisee's current provision of cable services, in accordance with the deployment schedule and its new service area plans for the next six months. The reports shall include visual (graphic, mapping) or written descriptions of actual geographic boundaries of the service areas identified by the franchisee pursuant in this section. The failure to correct or remedy any material deficiencies by franchisee shall be subject to the same remedies as contained in the [Incumbent Franchise] and [applicable preexisting Locality cable ordinance to which the incumbent is subject, if any].  
Sec. 1-5. - Town ordinances. 
If the governing body of any Town adopts an ordinance pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2108.19 et seq., such Town shall not be subject to any ordinance adopted by the [Locality] within which such Town lies.  
ARTICLE II. - SUBSTANTIVE PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 2-1. - PEG channels and fees. 
A.  PEG channels. 
1.  The franchisee shall provide _____ [2] public, educational, and governmental access ("PEG") channels dedicated solely to the [Locality] or its designee and not shared with any other jurisdiction (unless the [Locality] agrees otherwise). 
2.  The [Locality] may, after a public hearing and upon a finding that the existing PEG channels are substantially utilized within the meaning of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2108.22(1), require by ordinance that all [Locality] franchisees provide an additional PEG channel or channels, up to a maximum of three additional PEG channels, provided that the total number of PEG channels, including the additional PEG channels, shall not exceed seven. 
3.  All PEG channels shall be carried on a franchisee's basic tier. 
4.  Pursuant to the provisions of section 2-7, a franchisee shall either interconnect with one or more other franchisees in the [Locality] or directly connect to PEG insertion points to ensure the carriage of all required PEG access channels. 
5.  The [Locality] or its designee shall be responsible for management, operation, and programming of the PEG access channels. 
6.  Any additional PEG channel provided pursuant to subsection A.2 of this section that is not utilized for at least eight hours a day by the [Locality] need no longer be made available to the [Locality] by a franchisee, but may be programmed at the franchisee's discretion. At such time as the [Locality] can certify to the franchisee a schedule for at least eight hours of daily programming for a period of three months, the franchisee shall restore any reallocated additional PEG channel. 
B.  PEG fees. 
1.  A franchisee shall pay to the [Locality] a recurring fee ("the PEG Capital Fee") of _____ [3] to support the capital costs of PEG facilities, including institutional networks. 
2.  A franchisee shall pay to the [Locality] an additional recurring fee ("the PEG Capital Grant Surcharge Fee") of _____. [4] 
3.  A franchisee shall continue to pay the PEG Capital Fee and the PEG Capital Grant Surcharge Fee until the expiration of the [Incumbent Franchise]. [5] 
4.  At the end of the [Incumbent Franchise] [6], the [Locality] may negotiate with all franchisees to set a new, recurring fee to support the reasonable and necessary capital costs of PEG facilities, including institutional networks, that shall be imposed on all franchisees such that the fee applies equally, on a gross revenue percentage or per-subscriber basis, to all franchisees in the [Locality]. 
5.  If the [Locality] and the franchisees cannot agree on a recurring PEG capital cost fee through negotiation under subdivision (4) of this subsection (B), the [Locality], by ordinance adopted after a public hearing, shall impose a recurring fee, calculated on a per subscriber or percentage of gross revenue basis, to support the reasonable and necessary capital costs of PEG access facilities, including institutional networks, however, such fee may not exceed the PEG Capital Fee previously imposed on cable operators by the [Locality]. 
6.  Any and all PEG fees permitted or imposed under this subsection (B) shall be paid by the franchisee to the [Locality] on the same schedule as franchise fees are paid pursuant to section 2-2, and shall be subject to the same audit provisions as franchise fees are under section 3-3. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note— Insert a number equal to the lowest number of PEG channels provided by any other cable operator in the same franchise area. If the existing cable operator provides less than three PEG channels pursuant to a franchise agreement, the [Locality] may require each cable operator to provide up to three such channels. 

--- (3) --- 
Note— The PEG Capital Fee must be equal to the lowest recurring fee imposed on a per subscriber or a percentage of gross revenue basis and paid by any existing cable operator in the [Locality] to support the capital costs of PEG facilities. The PEG Capital Fee may only be imposed on a per subscriber or a percentage of gross revenue basis. If the [Incumbent Franchisee's] franchise contains no such recurring PEG fee, the [Locality] may not impose a PEG Capital Fee until the expiration of the [Incumbent Franchise]. 

--- (4) --- 
Note— If the existing cable operator has paid a lump sum capital grant at award or renewal of its current franchise, or is providing in-kind equipment in lieu of such a capital grant, to support PEG facilities, including institutional networks, the [Locality], by ordinance adopted after a public hearing, shall also impose an additional monthly recurring fee ("the PEG Capital Grant Surcharge Fee") on the cable operator equal to the lower of (i) 1.5 percent of the cable operator's gross revenues derived from the operation of its cable system in the [Locality] or (ii) the lowest amount of capital contribution paid or provided in-kind, as shown on the books of the cable operator, by an existing cable operator in the [Locality] (a) when such capital contribution is amortized over the term of the existing cable operator's franchise and (b) divided by the number of subscribers or annual gross revenue of the existing cable operator as shown on its most recent report to the [Locality], depending on recovery methodology chosen by the [Locality]. 

--- (5) --- 
Note— Insert the date of the soonest expiring existing franchise agreement. 

--- (6) --- 
Note— Insert the date of the soonest expiring existing franchise agreement; should be the same as the cable operator identified in (3) above. 
 
Sec. 2-2. - Franchise fee - omitted.  
Sec. 2-3. - Customer service standards. 
A.  A franchisee shall be subject to the following customer service standards consistent with 47 CFR 76.309, 76.1602, 76.1603, 76.1618 and 76.1619: 
1.  A franchisee will maintain a local, toll-free, or collect telephone access line which will be available to its subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
a.  Trained representatives will be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours. 
b.  After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by a service or automated response system, including an answering machine. Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained representative on the next business day. 
2.  Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a customer representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall be met no less than 90 percent of the time under normal operating conditions as measured on a quarterly basis. 
3.  The operator will not be required to acquire or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards in subsection A.2 of this section, unless an historical record of complaints indicates a failure to comply or it is required of the incumbent. 
4.  Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time. 
5.  A franchisee shall accurately collect and maintain data to measure its compliance with the telephone answering standards in subsections A.2 and 3 of this section. 
6.  Customer service centers and bill payment locations will be open at least during normal business hours and will be conveniently located. 
7.  Installations, outages, and service calls. Under normal operating conditions, each of the following four standards will be met no less than 95 percent of the time as measured on a quarterly basis. 
a.  Standard installations will be performed within seven business days after an order has been placed. "Standard" installations are those that are within 125 feet of the existing distribution system. 
b.  Excluding conditions beyond the control of the franchisee, the franchisee will begin working on service interruptions promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known. The franchisee must begin actions to correct other service problems the next business day after notification of the service problem. 
c.  The "appointment window" alternatives for installations, service calls and other installation activities will either be at a specific time or, at maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business hours. A franchisee may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer. 
d.  A franchisee may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. If a franchisee representative is running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer. 
8.  A franchisee shall accurately collect and maintain data to measure its compliance with subparagraph (6). 
9.  Communications between a franchisee and its subscribers. 
Notification to subscribers. A franchisee shall provide written information on each of the following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request: 
i.  Products and services offered; 
ii.  Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services; 
iii.  Installation and service maintenance policies; 
iv.  Instructions on how to use the cable service; 
v.  Channel positions of programming carried on the system; 
vi  Refund policy; and 
vii.  Billing and complaint procedures, including the franchisee's office hours, address and telephone number of the local cable office. 
B.  A franchisee shall notify subscribers of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions as soon as possible in writing. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of 30 days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the franchisee. In addition, a franchisee shall notify subscribers 30 days in advance of any significant changes in the other information required by subparagraph (8) of this section. 
C.  Billing 
1.  A franchisee's bills to its subscribers shall be clear, concise, and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates, and credits. 
2.  In case of a billing dispute, a franchisee must respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days. 
3.  Refund checks will be issued promptly, but not later than either: 
a.  The customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the request, or 30 days, whichever is earlier; or 
b.  The return of the equipment supplied by a franchisee if service is terminated. 
4.  Credits for service will be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. 
5.  A franchisee shall maintain an office within the franchise area for, at minimum, the payment of bills, delivery and return of subscriber equipment, requests for installation, disconnection, and reinstatement of cable service, addressing of subscriber inquiries, and receipt of subscriber complaints, only if this is required in an incumbent's franchise. 
6.  A franchisee shall provide parental control devices to all subscribers who wish to be able to block out any objectionable channel of programming from the cable service entering the subscriber's home, only if this is required in an incumbent's franchise. 
7.  A franchisee shall maintain and provide to the [Locality] on request a log of all subscriber complaints indicating the action taken by the franchisee, only if this is required in an incumbent's franchise.  
Sec. 2-4. - Service buildout requirements. 
A.  Within no less than three years of the date of the grant of the franchise, a franchisee shall make cable service available to all of the occupied residential dwelling units in the initial service area selected by the franchisee pursuant to section 1-3.C.1. 
B.  Within seven years of the date of the grant of the franchise, a franchisee shall make cable service available to no less than 65 percent of the residential dwelling units throughout the area in the [Locality] in which the franchisee has telephone facilities. 
C.  Notwithstanding subsections A and B of this section, a franchisee shall not be required to make cable service available: 
1.  For periods of force majeure; 
2.  For periods of delay caused by the [Locality]; 
3.  For periods of delay resulting from the franchisee's inability to obtain authority to access rights-of-way in the service area; 
4.  In areas where developments or buildings are subject to claimed exclusive arrangements; 
5.  In developments or buildings that the franchisee cannot access under industry standard terms and conditions after good faith negotiation; 
6.  In developments or buildings to which the franchisee is unable to provide cable service for technical reasons or that require facilities that are not available or cannot be deployed on a commercially reasonable basis; 
7.  In areas where it is not technically feasible to provide cable service due to the technology used by the franchisee to provide cable service; 
8.  In areas where the average occupied residential household density is less than 30 occupied residential dwelling units per mile as measured in strand footage from the nearest technically feasible point on the franchisee's active cable or such higher average density number as may be contained in an existing operator's cable franchise; or 
9.  When the franchisee's prior service, payment, or theft of service history with a subscriber or potential subscriber has been unfavorable. 
Should, through new construction, an area within a franchisee's service area meet the density requirement set forth in subsection C.8 of this section, the franchisee shall, subject to the exclusions set forth in subsections C.1—7 and 9 of this section, provide cable service to such area within six months of receiving notice from the [Locality] that the density requirements have been met. 
D.  During the 12 month period commencing after the seventh-year anniversary date of the grant of a franchise, the [Locality] may, by ordinance adopted after a public hearing in which the [Locality] specifically finds that such a requirement is necessary to promote competition in cable services within the [Locality], require a franchisee to make service available to 80 percent of the residential dwelling units in the area in the [Locality] in which the franchisee has telephone facilities within no less than ten years of the date of the grant of the franchisee's franchise, subject to the exclusions set forth in subsections C.1—9 of this section. If the franchisee notifies the [Locality] that it is unwilling to accept this additional service availability requirement, the [Locality] may, after notice and public hearing, terminate the franchisee's ordinance cable franchise. 
E.  A franchisee shall file with the [Locality] a certificate at its third and seventh, and if applicable, tenth, anniversary dates certifying its compliance with the foregoing service requirements.  
Sec. 2-5. - Rights-of-way management. 
A.  All excavation and reconstruction work by a franchisee in the public rights-of-way must be in compliance with the requirements of (chapter, article, section, etc.) of the(city, county or Town code) and any applicable VDOT standards. It shall be the responsibility of a franchisee to obtain any required permits, to review all applicable excavation, reconstruction, restoration, repair and permitting requirements, and to become familiar with such requirements before beginning any excavation, reconstruction, restoration or repair work in the public rights-of-way or private property. 
B.  Any equipment or facilities installed by a franchisee in the public rights-of-way shall be installed, located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, restored, removed, repaired, maintained and operated in accordance with good engineering practices, performed by experienced maintenance and construction personnel so as not (1) to endanger or interfere in any manner with improvements the [Locality] or VDOT may deem appropriate to make; or (2) to interfere with the rights of any private property owner; or (3) to hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
C.  Whenever the [Locality] or VDOT shall determine that it is necessary in connection with the repair, relocation, or improvement of the public rights-of-way, the [Locality] or VDOT may require by written notification that any properties or facilities of the franchisee be removed or relocated. Within 60 days after receipt of notification, unless the [Locality] or VDOT extends such period for good cause shown, the franchisee shall remove or relocate its facilities to such place and under such terms and conditions as specified by the [Locality] or VDOT. The franchisee shall bear all expenses associated with the removal and relocation except that the [Locality] or VDOT will issue, without charge to the franchisee, whatever local permits are required for the relocation of franchisee's facilities. If the franchisee does not complete its removal or relocation within 60 days or such other period as authorized by the [Locality] or VDOT, the [Locality] or VDOT may take such actions as necessary to effect such removal or relocation at the franchisee's expense. 
D.  For franchise's not falling within the scope of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2108.23(B)(i) or (ii), the following additional requirements shall apply: 
[Additional ROW requirements imposed on the Incumbent Franchisee may be inserted here.]  
Sec. 2-6. - Institutional networks. 
A.  Any franchisee holding a cable franchise from the [Locality] that was granted before July 1, 2006, under which the franchisee is required to provide institutional network facilities or capabilities shall continue to provide such facilities or capabilities for the remaining term of that franchisee's franchise, as that remaining term was defined in that franchisee's franchise. 
B.  On the expiration of a franchise subject to subsection A of this section, the franchisee shall, within 60 days after written request by the [Locality], either (1) remove, at franchisee's expense, all of its institutional network facilities and equipment owned by franchisee from [Locality] property (excluding the public rights-of-way), or (2) enter into good faith negotiations with the [Locality] to convey such facilities and equipment to the [Locality] at a price not exceeding franchisee's then-current net, depreciated book value of those facilities and equipment. If, despite such good faith negotiations, the franchisee and the [Locality] cannot agree on a sales price for such facilities and equipment, the franchisee shall, within 120 days, either (a) remove such facilities and equipment, at franchisee's expense, from [Locality] property, or (b) abandon such facilities and equipment.  
Sec. 2-7. - Interconnection. 
A.  Unless otherwise agreed to by the [Locality] or unless the franchisee elects direct connection pursuant to subsection F of this section, a franchisee shall interconnect its cable system with the cable systems of one or more franchisees, as necessary, located in the [Locality] for the purpose of ensuring the carriage of all PEG access channels. 
B.  Any new cable operator other than [Incumbent Franchisee] franchised pursuant to this ordinance on or after July 1, 2006, shall promptly enter into negotiations to interconnect its cable system with the [Incumbent Franchisee's] cable system. Any such franchisee and [Incumbent Franchisee] shall negotiate the terms and conditions of an interconnection agreement. 
C.  The construction costs and ongoing expenses of the interconnection shall be shared fairly between the interconnecting franchisee and [Incumbent Franchisee]. If no interconnection agreement is reached within 180 days after the effective date of a franchisee's franchise, the [Locality] shall designate the point of interconnection. As soon as practicable after the [Locality's] designation of the point of interconnection or the negotiation of an interconnection agreement, but in no event exceeding _____ (___) days after the effective date of its franchise, a franchisee shall carry all PEG access channels on its cable system as required under section 2-1.A. 
D.  A franchisee shall ensure that all PEG access channel signals carried on its system, whether via interconnection or other method, comply with all applicable FCC signal quality and technical standards for all classes of signals, and that interconnection or direct connection pursuant to subsection F of this section shall preserve the technical and signal quality of all PEG access channel signals. 
E.  Franchisees, including the [Incumbent Franchisee], shall share equally the costs of maintenance, repair, replacement and improvements to interconnection facilities. Franchisees shall cooperate in carrying out any such work. If the franchisees fail to reach agreement on such maintenance and repair, the [Locality] may carry out any work deemed necessary by it. The [Locality] will bill the franchisees equally for the work, and the franchisees shall remit the amounts so billed within 30 days of receipt of the bill from the [Locality]. 
F.  A franchisee may, if it wishes, direct connect with PEG access origination locations in lieu of interconnection with the [Incumbent Franchisee]. The PEG origination locations are as follows: 
[Insert locations of Locality's current PEG upstream links.] 
Alternatively, if a franchisee can obtain all of the PEG access channels at a single or lesser number of direct connection locations, it may do so. The direct connection options set forth in this subsection F are subject to the 240 day time limit set forth in subsection C of this section. 
G.  [Incumbent Franchisee] shall continue to provide the PEG origination capacity set forth in paragraph _______ of the [Incumbent Franchise] at the locations set forth in subsection F of this section beyond the termination of the [Incumbent Franchise]. If Virginia law is construed not to permit the [Locality] to require the [Incumbent Franchisee] to continue to provide such facilities for delivery of PEG access channels to the [Incumbent Franchisee's] system after the expiration of the [Incumbent Franchise], then [Incumbent Franchisee] shall, within 60 days, either (1) remove, at its expense, all of its PEG access return feed facilities from [Locality] property, or (2) enter into good faith negotiations with the [Locality] to convey such facilities to the [Locality] at a price not exceeding [Incumbent Franchisee's] then-current net, depreciated book value of those facilities. If, despite such good faith negotiations, [Incumbent Franchisee] and the [Locality] cannot agree on a sales price for those facilities, then [Incumbent Franchisee] shall, within 60 days, either (a) remove such facilities, at [Incumbent Franchisee's] expense, from [Locality] property, or (b) abandon such facilities.  
Sec. 2-8. - Service to public locations. 
A franchisee shall provide, without charge, within the area in the [Locality] actually served by its cable system, one cable service outlet activated for basic cable service to each fire station, public school, police station, public library, and any other governmental building.  
Sec. 2-9. - Emergency powers and authority. 
A.  Emergency powers. In the event of an emergency, or where a franchisee's cable system creates or is contributing to an imminent danger to health, safety, or property, or an unauthorized use of property, the franchisee shall remove or relocate any or all parts of franchisee's cable system at the request of the [Locality]. If the franchisee fails to comply with the [Locality's] request, the [Locality] may remove or relocate any or all parts of the franchisee's cable system upon reasonable notice to the franchisee. 
B.  Emergency alert system. 
1.  The franchisee shall comply with the emergency alert system (EAS) requirements of the FCC in order that emergency messages may be distributed over the system. A franchisee shall install and thereafter maintain an EAS for use by the [Locality]. 
2.  The EAS shall at all times be operated in accordance with federal requirements and other applicable law. In the event of an emergency, as determined by the designated [Locality] official or other official designated by any approved state or local EAS plan, and subject to applicable federal and Virginia law requirements, the EAS shall be remotely activated by telephone and shall allow a representative from the [Locality] or other official designated by any approved state or local EAS plan, in the event of an emergency or for reasonable testing, to override the audio and video on all channels on the franchisee's cable system without the assistance of the franchisee. 
3.  The [Locality] or other designated body responsible under any approved state or local EAS plan shall provide reasonable notice to the franchisee prior to any test of the EAS. The franchisee shall cooperate with the [Locality] or other designated body responsible under any approved state or local EAS plan in any such test. 
4.  A franchisee shall maintain the EAS and shall periodically upgrade the EAS at the franchisee's sole expense to ensure that the EAS technology remains consistent and compatible with prevailing technology and applicable law.  
Sec. 2-10. - Term. 
A.  All ordinance cable franchises granted pursuant to this ordinance shall have a term of 15 years. 
B.  For any ordinance cable franchise granted pursuant to this ordinance, the date of the grant of the franchise shall be deemed to be the date that the franchisee began providing cable service in the [Locality].  
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURES AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Notice and hearing procedures. 
A.  In the event that the [Locality] believes that a franchisee has not complied with the requirements of this ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2108 et. seq., or the applicable mandatory requirements of 47 USC 521—573 or any regulations promulgated thereunder, the following procedures shall apply: 
1.  The [Locality] shall informally discuss the alleged noncompliance with the franchisee. 
2.  In the event that the informal discussion does not resolve the matter, the [Locality] shall notify the franchisee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance. 
3.  Within 15 days from receipt of the [Locality's] written notice, the franchisee shall: 
a.  File a written statement with the [Locality] contesting, in whole or in part, the alleged noncompliance; or 
b.  Cure the alleged noncompliance and file written notification to the [Locality] of the cure; or 
c.  In the event the nature of the noncompliance prevents the franchisee from curing the noncompliance within 15 days, the franchisee shall initiate reasonable steps to remedy the noncompliance and file with the [Locality] a written statement setting forth the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be completed. The franchisee's cure shall be completed within 30 days of the projected date. 
B.  In the event the franchisee fails to cure the default within 15 days, fails to file a timely written response, or fails to timely complete the remediation, the [Locality], if it wishes to continue its investigation into the default, shall schedule a public hearing. The franchisee shall be notified in writing at least 30 business days prior to the public hearing and shall be provided an opportunity to be heard at the public hearing. The notice shall specify the time, place, and purpose of the public hearing. The [Locality] shall: (1) provide public notice of the hearing in compliance with Virginia law; (2) hear any person interested in the violation under review; and (3) provide the franchisee with an opportunity to be heard. 
C.  The [Locality] shall, within a reasonable time after the closure of the public hearing, issue findings and conclusions in writing, setting forth the basis for the findings, the proposed cure plan and time line for curing the violation, if the violation can be cured, and the penalties, damages and applicable interest, if any, owed. 
D.  Subject to applicable federal and Virginia law and the provisions of this ordinance, if the [Locality] determines pursuant to a public hearing that a franchisee is in violation of any provision of this ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2108 et seq., or the applicable mandatory requirements of 47 USC 521—573 or any regulation promulgated thereunder, the [Locality] may apply one or a combination of the following remedies: (i) seek specific performance or other equitable relief; (ii) commence an action at law; (iii) apply penalties in accordance with section 3-2-2, if applicable; or (iv) apply liquidated damages in accordance with section 3-2-3, if applicable. 
E.  The [Locality] may designate the Cable administrator or other designee to conduct the hearings and issue findings and conclusions under this subsection. If the [Locality] does so, the franchisee may appeal the determination of the Cable administrator or other [Locality] designee to the [Council]. Such an appeal shall be heard at a lawfully noticed public hearing. 
F.  Any franchise revocation rights applicable to an existing franchisee under a franchise in effect prior to the adoption of this ordinance shall also apply to franchises granted under this ordinance. 
G.  In the event a franchisee submits notification of unwillingness to comply with any additional service availability requirements as contained in section 2-4, or fails to comply with these additional service requirements, the franchisee's franchise may be terminated after written notice and a public hearing.  
Sec. 3-2. - Remedies. 
3-2-1.  Penalties. If, pursuant to the public hearing required by section 3-1, the [Locality] determines that a cable operator has failed to materially comply with this ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2108 et seq., or the applicable mandatory requirements of 47 USC 521—573 or any regulation promulgated thereunder, the [Locality] may impose any penalty for a violation of the terms of an ordinance franchise that it may impose for a comparable violation under the terms of the 1997 Franchise or applicable Virginia or [Locality] law [including, without limitation, revocation of the franchise]. 
3-2-2.  Liquidated Damages. 
A.  If, pursuant to the public hearing required by Section 3-1, the [Locality] determines that a franchisee has failed to materially comply with this Ordinance, Article 1.2 (§§ 15.2108 et seq.) of Chapter 121 of Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia, or the applicable mandatory requirements of 47 USC 521—573 or any regulation promulgated thereunder, the [Locality] may impose liquidated damages as provided in this subsection. Because a franchisee's failure to comply will result in injury to the [Locality] and subscribers and because it will be difficult to estimate the extent of such injury, the [Locality] and, by its acceptance of an ordinance franchise pursuant to this Ordinance, a franchisee agree to the following liquidated damages for the following material violations which represent both parties' best estimate of the damages resulting from the specified noncompliance. 
1.  For failure to comply with PEG channels: $_____/day for each violation for each day the violation continues after written notice has been provided to the franchisee by the [Locality] of such violation. 
2.  For failure to supply complete and accurate information, reports and filings required by the [Locality] as required by this Ordinance: $_____/day for each unrelated material violation for each day the violation continues after written notice and an applicable cure period has been provided to the franchisee by the [Locality] of such violation. 
3.  For failure to comply with any the customer service standard set forth in section 2-3 of this ordinance: $_____/day for each violation for each day the violation continues. 
4.  For failure to pay in full or in timely fashion any fee to support PEG access pursuant to section 2-1(B) of this ordinance: $_____/day for each violation for each day the violation continues, in addition to the balance of such fees owed and interest. 
The franchisee shall not be charged with multiple violations for a single act or event affecting a single subscriber or for a single act or event affecting multiple subscribers on the same day. 
B.  The [Locality] may reduce or waive any of the above liquidated damages if it determines, in its discretion, that such waiver is in the public interest. 
C.  If a court of competent and binding jurisdiction determines that liquidated damages cannot be imposed by this ordinance rather than by contract, the foregoing liquidated damages shall be construed to be penalties to the full extent allowed and contemplated by section 15.2-2108.22(6) of the Code of Virginia. 
3-2-3.  Interest on unpaid amounts. Interest on any and all unpaid amounts owed by a franchisee to the [Locality] shall accrue at the legal rates set forth in Virginia Code § 6.1-330.53. 
3-2-4.  Cure. Any violation or noncompliance with this ordinance, (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2108 et seq., or the applicable mandatory requirements of 47 USC 521—573 or any regulations promulgated thereunder, shall not be deemed cured until all penalties, damages and interest, if any, that are owed, are paid.  
Sec. 3-3. - Auditing and reporting. 
3-3-1.  Auditing 
A.  Once every 24 months and upon 30 days' written notice to the franchisee, the [Locality] shall have the right to: (1) inspect and copy at any time during normal business hours at such location as the [Locality] may designate, all books and records of a franchisee and any other person who is a "cable operator" of the franchisee's cable system reasonably necessary to audit and confirm the franchisee's accurate payment of any fees required by this Ordinance; and (2) audit and recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this Ordinance or a franchise agreement. Such records shall include, but are not limited to: receipts, financial and accounting records, contracts, computer records, codes, programs and disks or other storage media or other material that the [Locality] reasonably deems necessary in order to monitor compliance under this section. The franchisee may request that proprietary and confidential information be kept from public disclosure, but only as permitted by the Virginia Freedom of Information Act. 
B.  The [Locality's] audit expenses shall be borne by the [Locality] unless the audit discloses an underpayment of more than three percent of any quarterly payment, but not less than $5,000.00, in which case the [Locality's] out-of-pocket costs of the audit shall be borne by the franchisee as a cost incidental to the enforcement of its franchise. Any additional undisputed amounts due to the [Locality] as a result of the audit shall be paid by the franchisee within 30 days following written notice to a franchisee by the [Locality] of the underpayment. 
3-3-2.  Reporting. 
A.  Deployment reports 
1.  A franchisee shall submit to the Cable administrator, within 30 days after the close of the second and fourth calendar quarters, semiannual progress reports detailing the franchisee's current deployment and provision of cable services within its initial service area and, after the first three years of its franchise, within all parts of the [Locality] where the franchisee has telephone facilities and projecting the franchisee's system deployment plans and new services areas for the next six months. 
2.  A franchisee shall submit, within 30 days after the close of the second and fourth calendar quarters, semiannual reports to the Cable administrator providing sufficient information for the [Locality] to assess the franchisee's compliance with sections 1-4, 2-4(A), 2-4(B), 2-4(C) and, if applicable, 2-4(E) hereof and with sections 15.2-2108.21(D) and 15.2-2108.22(12) of the Code of Virginia. 
B.  Annual Reports 
No later than 90 days after the end of its fiscal year, a franchisee shall submit a written report to the [Board/Council], which shall include: 
1.  A summary of the previous year's activities in development of the franchisee's cable system, including, but no limited to, descriptions of cable services begun or dropped, the number of cable subscribers gained or lost for each category of service, the number of pay units sold, the amount collected annually from other users of the cable system and the character and extent of the cable services rendered to such users; 
2.  A summary of the number of complaints relating to billing, technical services, installation, construction, front counter or telephone answering problems, programming, and other complaints and the nature of the remedial efforts, if any, undertaken by the franchisee to address recurring complaints that are not resolved individually on a case-by-case basis; 
3.  If PEG fees are paid on a percentage of gross revenue, an annual report from the previous calendar year showing franchisee's total operating revenues from each type of cable service, its gross revenue, and the amount of the franchisee fees and PEG access fees paid by the franchisee to the [Locality]. The report shall include a report from an independent auditor or a duly authorized officer of the franchisee who has reviewed the financial statements of franchisee for the year, and found that franchisee's gross revenue, as defined in this Ordinance, are as reported in the annual report; 
4.  A copy of the annual report, if any, of franchisee's parent corporation; 
5.  An ownership report, indicating all persons who at any time during the preceding year did control or benefit from an interest in the franchisee of five percent or more; 
6.  A list of major cable-related projects undertaken in the past year and planned for the current year, including construction and upgrade schedules for any new, relocated, or upgraded aerial or underground facilities; 
7.  A report on any technical tests and measurements on the system made by the franchisee for compliance with applicable FCC standards; 
8.  A report on the number of system subscribers, by type, the number of miles of cable plant in the system, and the number of residents passed by the cable system; and 
9.  Such other information as the Cable administrator or the [Board/Council] reasonably and lawfully may direct in order to ascertain franchisee's compliance with this Ordinance, Article 1.2 (§§ 15.2108 et seq.) of Chapter 121 of Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia, or the applicable mandatory requirements of 47 USC 521—573 or any regulation promulgated thereunder. 
A franchisee's annual report shall be presented by the franchisee at a regular public meeting of the [Board/Council ]. 
C.  Quarterly Customer Service Reports 
Unless this requirement is waived in whole or in part by the [Locality], no later than 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter, the franchisee shall submit a written report to the [Locality], in a form reasonably satisfactory to the [Locality], which shall include: 
1.  A report showing the number of service calls received by type during that quarter, including any property damage to the extent such information is available to the franchisee, and any line extension requests received during that quarter; 
2.  A report showing the number of outages for that quarter, and identifying separately each planned outage of one or more nodes for more than one hour at a time, the time it occurred, its duration, and the map area (using the most recent edition of the ADC map or its equivalent, as specified by the [Locality]) and, when available to the franchisee, number of homes affected; and, when the franchisee can reasonably determine that at least 500 homes were affected, each unplanned outage affecting more than 500 homes for more than one hour, the time it occurred, the reason for the disruption and its causes, its estimated duration and the tax map area and, when available to the franchisee, the number of homes affected; and 
3.  A report showing the franchisee's performance with respect to all applicable customer service standards established in 47 CFR 76.309(c) and this Ordinance, signed by an officer or employee certifying its performance with these customer service standards. If the franchisee is unable to certify full compliance for any calendar quarter, it must indicate in its filing each standard with which it is in compliance and in noncompliance, the dates of noncompliance, the reason for the noncompliance and a remedial plan. The franchisee's failure to file a compliance certificate or noncompliance statement as required herein shall subject the franchisee to the liquidated damages established in this Ordinance. The franchisee shall keep such records as are reasonably required to enable the [Locality] to determine whether the franchisee is substantially complying with all such customer service standards, and shall maintain adequate procedures to demonstrate substantial compliance. 
D.  If the franchise is terminated, the franchisee shall file with the [Locality], within 90 days after such termination, a financial statement clearly showing the gross revenue received by the franchisee since the end of the previous fiscal quarter. The franchisee shall pay the PEG fee owed pursuant to section 2-1 and any other fees or amounts due at the time such statement is filed. 
E.  Additional Reports 
1.  Within 30 days of the [Locality's] request, the [Incumbent Franchisee] shall submit to the [Locality] all information needed to calculate the PEG Capital Grant Surcharge Fee as set forth in section 2-1(B)(2) hereof and Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2108.22(3)(ii)(a) and (b). 
2.  The [Locality] may, upon reasonable written notice, require such additional information with respect to the reports to be submitted as may be reasonably necessary for the [Locality's] oversight of the franchise, as determined by the County in its reasonable discretion and as permitted by Virginia law. 
Please note that § 15.2-2108.22.8 makes the reporting requirements for the incumbent the maximum for the new entrant.  
Sec. 3-4. - Itemization. 
A franchisee providing cable service may identify as a separate line item on each regular bill of each subscriber (i) the amount of the total bill assessed as a franchise fee, or any equivalent fee, that the franchisee has paid to the [Locality]; (ii) the amount of the total bill assessed to satisfy any requirements imposed on the franchisee, including those to support PEG access facilities, including institutional networks; and (iii) the amount of any other fee, tax, assessment, or charge of any kind imposed by any governmental entity on the transaction between the franchisee and the subscriber.  
Sec. 3-5. - Modifications. 
Any modification to a franchise shall require the approval of the [Board/Council].  
Sec. 3-6. - Transfer. 
No transfer of any franchise granted under this Ordinance shall occur without the prior consent of the [Locality], provided that the [Board/Council] shall not unreasonably withhold, delay, or condition such consent. No transfer shall be made to a person, group of persons or affiliate that is not legally, technically, and financially qualified to operate the cable system and satisfy the franchise obligations.  
Sec. 3-7. - Surrender. 
A franchisee that receives an ordinance cable franchise under this Ordinance that considers, within three years after the grant of a cable franchise under this Ordinance, that its provision of cable services within the [Locality] is no longer economically feasible, may notify the [Locality] in writing and surrender its cable franchise for the entire [Locality] without liability to the [Locality] (other than for any fees, taxes, or payments owed for the period before the franchisee surrendered the franchise and ceased providing cable service in the [Locality]). If a franchisee so surrenders its cable service franchise, it shall not be eligible to obtain a new cable service franchise within the [Locality] until after the normal expiration date of the franchise that such franchisee surrendered.  
Sec. 3-8. - Renewal. 
A franchisee electing to renew its cable franchise shall do so (i) pursuant to the renewal procedures in 47 USC 546, or (ii) by providing notice to the [Locality] that it will opt into an ordinance cable franchise pursuant to this Ordinance. A franchisee may file such notification that its cable franchise will be renewed by an ordinance cable franchise not more than one year in advance of the expiration date of its existing franchise. Except as provided by federal law, the restrictions in sections 15.2-2015 through 15.2-2018, 15.2-2100 through 15.2-2105, 15.2-2106 and 15.2-2107 of the Code of Virginia, including, but not limited to, the advertisement and receipt of bids for cable franchises, shall not apply to renewal certifications except where a renewal would result in the [Locality] having granted a cable franchise and a renewal with combined terms in excess of 40 years.  
Sec. 3-9. - Bonding. 
A.  Within 30 days after the award of a franchise, the franchisee shall deposit with the [Locality] a performance bond or an irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution running to the [Locality] in the amount of $50,000.00. The bond or letter of credit shall be used to insure the faithful performance by the franchisee of all of the provisions of its franchise and this Ordinance, Sections 15.2-2108.19 et seq. of the Code of Virginia, and the mandatory requirements of 47 USC 521—573 and any rules promulgated thereunder, and compliance with all lawful orders, permits, and directions of any agency, commission, board, department, division, or office of the [Locality] or VDOT having jurisdiction over the acts of the franchisee, or defaults under a franchise or the payment by a franchisee of any penalties, liquidated damages, claims, liens, and taxes due the [Locality] which arise by reason of the construction, operation, or maintenance of franchisee's cable system in the [Locality], including , including restoration of the public rights-of-way and the cost of removal or abandonment of any property of a cable operator. 
B.  Any bond obtained by a franchisee must be placed with a company which is qualified to write bonds in the commonwealth, such bond shall be subject to the approval of the [Locality] attorney and shall contain the following endorsement (or the substantive equivalent of such language as agreed upon by the [Locality]): 
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be cancelled without the consent of the [Locality] until 60 days after receipt by the [Locality] by registered mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice of intent to cancel or not renew." 
C.  Any letter of credit must be issued by a federally insured commercial lending institution and shall be subject to the approval of the [Locality] attorney. 
1.  The letter of credit may be drawn upon by the [Locality] by presentation of a draft at sight on the lending institution, accompanied by a written certificate signed by the chief executive officer of the [Locality] certifying that the franchisee has failed to comply with this Ordinance after having been given due notice and opportunity to cure the failure to comply. Such certificate shall also state the specific reasons for the failure of compliance, and stating the basis of the amount being drawn. 
a.  The [Locality] may withdraw money from the letter of credit or cash security fund in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section. 
b.  The [Locality] shall provide the franchisee with written notice informing the franchisee that such amounts are due to the [Locality]. The written notice shall describe, in reasonable detail, the reasons for the assessment. The franchisee shall have 30 days subsequent to receipt of the notice within which to cure every failure cited by the [Locality] or to notify the [Locality] that there is a dispute as to whether franchisee believes such amounts are due the [Locality]. Such notice by the franchisee to the [Locality] shall specify with particularity the basis of franchisee's belief that such monies are not due the [Locality]. 
c.  Upon the delivery of the necessary documents to the lending institution, the [Locality] has the right to immediate payment from the issuer bank of the amount from the letter of credit necessary to cure the default. 
d.  Any letter of credit shall contain the following endorsement (or the substantive equivalent of such language as agreed upon by the [Locality]: "It is hereby understood and agreed that this letter of credit may not be canceled by the issuer bank nor the intention not to renew be stated by the issuer bank until 60 days after receipt by the [Locality], by registered mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice of such intention to cancel or not to renew." 
D.  Any bond or letter of credit shall be recoverable by the [Locality] for all damages and costs, whether direct or indirect, resulting from the failure of a franchisee to well and faithfully observe and perform any provision of this ordinance. 
E.  The bond or letter of credit shall be maintained at the amount established herein for the entire term of the franchise, even if amounts have to be withdrawn pursuant to this ordinance. The franchisee shall promptly replace any amounts withdrawn from the bond or letter of credit.  
Sec. 3-10. - Indemnification and insurance. 
A.  The franchisee shall indemnify, hold harmless and defend the [Locality], its officers employees, and agents (hereinafter referred to as "indemnities"), from and against: 
1.  Any and all third-party claims for liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants), which may be imposed upon, incurred by or asserted against the indemnitees by reason of any act or omission of the franchisee, its personnel, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors, resulting in personal injury, bodily injury, sickness, disease or death to any person or damage to, loss of or destruction of tangible or intangible property, libel, slander, invasion of privacy and unauthorized use of any trademark, trade name, copyright, patent, service mark or any other right of any person, which may arise out of or be in any way connected with the construction, installation, operation, maintenance, use or condition of the franchisee's cable system caused by franchisee, its contractors, subcontractors or agents or the franchisee's failure to comply with any federal, state or local statute, ordinance or regulation. 
2.  Any and all third-party claims for liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants), which are imposed upon, incurred by or asserted against the indemnitees by reason of any claim or, lien arising out of work, labor, materials or supplies provided or supplied to the franchisee, its contractors or subcontractors, for the installation, construction, operation or maintenance of the franchisee's cable system in the [Locality]. 
3.  Any and all third-party claims for liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants), which may be imposed upon, incurred by or asserted against the indemnitees by reason of any financing or securities offering by franchisee or its affiliates for violations of the common law or any laws, statutes or regulations of the commonwealth or of the United States, including those of the Federal Securities and Exchange Commission, whether by the franchisee or otherwise. 
B.  Damages shall include, but not be limited to, penalties arising out of copyright infringements and damages arising out of any failure by the franchisee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors or licensees, or programs to be delivered by the franchisee's cable system. 
C.  The franchisee undertakes and assumes for its officers, agents, contractors and subcontractors and employees all risk of dangerous conditions, if any, on or about any [Locality]-owned or controlled property, including streets and public rights-of-ways, and the franchisee hereby agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the indemnitees against and from any claim asserted or liability imposed upon the indemnitees for personal injury or property damage to any person arising out of the installation, operation, maintenance or condition of the franchisee's cable system or the franchisee's failure to comply with any federal, state or local statute, ordinance or regulation, except for any claim asserted or liability imposed upon the indemnitees that arises or is related to wanton or willful negligence by the indemnitees. 
D.  In the event any action or proceeding shall be brought against the indemnitees by reason of any matter for which the indemnitees are indemnified hereunder, the franchisee shall, upon notice from any of the indemnitees, and at the franchisee's sole cost and expense, resist and defend the same, provided further, however, that the franchisee shall not admit liability in any such matter on behalf of the indemnitees without the written consent of the [Locality] attorney or his designee. 
E.  The [Locality] shall give the franchisee prompt notice of the making of any written claim or the commencement of any action, suit or other proceeding covered by the provisions of this section. 
F.  Nothing in this Ordinance or in a franchise is intended to, or shall be construed or applied to, express or imply a waiver by the [Locality] of statutory provisions, privileges or immunities of any kind or nature as set forth in the Code of Virginia, including the limits of liability of the [Locality] as exists presently or as may be increased from time to time by the legislature. Nothing in a franchise or this Ordinance shall constitute a waiver of the [Locality's] statutory provisions, privileges or immunities, including the [Locality's] sovereign immunity, of any kind or nature. 
G.  The franchisee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of a franchise hereunder specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, general comprehensive liability insurance insuring the franchisee. All liability insurance shall include an endorsement in a specific form which names as joint and several insured's the [Locality] and the [Locality's] officials, employees and agents, with respect to all claims arising out of the operation and maintenance of the franchisee's cable system in the [Locality]. Liability insurance mentioned herein below shall be in the minimum amounts of: 
1.  $5,000,000.00 for bodily injury or death to anyone person, within the limit of $10,000,000.00 for bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident; 
2.  $5,000,000.00 for property damage, including damage to the [Locality's] property, from any one accident; 
3.  $5,000,000.00 for all other types of liability resulting from any one occurrence; 
4.  Workers compensation insurance as required by the commonwealth; 
5.  A franchisee shall carry and maintain in its own name automobile liability insurance with a limit of $5,000,000 for each person and $5,000,000 for each accident for property damage with respect to owned and non-owned automobiles for the operation of which the franchisee is responsible; and 
6.  Coverage for copyright infringement. 
H.  The inclusion of more than one insured shall not operate to increase the limit of the franchisee's liability, and that insurer waives any right on contribution with insurance which may be available to the [Locality]. 
I.  All policies of insurance required by this section shall be placed with companies which are qualified to write insurance in the commonwealth and which maintain throughout the policy term a General Rating of "A-" and a Financial Size Category of "A:X" as determined by Best Insurance Rating Services. 
J.  Certificates of insurance obtained by the franchisee in compliance with this section must be approved by the [Locality] attorney, and such insurance policy certificate of insurance shall be filed and maintained with the [Locality] clerk during the term of the franchise. The franchisee shall immediately advise the [Locality] attorney of any litigation that may develop that would affect this insurance. 
K.  Should the [Locality] find an insurance document to be in noncompliance, then it shall notify the franchisee, and the franchisee shall be obligated to cure the defect. 
L.  Neither the provisions of this section, nor any damages recovered by the [Locality] thereunder, shall be construed to nor limit the liability of the franchisee under any franchise issued hereunder or for damages. 
M.  The insurance policies provided for herein shall name the [Locality], its officers, employees and agents as additional insured's, and shall be primary to any insurance or self-insurance carried by the [Locality]. The insurance policies required by this section shall be carried and maintained by the franchisee throughout the term of the franchise and such other period of time during which the franchisee operates or is engaged in the removal of its cable system. Each policy shall contain a provision providing that the insurance policy may not be canceled by the surety, nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety, until 30 days after receipt by the [Locality], by registered mail, of written notice of such intention to cancel or not to renew. 
N.  Nothing in this section shall require a franchisee to indemnify, hold harmless or defend the [Locality], its officials, employees or agents, from any claims or lawsuits arising out of the [Locality's] award of a franchise to another person.  
Sec. 3-11. - Inspection of facilities. 
A franchisee shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local construction and engineering codes and regulations, currently in force or hereafter applicable, to the construction, operation or maintenance of its cable system within the [Locality]. The [Locality] shall have the right to review a franchisee's construction plans and specifications to assure compliance with the required standards. After construction has been completed, the [Locality] shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation work performed pursuant to the franchise and to conduct any tests it deems necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this Ordinance and all applicable federal, state and local building and engineering codes. However, the [Locality] shall not be required to review or approve construction plans and specifications or to make any inspections. The franchisee shall be solely responsible for taking all steps necessary to assure compliance with applicable standards and to ensure that its cable system is installed in a safe manner and pursuant to the terms of the franchise and applicable law.  
Sec. 3-12. - Incorporation of amendments to state code, federal law and regulations. 
Code of the Virginia, §§ 15.2-2108.19 through 15.2-2108.31, as amended, and all of the provisions and standards referenced therein, are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. All future amendments to such sections and provisions are hereby automatically incorporated into the city, [Locality] or Town code.  
Chapter 25 - HISTORIC STRUCTURES, SITES AND PLACES 
 
Sec. 25-1. - Purpose. 
The Town Council finds that recognition and identification of structures, sites and places of historical significance in the Town is in the public interest and should be encouraged. 
(Code 1969, § 25-1; Ord. of 11-7-1988)  
Sec. 25-2. - Intent. 
(a)  It is the intent of the Town Council that recognition and identification pursuant to this chapter shall not in and of itself constitute an "official designation" for the purposes and intent of chapter 18, article 26 and shall not constitute a "site" for the purposes of establishing an historic district thereunder, nor shall recognition and identification hereunder in any way preclude, hinder or restrict the prior or subsequent "official designation" of the same structure or site for the purposes and intent of chapter 18, article 26, should such structure or site otherwise fully satisfy the provisions of said chapter 18, article 26. 
(b)  It is further intended that recognition and identification hereunder as opposed to "official designation" as contemplated by chapter 18, article 26, shall be of no legal effect or consequence and totally inapplicable in the application and enforcement of the zoning and subdivision laws otherwise applicable to any such structure or site. Listing of any historic structure, site, or place on the register as provided for in this chapter shall not constitute "official designation" as defined and used in chapter 18, article 26. 
(Code 1969, § 25-2; Ord. of 11-7-1988)  
Sec. 25-3. - Register. 
The Town Manager is authorized and directed to compile a register of such structures, sites and places of historic significance (register) as are approved by the Town Council for inclusion in such register, to publish the same in pamphlet form with a brief description of each structure, site, and place included therein, and to revise and update the same not less frequently than once each two years. No structure, site or place shall be listed on the register except upon application by the owner. 
(Code 1969, § 25-3; Ord. of 11-7-1988)  
Sec. 25-4. - Historic marker. 
The Town Manager is authorized to develop, with such assistance as may be required, an appropriate historic marker of durable, weather-resistant material, and to make the same available at cost to the owners of such structures, sites, and places as are approved by the Town Council for inclusion in the register. The marker shall display words indicating that the structure, site or place to which it is affixed is significant to the history of the Town, and such markers shall be sequentially numbered. 
(Code 1969, § 25-4; Ord. of 11-7-1988; Ord. of 9-1990)  
Sec. 25-5. - Application for registration. 
The owner of any structure, site or place deemed by said owner to be of historic significance to the Town may apply for listing on the register by filing with the Town Manager a letter setting forth the reasons for such inclusion. The letter of application should describe in such detail as the owner thinks necessary the type of structure, site or place which it is desired to list, its size and specific location, significant dates in the history of the subject structure, site or place, the identity of events or people of substantial historic interest with which the structure, site or place has been associated, and such other facts as the applicant deems appropriate. 
(Code 1969, § 25-5; Ord. of 11-7-1988)  
Sec. 25-6. - Consideration of applications—Historic Vienna, Inc. 
(a)  The Town Manager, upon receiving any such letter of application requesting listing on the register, shall promptly transmit the same to the board of directors of Historic Vienna, Incorporated, with a request that said board furnish to the Town Manager a recommendation as to what action on the application is appropriate in the judgment of the board and the reasons therefor. The Town Manager may also consult with or solicit recommendations on the application from such other persons and organizations as the Town Manager deems appropriate. 
(b)  Within 120 days after receiving any such letter application for listing on the register of any structure, site or place, the Town Manager shall transmit the same to the Town Council with a recommendation setting forth what action the Town Manager deems appropriate and the reasons therefor, together with the recommendations and comments of the board of Historic Vienna, Inc., if available, and the recommendations and comments of such other persons and organizations with which the Town Manager shall have consulted. 
(Code 1969, § 25-6; Ord. of 11-7-1988)  
Sec. 25-7. - Same—Town Council. 
The Town Council shall act on each such application within 60 days after receiving the same from the Town Manager. The Town Council may, as it deems appropriate, approve, disapprove, or approve with conditions and qualifications, each application. Any structure, site or place so approved by the Town Council shall thereupon be added to the register and be entitled to display the marker provided for in section 25-4. 
(Code 1969, § 25-7; Ord. of 11-7-1988)  
Sec. 25-8. - Presumptive qualification for registration. 
In considering applications for inclusion on the register, the Town Manager, the board of Historic Vienna, Inc., and the Town Council shall consider the following structures, sites and places as presumptively entitled to inclusion on the register: 
(a)  Buildings and other structures erected at their present location prior to 1900 and which retain all or a substantial portion of their original dimension and appearance. 
(b)  Businesses continuously conducted in the Town since prior to 1900 under the same name or in the same location. 
(c)  Sites and places in the Town that have been used continuously since prior to 1900 for the same purposes, or have remained essentially unchanged since the abandonment or discontinuation of such use. 
(Code 1969, § 25-8; Ord. of 11-7-1988)  
Sec. 25-9. - Non-presumptive qualification for registration. 
In developing recommendations and taking action on applications for inclusion on the register of structures, sites and places other than those described in section 25-8, the Town Manager, the board of Historic Vienna, Inc., and the Town Council shall consider: 
(a)  Structures, sites and places that are more than 50 years old, and possess significance related to the founding or development of the Town or to persons who have achieved local, regional or national prominence; 
(b)  Structures, sites or places which are over 50 years old and considered to be symbolic of the Town's history by reason of their architecture or in the way they have been used; 
(c)  Structures, sites or places less than 50 years old which are considered so unusually or uniquely connected with the Town's historical development as to qualify for inclusion on the register notwithstanding their being less than 50 years old. 
(Code 1969, § 25-9; Ord. of 11-7-1988)  
Chapter 26 - AUXILIARY POLICE FORCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Auxiliary police force, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1731—15.2-1735. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - TITLE; PURPOSE; APPLICABILITY 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Town of Vienna Auxiliary Police Force Ordinance." 
(Code 1969, § 26-1; Ord. of 10-30-1989)  
Sec. 26-2. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to the incorporated territory of the Town and Town-owned property outside the incorporated territory. 
(Code 1969, § 26-2; Ord. of 10-30-1989)  
Sec. 26-3. - Purpose. 
The ordinance from which this chapter is derived is adopted for the further preservation of the public peace, safety, and good order of the Town. 
(Code 1969, § 26-3; Ord. of 10-30-1989)  
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 26-4. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Auxiliary police force means a supplemental police contingent unit comprised of citizen volunteers selectively used to conduct a variety of operational support and administrative assignments. 
(Code 1969, § 26-4; Ord. of 10-30-1989)  
ARTICLE 3. - APPOINTMENT; AUTHORITY AND FUNCTION 
 
Sec. 26-5. - Appointment of auxiliary members. 
The chief of police shall have the authority to appoint as auxiliary police officers as many persons of good character as he shall deem necessary, not to exceed 20, and their appointment shall be revocable at any time by the chief of police. 
(Code 1969, § 26-5; Ord. of 10-30-1989)  
Sec. 26-6. - Authority to prescribe uniform, equipment, organization and regulations. 
The chief of police shall have the authority to prescribe the uniform, equipment, organization and such rules and regulations as he shall deem necessary for the operation of the auxiliary police force. 
(Code 1969, § 26-6; Ord. of 10-30-1989)  
Sec. 26-7. - When auxiliary police personnel may be called into service. 
The chief of police or Town Manager may call into service such auxiliary police officers as may be deemed necessary: 
(a)  In time of public emergency; 
(b)  At such times as there are insufficient number of regular police officers to preserve the peace, safety, and good order of the community; 
(c)  At any time for the purpose of training such auxiliary police officers. 
(Code 1969, § 26-7; Ord. of 10-30-1989)  
Sec. 26-8. - Powers, immunities of auxiliary police personnel. 
The members of the auxiliary police force, when called into service by the chief of police and at his authority, shall have all the powers and immunities of constables at common law, subject to such limitations on powers as may from time to time be prescribed in general orders for such auxiliary police force. 
(Code 1969, § 26-8; Ord. of 10-30-1989)  
Sec. 26-9. - Jurisdictional limitations of auxiliary personnel. 
The members of the auxiliary police force shall not be required to act beyond the limits of the jurisdiction of the Town except when called upon to protect any public property belonging to the Town which may be located beyond its boundaries. 
(Code 1969, § 26-9; Ord. of 10-30-1989)  
Sec. 26-10. - Compensation and civil service status of auxiliary personnel. 
The members of the auxiliary police force shall serve as such without compensation and shall not be subject to the provisions of any law, ordinance, regulation, policy or procedure providing rights or benefits of any nature to the regular police force or employees of the Town; nor shall the members be entitled to any of the benefits of regular police officers as provided by the laws of the commonwealth or ordinances, resolutions and policies of the Town. 
(Code 1969, § 26-10; Ord. of 10-30-1989)  
Sec. 26-11. - Auxiliary personnel to wear uniforms and equipment. 
The members of the auxiliary police force shall wear the uniform and equipment prescribed by the chief of police at all times while serving as auxiliary police officers. 
(Code 1969, § 26-11; Ord. of 10-30-1989)  
Sec. 26-12. - Eligibility requirements; application for membership. 
Any citizen of the United States who is between the ages of 21 and 75 shall be eligible to make application to become a member of the auxiliary police force. Applicants shall apply and will be selected in the form and manner prescribed by the chief of police. 
(Code 1969, § 26-12; Ord. of 10-30-1989; Ord. of 7-3-2000)  
Sec. 26-13. - Auxiliary personnel and conflicts of interest. 
Applicants for the auxiliary police force must not be employed in positions presenting a potential conflict of interest. They include police officers, security guards, military police officers, civilians in law enforcement positions, and firefighters. 
(Code 1969, § 26-13; Ord. of 10-30-1989)  
Chapter 27 - CONSERVATION AND SUSTAINABILITY COMMISSION (CSC)[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of  1-28-2019 , renamed chapter 27, from community enhancement commission to conservation and sustainability commission (CSC). 
 
Sec. 27-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to develop, promote, and coordinate voluntary efforts to introduce and improve conservation, environmental, and sustainability initiatives by the Town, developers, businesses, and residences; to educate citizens about environmental initiatives to benefit and enhance the Town; and to improve the appearance of the commercial, industrial, public, and residential areas of the Town. To that end, there is established a conservation and sustainability commission to act as the focal point for such efforts, and to advise the Town Council and appropriate Town departments on matters relating to conservation, energy, the environment, sustainability, and community appearance. It is intended that functions assigned to the commission be performed by members of the commission, particularly the interface with other Town organizations, the selection of individuals, properties, businesses, or organizations for recognition, and the identification of problem situations. The initiative for commission activities, decisions, and plans should emanate from its members; it is anticipated that commission members actively participate in projects undertaken by the commission. 
(Code 1969, § 27-1; Ord. of 7-6-1992; Ord. of 2-1999; Ord. of 2-2010; Ord. of 1-28-2019 )  
Sec. 27-2. - Membership, appointment, numbers, qualification, terms, removal. 
The commission shall consist of ten members, all of whom shall be appointed by the Town Council. In addition, the director of parks and recreation shall serve as an ex-officio member of the commission. Except for the director of parks and recreation, all appointees shall be either residents of the Town or representatives of businesses, organizations, or professions located in and licensed by the Town. 
1.  Two members shall be selected from among businesses and professional practitioners licensed by the Town. 
2.  Six members shall be selected from among residents of the Town. It is preferred that one member be appointed from each Town quadrant; however, if there are vacancies from a specific Town quadrant that cannot be filled, the members may be appointed at-large. 
3.  In appointing the six citizen members, the Town Council shall consider nominations received from civic associations and persons expressing a willingness to serve. 
4.  Two student members shall be selected from among residents of Vienna. 
The term of all members shall be for two years. The term of student members shall commence on June 1 prior to their junior year of high school. Student members will develop and coordinate student activities in association with the commission. 
Vacancies occurring on the commission for reasons other than the expiration of terms shall be filled by the Town Council for the unexpired term. Members shall be eligible for reappointment. 
Members may be removed from the commission by a majority vote of the Town Council. 
(Code 1969, § 27-2; Ord. of 7-6-1992; Ord. of 7-1994; Ord. of 2-1999; Ord. of 2-2010; Ord. of 12-17-2012, § 2; Ord. of 1-28-2019 )  
Sec. 27-3. - Organization, rules, meetings, records. 
The commission shall, at a meeting to be held each year in the month of June, elect from its number a chairman and a vice chairman to serve for the ensuing fiscal year. 
The commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business, and shall keep records of its discussions, findings, and recommendations, all of which shall be open to public inspection. Meetings of the commission shall be held monthly and as called by the chairman or at the request of a majority of commission members. A quorum shall consist of at least five members of the commission, and all decisions of the commission shall be by majority vote. Meetings, meeting minutes, reports, and letters developed by the commission shall be open to the public. 
(Code 1969, § 27-3; Ord. of 7-6-1992; Ord. of 2-1999; Ord. of 12-17-2012, § 2; Ord. of 1-28-2019 )  
Sec. 27-4. - Powers and duties. 
The conservation and sustainability commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
A.  To recommend policies and programs to the mayor and Town Council relating to community enhancement, e.g., recycling, the environment, energy conservation, and sustainability. The core of this mission is to achieve a sustainable community through planning, education, community initiatives, and policy recommendations. 
B.  To develop and recommend policy initiatives and changes to the mayor and Town Council that promote a sustainable community. These may include: 
(1.)  Energy consumption and conservation; 
(2.)  Environmental enhancement and natural resource conservation; 
(3.)  Recycling programs; 
(4.)  Sustainable development planning and practices; 
(5.)  Promotion of green construction; 
(6.)  Tree protection and replacement programs; and 
(7.)  Application for local, state, federal, and private grants related to the conservation and sustainability commission's mission. 
C.  To educate and encourage Town residents and businesses to be good stewards of the environment through the following: 
(1.)  Publishing regular articles in the Town newsletter and on the Town website; 
(2.)  Encouraging the development of green classes through the parks and recreation department; 
(3.)  Providing seminars on topics of interest to Town residents; and 
(4.)  Speaking with area schools and local organizations to promote school involvement in community initiatives. 
D.  To plan and promote programs and events that further the mission of the commission through the following: 
(1.)  Energy and environment plan: Create and revise, on a three- to five-year schedule, an energy and environment plan to set aspirational goals and targets for creating a more sustainable community. This plan will serve to suggest and recommend energy/environmental conservation and sustainability ideas to the planning commission when it reviews the Town's Comprehensive Plan; 
(2.)  Beautification awards: Present awards to individuals, residents, businesses, or organizations that demonstrate an ongoing effort to enhance the appearance of their property or business; 
(3.)  Sustainable landscape award: Present awards to individuals, residents, businesses, or organizations whose landscape demonstrates elements and the philosophy of a sustainable landscape; 
(4.)  Environmental excellence awards: Present awards to individuals, residents, businesses, or organizations by the mayor and Town Council to recognize outstanding achievement or service to the environment in Vienna; 
(5.)  Town Cleanup Day and Potomac Watershed Cleanup Day: Organize these annual events to promote clean-up of our streams, stream valleys, and parks; 
(6.)  Green Expo: Organize and promote the Green Expo to be held annually during Earth Week; 
(7.)  Celebrate Arbor Day: Plan the annual Arbor Day tree planting; 
(8.)  Promote recycling events within the Town, including an annual recycling road show; 
(9.)  Invasive plant management initiative: Work with local groups to promote the removal of invasive plants in Town parks; 
(10.)  Serve as the Town tree board and maintain Tree City USA status for the Town. 
E.  Not later than January 15 of each year, the chair of the commission shall submit to the Town Council a report of activities accomplished during the previous fiscal year and a specific plan of activities and initiatives for the next fiscal year. 
(Code 1969, § 27-4; Ord. of 7-6-1992; Ord. of 2-1999; Ord. of 2-2010; Ord. of 1-28-2019 )  
Sec. 27-5. - Tree board. 
(a)  The conservation and sustainability commission, acting with the cooperation and advice of the ISA certified Town arborist, shall constitute the Town tree board. 
(b)  The tree board shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  To promote and protect public health, safety, and general community appearance by planning and recommending the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants on public property within the Town. 
2.  To ensure that the planting, maintenance, pruning, and removal of trees and shrubs on public property within the Town are done in accordance with current accepted standards as established and set forth by the National Arborist Association and by the American Association of Nurserymen's Council American Standard for Nursery Stock. 
3.  To develop, maintain, and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal, or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets, and in other public areas. Such plan will be reviewed annually, updated as necessary, and presented to the Town Council; upon acceptance and approval by the Town Council, such plan shall constitute the official public tree management plan for the Town. 
4.  To recommend to the Town Council and to the appropriate municipal department directors the adoption of such rules, regulations, and policies as may be necessary to implement and enforce the public tree management plan and related ordinances. 
5.  To undertake an ongoing program of public outreach and education in order to promote public understanding and support of the Town's public tree management plan and to increase public awareness of the value and benefits of a diversified, sustainable community forest. 
(c)  Review by Town Council. The Town Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts, and decisions of the Town tree board. Further, the tree board, when requested by the Town Council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report on, and recommend any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work. 
(Code 1969, § 27-5; Ord. of 9-2000; Ord. of 1-28-2019 )  
Chapter 28 - VIENNA PUBLIC ART COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 28-1. - Purpose. 
There is hereby created and established a commission to be known as the Vienna Public Art Commission, which shall advise and assist Town Council on matters relating to the advancement of public art in the Town, including the development and funding of a public art program. For the purposes of this section, public art is defined as art in any media that has been planned and executed with the intention of being staged on Town property, the public right-of-way or as part of common areas in developments subject to architectural review. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015(1) )  
Sec. 28-2. - Membership, appointment, numbers, qualification, terms, removal. 
The commission shall consist of seven members, all of whom shall be appointed by the Town Council. In addition, Town representative(s) from parks and recreation department and/or planning and zoning department shall serve as an ex-officio member(s) of the commission. Except for the Town Representative(s), all appointees shall be either residents of the Town or representatives of businesses or professions located in and licensed by the Town. In making all appointments to the commission, the Town Council shall give consideration to persons who have evidenced an interest, expertise or appreciation for the arts. 
A.  Up to two members shall be selected from among businesses and professional practitioners licensed by the Town. 
B.  At least two members shall residents of the Town. 
C.  One member shall be selected from the Vienna Arts Society. 
D.  One member shall be selected from the board of architectural review. 
E.  One member shall be selected from the community enhancement commission. 
The term of all members shall be for two years. Initially, four members of the board shall be appointed for a term of one year and three members shall be appointed for a term of two years. Thereafter, all appointments to the commission, except for those to fill an unexpired term, shall be for a period of two years. All members shall serve without compensation. Vacancies occurring on the commission for reasons other than the expiration of terms shall be filled by the Town Council for the remainder of the unexpired term. Members shall be eligible for reappointment. Members may be removed from the commission by a majority vote of the Town Council. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015(1) )  
Sec. 28-3. - Organization, rules, meetings, records. 
A.  The commission shall, at a meeting to be held each year in the month of July, elect from their number a chair and a vice chair to serve for the ensuing year. The commission may create and fill from among its members such other offices as it may determine to be necessary. 
B.  The commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business, provided that such shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
C.  The commission shall keep records of its discussions, findings and recommendations, to be filed with the Town Clerk. 
D.  The commission shall hold regular and such special meetings as it deems necessary, or as called by the chair or at the request of a majority of the commission. A quorum shall consist of at least four members of the commission, and all decisions of the commission shall be by majority vote of those present at a meeting. Such meetings shall be open to the public, following Open Meeting Law of Virginia. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015(1) )  
Sec. 28-4. - Same—Powers and duties. 
The Vienna Public Art Commission powers and duties shall include: 
A.  Recommending the establishment of the criteria for public art in the Town as well as the process and procedures for commission art to the council. 
B.  Participating in fund raising for public art in Vienna and awareness and promotion of Vienna Public Art Commission's purpose. 
C.  Making recommendations to the Town Council in determining what funds should be provided in the Town's budget for promotion of public art and for the work of the commission. 
D.  Advising the Town Council regarding the appropriateness, feasibility, quality, condition, sustainability and value of all proposed gifts or bequests of public art to the Town or within the development process per established criteria of the Vienna Public Art Commission. 
E.  Advising the Town Council on the design, location, preservation, care and decommissioning of public art owned by the Town. 
F.  Recommend ways to enhance community culture through public art by collaborating resources of arts councils, organizations and societies, including activities, education and accommodations. 
G.  Solicit and incorporate recommendations from arts councils, organizations and societies, when advising or making recommendations to the Town Council. 
H.  Identifying grants and other funding sources to further projects and activities related to public art. 
I.  Not later than August 15 of each year, the chair of the commission shall submit to the Town Council a report of activities accomplished the past fiscal year, including an annual review of all public art installations. 
J.  Not later than January 15 of each year, the chair of the commission shall submit to the Town Council a specific plan of activities and budget for the upcoming fiscal year. 
( Ord. of 3-16-2015(1) ) 
