THE CODE OF THE TOWN OF WARRENTON, VIRGINIA 
____________ 
CHARTER AND GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Town Council, 1987 
____________ 
Adopted January 5, 1988 
Effective January 5, 1988 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF WARRENTON, VIRGINIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
J. Willard Lineweaver 
Mayor 
____________ 
J. Frederick Austin, Jr. 
Vice Mayor 
____________ 
Frank S. Foley 
Kathryn A. Carter 
Robert W. Rice 
John E. Mann, Sr. 
Robert L. Walker 
James N. Hartman 
Town Council 
____________ 
Donald A. Smith 
Town Manager 
____________ 
Carroll J. Martin, Jr. 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Evelyn J. Weimer 
Town Recorder 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the Warrenton, Virginia, of a general and permanent nature. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1981 Code, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the town council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1981 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 2 is numbered 2-1 and the ninth section of Chapter 3 is 3-9. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 3-3 and 3-4 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 3-3.1, 3-3.2 and 3-3.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 4 and 5, it will be designated as Chapter 4.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
    The indices of the Code have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officers and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Successfully keeping this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of Milton E. Lefkoff, Supervising Editor, and Ronald McLaughlin, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publishers are most grateful to Mr. Carroll J. Martin, Jr., Town Attorney, and Mr. Donald A. Smith, Town Manager, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the Town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the Town's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 1997-02 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the Town of Warrenton, Virginia, Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein, Providing for a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
    Be It Ordained by the Town Council for the Town of Warrenton, that the Code for the Town of Warrenton, Virginia Be Amended, Re-stated and Re-adopted in its Entirety As Follows: 
• 
The Code entitled "The Code of the Town of Warrenton, Virginia," published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 17, each inclusive, and the Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Ordinance published by the Town of Warrenton, and any amendments contained in this ordinance, are hereby re-adopted and re-codified as follows: 
Chapter  1. General Provisions. 
Chapter  2. Administration. 
Chapter  3. Animals and Fowl. 
Chapter  4. Buildings. 
Chapter  5. Cemetery. 
Chapter  6. Dealers in Precious Metals and Gems. 
Chapter  7. Fire Prevention and Protection. 
Chapter  8. Garbage, Trash and Weeds. 
Chapter  9. Licenses. 
Chapter 10. Motor Vehicles and Traffic. 
Chapter 11. Offenses-Miscellaneous. 
Chapter 12. Police Department. 
Chapter 13. Solicitors. 
Chapter 14. Streets and Sidewalks. 
Chapter 15. Taxation. 
Chapter 16. Taxicabs. 
Chapter 17. Water and Sewers. 
Chapter 18. Zoning Ordinance. 
Chapter 19. Subdivision Ordinance. 
• 
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before March 11, 1997, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
• 
The repeal provided for above shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
• 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provisions of the Code, or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor; however, any lesser penalty provided by state law for a like offense shall apply. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the town may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
• 
Future additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the council to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
• 
Ordinances adopted after March 11, 1997, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption. 
Voting For: Lewis, Reynolds, Foley, Mann, Rice, Tarr, Walker 
Against: _____ 
Adopted this 11th day of March, 1997. 
      Evelyn J. Weimer, Recorder   ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 1988-1 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the Town of Warrenton, Virginia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the Council of the Town of Warrenton, Virginia: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the Town of Warrenton, Virginia," published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 17, each inclusive is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before June 2, 1987, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provisions of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor; however, any lesser penalty provided by state law for a like offense shall apply. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the town may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the council to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after June 2, 1987, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective January 5, 1988. 
Passed and adopted by the town council this 5th day of January, 1988. 
      J. Williard Lineweaver, Mayor         Evelyn J. Weimer, Recorder   Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the council of the Town of Warrenton, Virginia held on the 5th day of January, 1988. 
      Evelyn J. Weimer, Recorder   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No. 2010-01  6- 8-10 Omitted 37 2010-02  6- 8-10 Omitted 37 2010-03  8-10-10 Included 37 2011-01  6-14-11 Omitted 37 2011-02  6-14-11 Omitted 37 2011-03  8- 9-11 Included 37 2011-04 12-13-11 Included 37 Ord. of  4-12-11 Included 37 2012-01  6-11-12 Omitted 37 2012-02  6-11-12 Omitted 37 2012-3  9-11-12 Included 37 2013-01  6-11-13 Omitted 38 2013-02  6-11-13 Omitted 38 2013-3  8-13-13 Included 38 2013-04  8-13-13 Included 38 2014-01  6-10-14 Omitted 38 2014-02  6-10-14 Omitted 38 2014-03  8-12-14 Included 38 2014-04 12- 9-14 Included 38 2014-05 12- 9-14 Included 38 2015-01(a)  3-10-15 Included 39 2015-01(b)  6- 9-15 Omitted 39 2015-02  6- 9-15 Omitted 39 2015-03  8-11-15 Included 39 2015-04  8-11-15 Included 39 2015-05 12- 8-15 Omitted 39 2016-01  1-12-16 Included 39 2016-02  6-14-16 Omitted 40 2016-03  6-14-16 Omitted 40 2016-04  6-14-16 Omitted 40 2016-05  7-12-16 Included 40 2016-06  7-12-16 Omitted 40 2016-07 10-11-16 Included 40 2016-08  9-13-16 Included 40 2017-01  2-14-17 Included 40 2017-02  3-14-17 Included 40 2016-09  6-14-16 Included 41 2017-03  6-13-17 Omitted 41 2017-04  6-13-17 Omitted 41 2017-05  6-13-17 Omitted 41 2017-06  5- 9-17 Included 41 2017-07  5- 9-17 Included 41 2017-08  9-12-17 Included 41 2017-09  9-12-17 Included 41 2018-01  6-12-18 Omitted 41 2018-02  6-12-18 Omitted 41 2018-03  6-12-18 Included 41 2018-04  6-12-18 Omitted 41 2018-05  6-12-18 Omitted 41 2018-06  8-14-18 Included 41 2018-07  8-14-18 Included 41 2018-08 12-11-18 Included 42 2019-01  1- 8-19 Included 42  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
    An act to provide a new charter for the Town of Warrenton in the County of Fauquier, Virginia, and to repeal Chapter 189, Acts of Assembly, Extra Session, 1902-03-04, approved April 30, 1903, which provided a charter for the Town of Warrenton, and all amendments thereof. 
    Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Virginia: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The charter is derived from section 1 of Chapter 47 (page 77 et seq.) of the 1964 Acts of the General Assembly and is set out herein as it appeared in the 1981 Warrenton Town Code. A uniform system of capitalization has been used. Amendments have been added and are indicated by history notes appearing in parentheses () at the end of the amended sections. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is derived, unamended, from Acts 1964, Chapter 47. Any words appearing in brackets [] were added by the editor for clarity. Certain section catchlines and article titles, appearing in boldface type, were amended in the 1981 codification for editorial purposes and should not be construed to restrict, limit or affect the contents of the sections and articles. 
Sections 2 and 3 of Acts 1964, Chapter 47, read as follows: 
 "2. Chapter 189, Acts of Assembly, Extra Session, 1902-03-04, approved April 30, 1903, and all amendments thereof, are hereby repealed. 
 3. An emergency exists and this act is in force from its passage." 
The act was approved on February 19, 1964. 

ARTICLE I. - CREATION 

Sec. 1-1. - Incorporation. 
    The inhabitants of the territory comprised within the limits of the Town of Warrenton, as the same are now or may hereafter be established by law, shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name of the Town of Warrenton and as such shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, contract and be contracted with, and may have a corporate seal which it may alter at its pleasure. 
Sec. 1-2. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the town shall be the boundaries of the Town of Warrenton, its predecessor as established by Chapter 189, Acts of Assembly, Extra Session 1902-03-04, as confirmed by section 1, of Chapter 18 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 1912, approved January 31, 1912, as modified and enlarged by the decree of the circuit court of Fauquier County, entered on December 11, 1959, in the annexation proceedings styled Town of Warrenton v. County of Fauquier, Virginia, which decree is recorded in the clerk's office of the circuit court of Fauquier County, Virginia in Common Law Order Book "X" at pages 376-377-378; and as modified and enlarged by the decree of the circuit court of Fauquier County, entered on December 7, 1979, in the annexation proceedings styled Meadow Run, Ltd. v. Fauquier County and Town of Warrenton, which decree is recorded in the clerk's office of the circuit court of Fauquier County, Virginia, in D.B. 391 at page 358. 
Editor's note- By a decree of the circuit court, dated December 7, 1979, 46.3905 acres of land were annexed to the town, effective January 1, 1980. 
ARTICLE II. - CORPORATE POWERS 

Sec. 2-1. - General powers. 
    The Town of Warrenton shall have and may exercise all powers which are now or may hereafter be conferred upon or delegated to cities and towns under the constitution and laws of the commonwealth, and all other powers pertinent to the conduct of municipal government, the exercise of which is not prohibited by the constitution and laws of the commonwealth, and which in the opinion of the council are necessary to promote the general welfare of the inhabitants of the town. It is intended that the town shall possess all powers which, under the constitution, it would be competent for this charter to enumerate specifically, and no enumeration of particular powers shall be held to be exclusive, but in addition to this general grant. 
    The powers which are now or may hereafter be conferred upon or delegated to the town under the constitution and laws of the commonwealth and this charter shall be construed liberally when such powers are exercised by the town and in case of doubt as to the existence of a power such doubt shall be resolved in favor of the town. 
Sec. 2-2. - Financial powers generally. 
    The Town of Warrenton shall have the power to raise annually by taxes and assessments in said town such sums of money as the council thereof shall deem necessary for the purposes of the town, and in such manner as the council may deem expedient in accordance with the constitution and general laws of the commonwealth and of the United States, and to expend the money of said town for all lawful purposes. 
Sec. 2-3. - Special assessments. 
    The Town of Warrenton shall have the power to impose special or local assessments for local improvements and to enforce the payment thereof, subject to the limitations prescribed by the constitution and laws of the commonwealth as may be in force at the time of the imposition of such special or local assessments. 
Sec. 2-4. - Borrowing power. 
    The Town of Warrenton may incur indebtedness by issuing its negotiable bonds and notes for the purposes and in the manner provided in the constitution and general laws of the commonwealth. 
(Acts 1968, Ch. 75, § 1) 
Sec. 2-5. - Eminent domain. 
    The Town of Warrenton is hereby empowered to acquire by condemnation or otherwise, property, real or personal, or any interest or estate therein, either within or without its corporate limits, for any of its proper purposes, and may sell, lease, manage, and control such property as its interests require, and in such manner as [the] council deems expedient. 
Sec. 2-6. - Enactment, etc., of ordinances. 
    The Town of Warrenton shall have the power to enact and enforce ordinances to carry into effect all powers granted by this charter. 
Sec. 2-7. - Adoption of certain provisions of title 15.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
    The powers set forth in sections 15.1-835 through 15.1-907 of Chapter 18 of Title 15.1 of the Code of Virginia as in force on January 1, 1968, are hereby conferred on and vested in the Town of Warrenton. 
(Acts 1968, Ch. 75, § 1) 
Editor's note- Code of Virginia, Title 15.1, Ch. 18, now begins with section 15.1-837. 
ARTICLE III. - THE COUNCIL GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-1. - Composition; members to be qualified voters. 
    The Town of Warrenton shall be governed by a town council which shall be composed of seven (7) members who shall be qualified voters of the town. 
Sec. 3-2. - Election and terms of members. 
    The members of the council in office at the effective date of this charter amendment will hereby continue in office until June thirtieth [,] nineteen hundred eighty-seven. On the first Tuesday in May, nineteen hundred eighty-seven, there shall be elected seven (7) councilmen, five (5) of whom shall be elected from wards and two (2) at large. The ward councilmen shall serve for a term of one (1) year and the at-large councilmen for a term of three (3) years. On the first Tuesday in May, nineteen hundred eighty-eight, the five (5) ward councilmen will run for terms of four (4) years. On the first Tuesday in May, nineteen hundred ninety, the two (2) at-large councilmen will run for terms of four (4) years. On the first Tuesday in May nineteen hundred ninety-two, the five (5) ward councilmen will run for terms of four (4) years. Thereafter all councilmen shall be elected for terms of four (4) years to fill vacancies caused by expiration of terms of office as hereinabove provided. 
(Acts 1971, Ex. Sess., Ch. 78, § 1; Ord. of 12-16-86, § 3-2) 
Editor's note- The wording of the above section has been corrected as instructed by the town. 
State Law reference- Council of town as judge of election, etc., of members, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-830. 
Sec. 3-3. - When councilmen take office. 
    All councilmen shall take office on the first day of July next following their election. 
(Acts 1971, Ex. Sess., Ch. 78, § 1) 
Sec. 3-4. - Compensation. 
    The council may by ordinance authorize the payment of an annual salary to councilmen, subject to such limitations as may be imposed by the general laws of the commonwealth. 
State Law reference- Salaries of town council members, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-827.1. 
Sec. 3-5. - Filling vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the council shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term by a majority vote of the remaining members of the council, if such vacancy shall occur two (2) years or less before the date of expiration of such terms. If the vacancy shall occur more than two (2) years before the expiration of the term, the vacancy shall be filled by a majority vote of the remaining members of the council only until the next councilmanic election, at which election the qualified voters shall elect a person to serve as councilman for the remaining two (2) years of the term. 
Sec. 3-6. - Vesting powers of town. 
    All powers of the Town of Warrenton as a body politic and corporate shall be vested in the town council. 
Sec. 3-7. - Appointment, etc., of town attorney. 
    The council may appoint a town attorney whose term of appointment, duties, and compensation shall be prescribed by the council. 
Sec. 3-8. - Appointment, etc., of recorder. 
    The council may appoint a recorder whose term of appointment, duties, and compensation shall be prescribed by the council. 
ARTICLE IV. - COUNCILMANIC PROCEDURES, ETC 

Sec. 4-1. - Regular meetings. 
    The council shall meet in regular session at least once each month. 
Sec. 4-2. - Special meetings. 
    The council shall provide for the calling of special meetings by the mayor, the town manager, or any four (4) members of the council, and shall prescribe the method of giving notice thereof, provided such notice shall contain a statement of the specific item or items of business to be transacted, and no other business shall be transacted at such meetings except by the unanimous consent of all the members of council; provided, however, that a special meeting may be held at any time without notice if all members of the council attend said meeting or waive notice thereof. 
State Law reference- Giving notice of time and place of meetings, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-343. 
Sec. 4-3. - Quorum. 
    A majority of the members of the council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
Sec. 4-4. - Prerequisites to passage of ordinances, etc. 
    No ordinance, resolution, motion or vote shall be adopted by the council except at a meeting open to the public and unless it shall have received the affirmative votes of the majority of the members present. 
State Law reference- Virginia Freedom of Information Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-340 et seq.; executive or closed meetings, Code of Virginia, §§ 2.1-341, 2.1-344. 
Sec. 4-5. - Reconsideration, etc., of vote at special meeting. 
    No vote shall be reconsidered or rescinded at any special meeting unless at such special meeting there are present as large a number of members as were present when such vote was taken. 
Sec. 4-6. - Financial interest as limitation on voting power. 
    No member of the council shall participate in the vote on any ordinance, resolution, motion, or other proceeding in which he, or any person, firm, or corporation for which he is attorney, officer, director, employee, or agent has a financial interest other than as a minority stockholder of a corporation or as a citizen of the town. 
State Law reference- State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-639.1 et seq. 
ARTICLE V. - THE MAYOR 

Sec. 5-1. - Election and term. 
    The mayor in the office at the effective date of this charter amendment will hereby continue in office until July one, nineteen hundred seventy-eight. On the first Tuesday in May, nineteen hundred seventy-eight, and every four (4) years thereafter, there shall be elected from the town at large a mayor, who shall be a qualified voter of the town and who shall serve for a term of four (4) years. The mayor shall take office on the first day of July next following his election. 
(Acts 1971, Ex. Sess., Ch. 78, § 1; Acts 1977, Ch. 133, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2. - Duties generally. 
    The mayor shall preside over the meetings of the council and shall have the same right to speak therein as councilmen; however, he shall not have the right to vote except in the case of a tie, in which event he shall be entitled to cast one (1) vote. He shall be recognized as the head of the town government for all ceremonial purposes, the purposes of military law and the service of civil process. 
Sec. 5-3. - Compensation. 
    The council may by ordinance authorize the payment of an annual salary to the mayor, subject to such limitations as may be imposed by the general laws of the commonwealth. 
State Law reference- Salary of mayor, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-827. 
ARTICLE VI. - THE TOWN MANAGER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Town manager, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-795. 

Sec. 6-1. - Establishment of position; responsibilities; qualifications; term. 
    There shall be a town manager who shall be the chief executive officer of the town and shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of the town government. He shall be chosen by the council without regard to his political beliefs and solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications. He shall be appointed for an indefinite period and shall hold office during the pleasure of the council. 
Sec. 6-2. - Appointment and removal of officers and employees. 
    The town manager shall appoint for an indefinite term the heads of all departments and all other officers and employees of the town. The manager shall have the power to remove any officer or employee appointed by him. 
Editor's note- See §§ 3-7 and 3-8, above. 
Sec. 6-3. - Duties and powers generally. 
    The town manager shall also have the following duties and powers: 
(a)  To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced. 
(b)  To exercise supervision and control over all administrative departments and divisions. 
(c)  To attend all regular meetings of the council, with the right to take part in the discussion, but having no vote. 
(d)  To recommend to the council for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or desirable. 
(e)  To execute all contracts on behalf of the town. 
(f)  To prepare and submit to the council the annual budget. 
(g)  To keep the council advised as to the present and future needs of the town and as to all operations of its government. 
(h)  To perform all such other duties as may be prescribed by the charter, or be required of him by the council. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Public Finance Act, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-170 et seq. 

Sec. 7-1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year for the Town of Warrenton shall begin on July first, and end June thirtieth of the following year. 
State Law reference- Uniform fiscal year, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-159.8. 
Sec. 7-2. - Procedure as to budget, etc. 
    Not later than the first day of May annually, the town manager shall prepare and submit to the council a budget presenting a financial plan for conducting the affairs of the town for the ensuing fiscal year. Such budget shall be set up in the manner provided for law and shall include such information as the council by ordinance or resolution may require. Hearings on the budget shall be held and notice thereof given and the budget adopted in accordance with the general laws of the commonwealth, provided that the tax levy for each fiscal year shall be made, and the budget for each fiscal year shall be adopted prior to the first day of the fiscal year for which made or adopted. 
State Law reference- Municipal budgets, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-160 et seq. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ANNUAL AUDIT 

Sec. 8-1. - Generally. 
    After the close of each fiscal year the council shall cause to be made an independent audit of the accounts, books, records and financial transactions of the town by the auditor of public accounts of the commonwealth or by a firm of independent certified public accountants to be selected by the council. The report of such audit shall be filed within such time as the council shall specify and one copy thereof shall be always available for public inspection in the office of the town manager during regular business hours. 
State Law reference- Audit of local government records, etc., by auditor of public accounts, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-167. 
ARTICLE IX. - MUNICIPAL COURT[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- The provisions of this article were deleted pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 16.1-70.1, which abolished courts of limited jurisdiction. 

ARTICLE X. - CONTINUATION AND REPEAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 10-1. - Repeal of former charters. 
    All former charters and amendments thereto for the Town of Warrenton, Virginia, are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 10-2. - Succession of town to rights and duties. 
    The Town of Warrenton shall succeed to all the rights, duties, obligations, and contracts of the former Town of Warrenton. 
Sec. 10-3. - Continuance in force of ordinances. 
    All ordinances of the former Town of Warrenton not inconsistent with this charter shall remain in full force and effect until amended or repealed by the town council. 
Sec. 10-4. - Continuity of terms of officers. 
    The officers of the Town of Warrenton who were in office immediately prior to the adoption of this charter shall remain in office until the expiration of their several terms and until their successors have been duly elected and qualified. 
Sec. 10-5. - Severability. 
    In the event that any portion, section, or provision of this charter shall be declared illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional by final judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction such judgment shall not invalidate any other portion, section, or provision hereof, but all parts of this charter not expressly held to be invalid shall remain in full force and effect. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and the acts amending the Charter. 
Year Chapter Section Section 
this Charter 1964 47 1-6-10-10 1-1-10-5 1968 75 1 Char., § 2-4 Char., § 2-7 1971(Ex. Sess.) 78 1 Char., § 3-2 Char., § 3-3 Char., § 5-1 1977 133 1 Char., § 5-1  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Incorporation of town, § 1-1; boundaries of town, § 1-2; enactment of ordinances, § 2-6; continuation and repeal provisions, Art. X. 
State Law reference- Adoption and enforcement of municipal ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-13. 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated and cited as "The Code of the Town of Warrenton, Virginia." Such Code may also be cited as "The Warrenton Town Code." 
(Code 1981, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Authority of town to codify and recodify its ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37.3. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the town, the following rules shall be observed, unless otherwise specifically provided or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council. 
    The rules of construction given in sections 1-13.1 to 1-15, Code of Virginia, shall govern, so far as applicable, the construction of all other words not defined in this section, in other sections of this Code or in other ordinances of the town. 
    Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
State Law reference- "Bond with surety" defined, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.1:1. 
    Charter. The word "charter" shall mean the charter of the town as it now exists or as it may be amended in the future. 
    Code. Whenever the term "Code" or "this Code" is used without further qualification, it shall mean The Code of the Town of Warrenton, Virginia, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Code of Virginia. The words "Code of Virginia" shall mean the Code of Virginia of 1950, as it now exists or as it may be amended in the future. 
    Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done, a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
State Law reference- Computation of time, Code of Virginia, §§ 1-13.3, 1-13.3:1. 
    Council. The word "council" shall mean the council of the Town of Warrenton. 
State Law reference- "Council" defined, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.5. 
    County. The word "county" shall be construed as if the words "of Fauquier" followed it. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
State Law reference- Gender, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.7. 
    Health department. The words "health department" shall mean the health department of Fauquier County. 
    Health director. The words "health director" shall mean the health director of the Fauquier County health department or his authorized agent. 
    In the town. The words "in the town" shall mean any territory jurisdiction of which, for the exercise of its regulatory power, has been conferred on the town by public or private law. 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more public officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.1. 
    May. The word "may" is permissive. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.13. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well as to one (1) person or thing; and a word importing the plural number only may extend and be applied to one (1) person or thing, as well as to several persons or things. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.15. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.16; when affirmation may be made, Code of Virginia, § 49.9. 
    Officers; boards; etc. Whenever reference is made to a particular officer, department, board, commission or other agency, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the Town of Warrenton, Virginia." 
    Or; and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, companies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
State Law reference- "Person" defined, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.19. 
    Preceding; following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
State Law reference- "Following" defined, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.6; "preceding" defined, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.23. 
    Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line, or the lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature; subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when a person cannot write. 
    Standard time. Whenever particular hours are referred to, the time applicable shall be official standard time or daylight saving time, whichever may be in current use in the town. 
State Law reference- Standard eastern time, daylight saving time, Code of Virginia, § 1-15. 
    State; commonwealth. The words "state" and "commonwealth" shall be construed as if the words "of Virginia" followed. 
State Law reference- "State" defined, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.26. 
    Street. The word "street" shall include public avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto and all other public thoroughfares in the town and shall mean the entire width thereof between abutting property lines and a sidewalk or footpath. 
    Swear; sworn. The word "swear" or "sworn" shall be equivalent to the word "affirm" or "affirmed" in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.28; when affirmation may be made, Code of Virginia, § 49-9. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Town. The words "the town" shall mean the Town of Warrenton, in the State of Virginia. 
State Law reference- "Town" defined, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.29. 
    Written; in writing. The word "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.32. 
    Year. The word "year" shall be construed to mean a calendar year; and the word "year" alone shall be equivalent to the expression "year of our Lord." 
(Code 1981, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- "Year" defined, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.33. 
Sec. 1-3. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of the 1981 Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the 1981 Code and included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1981, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this Code or the application thereof to any person or circumstances which are held invalid shall not affect the validity of other provisions or applications of this Code which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or applications. 
(Code 1981, § 1-4) 
State Law reference- Severability of statutory provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-17.1 
Sec. 1-5. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part thereof, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1981, § 1-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions applicable to Code of Virginia, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.9. 
Sec. 1-6. - Notice to town attorney of appeals to circuit court. 
    In any case arising under any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the town where there is a conviction and an appeal allowed to the circuit court of the county, the court trying such case shall immediately notify in writing the town attorney of such appeal and request him to represent the town in such appeal before the circuit court of the county. 
(Code 1981, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance or resolution of the town or any rule or regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the town under authority duly vested in him or it, any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor and no specific penalty is provided for the violation thereof, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  For Class 1 misdemeanors, confinement in jail for not more than twelve (12) months and a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), either or both. 
(2)  For Class 2 misdemeanors, confinement in jail for not more than six (6) months and a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), either or both. 
(3)  For Class 3 misdemeanors, a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(4)  For Class 4 misdemeanors, a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(5)  A misdemeanor for which no punishment or no maximum punishment is prescribed by statute or ordinance shall be punishable as a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(6)  Where a provision of this Code prescribes punishment by stating that the offense is a misdemeanor or that it is punishable as provided for in section 1-7, the offense shall be deemed to be a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this section to the contrary, no penalty for violation of any such provision, ordinance, etc., shall exceed the penalty prescribed by general law for a like offense. 
(c)  Unless otherwise provided, each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance, resolution, regulation, rule or order shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1981, § 1-7; Ord. No. 1996-1, 2-13-96; Ord. No. 1997-02, 3-11-97) 
State Law reference- Penalties for violations of municipal ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-901; bond of persons convicted to prevent additional violations, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-902; injunctive relief against continuing violation of ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-905; classification of criminal offenses, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-9; punishment for conviction of misdemeanor, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-11; punishment for misdemeanor where no penalty prescribed, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-12, 18.2-13. 
Sec. 1-8. - Miscellaneous ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered before the effective date of this Code; 
(3)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the town or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the town or any evidence of the town's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the town; 
(4)  Any right or franchise conferred by ordinance or resolution; 
(5)  Any appropriation or budget ordinance; 
(6)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes, fees or other charges; 
(7)  Any ordinance providing for any public improvement; 
(8)  Any ordinance making any assessment; 
(9)  Any ordinance naming, renaming, opening, relocating, accepting, closing or vacating any streets or alleys; 
(10)  Any ordinance relative to position classification, salaries, wages or compensation or bonds of town officers or employees and of members and employees of town boards or commissions; 
(11)  Any ordinance relative to zoning or to zoning map changes; 
(12)  Any ordinance relative to building lines or setback lines; 
(13)  Any ordinance relative to subdivisions; 
(14)  Any ordinance relative to soil erosions and sedimentation control; 
(15)  Any ordinance relative to industrial costs for wastewater treatment; 
(16)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the town; 
(17)  Any ordinance adopted for purposes which have been consummated; 
(18)  Any ordinance which is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1981-2, § 3, 2-3-81) 
State Law reference- Repeal of law not to affect liabilities, Code of Virginia, § 1-16. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by town personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the town council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been replaced shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections_______ to_______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
State Law reference- Authority of town to supplement Code, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37.3. 
Sec. 1-10. - Copies of Code and supplements to be available for public inspection. 
    At least three (3) copies of this Code and at least three (3) copies of every supplement thereto shall be kept in the office of the town recorder and shall there be available for public inspection during normal business hours. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37.3. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Corporate powers, Art. II; mayor, Art. V; financial administration generally, Art. VII; annual audit, Art. VIII. 
Cross reference- Cemetery, Ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; garbage, trash and weeds, Ch. 8; police department, Ch. 12; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 14; taxation, Ch. 15; water and sewers, Ch. 17; animal warden, § 3-2; building official, § 4-2; electrical inspector, § 4-31 et seq.; cemetery caretaker, § 5-3; chief of police, § 12-31 et seq. 
State Law reference- The Virginia Freedom of Information Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-340 et seq.; counties, cities and towns, Code of Virginia, Title 15.1; government of cities and towns, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-792 et seq.; provisions affecting towns only, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-826 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Town depositories. 
    The funds of the town shall be deposited to the credit of the town by the finance director in such banks as the council may direct, and such banks shall give bond or deposit collateral securities as provided in the Virginia Security for Public Deposits Act (Code of Virginia, section 2.1-359 et seq.). 
(Code 1981, § 2-1) 
Cross reference- Licenses, Ch. 9; taxation, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference- Authority of institutions holding public deposits to secure such deposits, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-368; definitions applicable to the Virginia Security for Public Deposits Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-360. 
Sec. 2-2. - Deposit of town money in depository account; withdrawals. 
(a)  All funds received by the town shall be deposited to the credit of the town in qualified public depositories as the same are authorized under the Virginia Security for Public Deposit Act, Chapter 23, Section 2.1-359 et seq., of the Code of Virginia, in special accounts authorized thereunder. 
(b)  Any such funds may, at the discretion of the finance director or deputy finance director, be invested in local government investment pools authorized under Section 2.1-234.8 of the Code of Virginia and the town's investment policy as adopted by the town council. 
(c)  All disbursements of funds deposited by the town shall be made directly or from funds invested as authorized under subsection (b). All disbursements are to be made by bank check or electronic funds transfer. 
(d)  The finance director or deputy finance director shall prepare a statement of disbursements which shall include therein the name of the payee and the amount of each disbursement. Each disbursement shall be in payment of properly prepared vouchers which have been certified for payment by the town manager. The statement of disbursements shall identify the source of funds from which the disbursement is to be made and be signed by either the finance director or the deputy finance director and signed by the town manager. 
(e)  Bank checks or electronic funds transfer authorizations for disbursements approved under the previous subsections shall be signed by either the finance director or the deputy finance director, whoever did not sign the statement of disbursements identified in the previous subsection. 
(Code 1981, §§ 2-2, 2-3; Ord. No. 1995-5, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 1998-08, 6-9-98) 
State Law reference- Deposit of public funds pursuant to the Virginia Security for Public Deposits Act, Code of Virginia, §§ 2.1-366, 2.1-367; liabilities, Code of Virginia, §§ 2.1-363, 2.1-370. 
Secs. 2-3-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Election of members of council, § 3-2; filling vacancies on council, § 3-5. 
State Law reference- Elections, Code of Virginia, Title 24.1; municipal elections, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37.4 et seq.; election of local officers, Code of Virginia, § 24.1-90 et seq.; town election process, notice and cost of election, Code of Virginia, § 24.1-93; elections on issues of indebtedness, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-235.1. 

Sec. 2-21. - Wards. 
    The following wards in the town are provided for, established and laid off: 
(1)  First Ward: Beginning at the intersection of the corporate limits and Business Route 17; thence in a clockwise direction following the corporate limits in a northerly direction to the northernmost point of the corporate limits thence following the corporate limits in an easterly direction crossing Hastings Lane, then crossing Route 672 to Route 15-29; thence following the eastern corporate limits in a southerly direction on the Eastern Bypass, Alternate U.S. Routes 29 and 15 to the point where it crosses under Academy Hill Extended; thence following Academy Hill Extended in a westerly direction to its intersection with Walker Drive; thence following Walker Drive in a northerly direction to its intersection with Blackwell Road; thence in a southerly direction on Blackwell Road to its intersection with Alexandria Pike; thence following Alexandria Pike in a southerly direction to its intersection with King Street; thence following King Street in a northerly direction to its intersection with Winchester Street; thence following Winchester Street in a northerly direction to its intersection with Broadview Avenue and Route 17; thence following Route 17 in a northerly direction to its intersection with the corporate limits, the point beginning. 
(2)  Second Ward: Beginning at the southernmost corporate limits of the town, at the center point of Turkey Run; thence in a clockwise direction meandering with the centerline of Turkey Run in a westerly direction to its intersection with James Madison Highway (Route 15-29); thence following James Madison Highway in a northerly direction to its intersection with Falmouth Street and East Shirley Avenue; thence following East Shirley Avenue in a northwesterly direction to its intersection with Madison Street; thence following Madison Street in a southeasterly direction to its intersection with Falmouth Street; thence following Falmouth Street in a northerly direction to its intersection with East Street; thence following East Street in an easterly direction to its intersection with East Lee Street; thence following East Lee Street in an easterly direction to its intersection with Walker Drive; thence following Walker Drive in a northerly direction to its intersection with Academy Hill Road; thence following Academy Hill Road in a southwesterly direction to its intersection with Horner Street; thence following Horner Street in a westerly direction to its intersection with Fifth Street; thence following Fifth Street in a southerly direction to its intersection with Main Street; thence following Main Street in a westerly direction to its intersection with Third Street; thence following Third Street in a northerly direction to its intersection with Horner Street; thence following Horner Street in a westerly direction to its intersection with Alexandria Pike; thence following Alexandria Pike in a northerly direction to its intersection with Blackwell Road; thence following Blackwell Road in a northerly direction to its intersection with Walker Drive; thence following Walker Drive in an easterly direction to its intersection with Academy Hill Extended; thence following Academy Hill Extended in an easterly direction to the eastern corporate limits at the Eastern Bypass, Alternate U.S. Routes 29 and 15; thence following the eastern corporate limits in a southerly direction on the Eastern Bypass, Alternate U.S. Routes 29 and 15 across its intersection with Route 643, Meetze Road Interchange to its intersection with the center point of Turkey Run, the point of beginning. 
(3)  Third Ward: Beginning at the corner of Falmouth and Madison Streets in a clockwise direction; thence following Madison Street in a westerly direction to its intersection with East Shirley Avenue; thence following East Shirley Avenue in a southeasterly direction to its intersection with Falmouth Street and James Madison Highway; thence following James Madison Highway in a southerly direction to its intersection with the new corporate limits between the Town of Warrenton and the County of Fauquier, established by the Circuit Court of Fauquier County on May 8, 2001; thence following the new southwestern corporate limit in a northwesterly direction to its intersection with Culpeper Street, thence following Culpeper Street in a northeasterly direction to its intersection with East Shirley Avenue; thence following East Shirley Avenue in an easterly direction to its intersection with Green Street; thence following Green Street in an northeasterly direction to its intersection with Franklin Street; thence following Franklin Street in a northerly direction to its intersection with Third Street; thence following Third Street in a northern direction to Beckham Street; thence following Beckham Street in a westerly direction to its intersection with Culpeper Street; thence following Culpeper Street in a northerly direction to its intersection with Main Street; thence following Main Street in a westerly direction to its intersection with Alexandria Pike; thence following Alexandria Pike in a northerly direction to its intersection with Horner Street; thence following Horner Street in an easterly direction to its intersection with Third Street; thence following Third Street in a southerly direction to its intersection with Main Street; thence following Main Street in an easterly direction to its intersection with Fifth Street; thence following Fifth Street in a northerly direction to its intersection with Horner Street; thence following Horner Street in an easterly direction to its intersection with Academy Hill Road; thence following Academy Hill Road in a northeasterly direction to its intersection with Walker Drive; thence following Walker Drive in a southerly direction to its intersection with East Lee Street; thence following East Lee Street in a westerly direction to its intersection with East Street; thence following East Street in a westerly direction to its intersection with Falmouth Street; thence following Falmouth Street in a southerly direction to its intersection with Madison Street, the point of beginning. 
(4)  Fourth Ward: Beginning at the intersection of Culpeper Street (Route 802) and the south corporate limits in a clockwise direction; thence following the corporate limits of the town in a northerly direction to the intersection of Frost Avenue (Route 211); thence following in a westerly direction along the northern boundary of Frost Avenue (Route 211) to the new corporate limits between the Town of Warrenton and the County of Fauquier, established by the Circuit Court of Fauquier County on April 24, 2003; thence following the new corporate limits in a northerly direction to the intersection of Lower Waterloo Road (Route 680); thence following Lower Waterloo Road (Route 680) in an easterly direction to its intersection with Old Waterloo Road (Route 678); and thence running in a westerly direction with the corporate limits and Old Waterloo Road (Route 678) to its intersection with the west corporate limits; thence running in a northeasterly direction with the corporate limits to its intersection with Business Route 17; thence following Business Route 17 in a southerly direction to its intersection with Foxcroft Road; thence following Foxcroft Road in a southwesterly direction to its intersection with Bear Wallow Road; thence following Bear Wallow Road in an easterly direction to its intersection with Broadview Avenue; thence following Broadview Avenue (Route 15-17-29) in a southerly direction to its intersection with Frost Avenue (Route 211) and West Shirley Avenue; thence continuing in a southerly direction along West Shirley Avenue to Culpeper Street (Route 802); thence following Culpeper Street (Route 802) in a southwesterly direction to the southern corporate limits, the point of beginning. 
(5)  Fifth Ward: Beginning at the intersection of Green Street and East Shirley Avenue in a clockwise direction following East Shirley Avenue in a northerly direction to its intersection with Culpeper Street (Route 802) and West Shirley Avenue; thence following West Shirley Avenue in a northerly direction to its intersection with Frost Avenue (Route 211) and Broadview Avenue; thence continuing along Broadview Avenue (Route 15-17-29) in a northerly direction to its intersection with Bear Wallow Road; thence following Bear Wallow Road in a westerly direction to its intersection with Foxcroft Road; thence following Foxcroft Road in a northerly direction to its intersection with Business Route 17; thence following Business Route 17 in a southerly direction to its intersection with West Lee Highway and Winchester Street; thence following Winchester Street in a southerly direction to its intersection with King Street; thence following King Street in an easterly direction to its intersection with Alexandria Pike; thence following Alexandria Pike in an southerly direction to its intersection with Main Street; thence following Main Street in an easterly direction to its intersection with Culpeper Street; thence following Culpeper Street in a southerly direction to its intersection with Beckham Street; thence following Beckham Street in an easterly direction to its intersection with Third Street; thence following Third Street in a southerly direction to its intersection with Franklin Street; thence following Franklin Street in an easterly direction to its intersection with Green Street; thence following Green Street in a southerly direction to its intersection with East Shirley Avenue, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. of 11-6-86, § 21.1; Ord. of 4-7-87, § 21.1; Ord. No. 1991-14, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 1993-18, 11-9-93; Ord. No. 2002-02, 2-12-2002; Ord. No. 2004-01, 2-10-2004; Ord. No. 2011-04, 12-13-11) 
Charter reference- Number of wards, § 3-2. 
State Law reference- Election districts, Code of Virginia, § 24.1-36 et seq.; requirements for election districts and precincts, Code of Virginia, § 24.1-40.7 et seq. 
Sec. 2-22. - Voting or polling place. 
    The voting places for the wards established by section 2-21 shall be as follows: 
(1)  Ward 1: Warrenton Manor Apartments. 
(2)  Ward 2: Warrenton Presbyterian Church. 
(3)  Ward 3: Warren Green Building. 
(4)  Ward 4: Warrenton Police Station. 
(5)  Ward 5: Warren Green Building. 
(Ord. of 11-6-86; Ord. of 4-7-87, § 21.2; Ord. No. 1991-14, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 1993-18, 11-9-93; Ord. No. 2002-02, 2-12-2002; Ord. No. 2002-09, 10-8-2002; Ord. No. 2004-01, 2-10-2004; Ord. No. 2011-04, 12-13-11) 
State Law reference- Polling places in towns, Code of Virginia, § 24.1-92. 
Sec. 2-23. - Campaign finance disclosure. 
    Code of Virginia, Chapter 9.3, Campaign Finance Disclosure Act of 2006, of title 24.2, Elections, as amended, shall be applicable to elections for town offices in the town pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 24.2-945, as amended. 
( Ord. No. 2014-04, 12-9-14 ) 
Secs. 2-24-2-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TOWN COUNCIL[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Town council generally, Art. III. 
State constitution reference- Procedures of local governing body, Art. VII, § 7. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-36. - Generally. 
    The council shall appoint from its membership a vice-mayor, who shall exercise the powers and perform the duties of the mayor during any absence or disability of the mayor. 
(Code 1981, § 2-32) 
Charter reference- Duties of mayor, § 5-2. 
Sec. 2-37. - Orders, etc., by members of council. 
    No member of the town council shall give any orders or authorize any work to be done for or on behalf of the town between meetings of the council without the approval and supervision of the town manager or, in the absence of the town manager, without the approval and consent of the town council. 
(Code 1981, § 2-4) 
Charter reference- Power of council to prescribe duties for town manager, § 6-3. 
Sec. 2-38. - Special committees. 
    The mayor shall have authority, when he deems it necessary, to appoint special committees of the council. Such appointments shall be subject to the approval of the town council. 
(Code 1981, § 2-5) 
Sec. 2-39. - Special meetings. 
    The mayor, the town manager or any four (4) members of the council may call special meetings of the council at any time, after twelve (12) hours' written notice to each member served personally or left at his usual place of business or residence. Such notice shall contain a statement of the specific item or items of business to be transacted. Such meeting may be held at any time without notice, if all members of the council attend such meeting or waive notice thereof. 
(Code 1981, § 2-12) 
Charter reference- Special meetings, § 4-2; reconsideration, etc., of vote at special meeting, § 4-5. 
State Law reference- Giving notice of time and place of meetings, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-343. 
Secs. 2-40-2-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROCEDURES GENERALLY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Councilmanic procedures, etc., Art. IV. 
State Law reference- Power of council to adopt rules for the regulation of its proceedings, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-826. 

Sec. 2-51. - Application of rules of procedure of House of Delegates. 
    The proceedings of the council, except as its own rules of procedure or this Code may otherwise provide, shall be conducted according to the same rules of procedure as those used by the House of Delegates of the state. 
(Code 1981, § 2-6) 
State constitution reference- Power of each house of General Assembly to settle its rules of procedure, Art. IV, § 7. 
Sec. 2-52. - Suspension of rules. 
    No rule of procedure of the council shall be suspended except with the concurrence of five (5) of the members. 
(Code 1981, § 2-7) 
Sec. 2-53. - Order of proceedings. 
    The order of the proceedings of the council, at a council meeting, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Call to order. 
(2)  Invocation. 
(3)  Visitors. 
(4)  Reports and communications from town officers, including financial statements and reports of committees. 
(5)  New business. 
(6)  Unfinished business. 
(7)  Communications and correspondence. 
(Code 1981, § 2-8) 
Sec. 2-54. - Consideration of petitions. 
    After the purport of a petition of new business has been briefly stated by the member offering it, the council may consider it or otherwise dispose of it. 
(Code 1981, § 2-9) 
State constitution reference- Right to petition, Art. I, § 12. 
Sec. 2-55. - Adjournment in absence of quorum. 
    If a quorum of the members of the council shall fail to attend within half an hour after the appointed time of meeting, those present may adjourn to such time as they deem proper and the recorder shall enter the names of those present and those absent on the journal. 
(Code 1981, § 2-10) 
Charter reference- Quorum, § 4-3. 
State Law reference- Giving notice of time and place of meetings, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-343. 
Sec. 2-56. - Permission required for member to absent self from meeting. 
    After a member of the council, at any meeting of the council, has been recorded as present, he shall not absent himself from such meeting until adjournment without the permission of the presiding officer. 
(Code 1981, § 2-11) 
Charter reference- Powers and duties of mayor as presiding officer, § 5-2. 
Secs. 2-57-2-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Power of town to enact and enforce ordinances, § 2-6; prerequisites of passage of ordinances, etc., § 4-4. 
State Law reference- Adoption and enforcement of municipal ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-13. 

Sec. 2-71. - Form and reading of ordinance; advertisement of ordinances; recording of vote. 
(a)  Form of ordinance. No ordinance shall be passed unless it has been introduced in writing at a meeting of the council. The object of each such ordinance shall be expressed in its title. For a proposed ordinance to be adopted, a reading shall be undertaken of its title. 
(b)  Advertisement of ordinances. Except as otherwise authorized by law or as a declared emergency ordinance, no ordinance shall be passed until after descriptive notice of an intention to propose the same for passage shall prior to its passage have been published once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper published and having a general circulation within Fauquier County, Virginia. The second publication shall not be sooner than one calendar week after the first publication. Such notice shall specify the time and place at which persons affected may appear and present their views, not less than six days nor more than twenty-one (21) days after the second advertisement shall appear in such newspaper. The publication shall include a statement that a copy of the full text of the ordinance is on file in the office of the town manager for the Town of Warrenton. During all such time subsequent to the first publication until passage, a written copy of the ordinance shall be placed on file for public inspection during regular business hours at the office of the town manager. 
(c)  Enactment of ordinance; recording of vote. Any ordinance read at one (1) such meeting may be amended and passed as amended at such meeting without the necessity of further public hearing provided the amendment does not materially change the ordinance. In the event such amendment does materially change an ordinance, a further public hearing after publication notice provided herein must be held prior to adoption. The ayes and nayes shall be taken and recorded upon passage of all ordinances and entered upon the journal of the proceedings of council. 
(Code 1981, § 2-13; Ord. No. 1990-6, 10-9-9; Ord. No. 1994-12, 10-11-94) 
State constitution reference- Recording of how each member votes on ordinances and resolutions, Article VII, § 7. 
Sec. 2-72. - Effective dates; emergency measures. 
(a)  Effective date of ordinance. After enactment of ordinances by the town council, such ordinance shall become effective upon adoption or upon a date affixed by the council. 
(b)  Emergency measures. The council, may by the affirmative vote of five (5) of its members pass emergency measures without publication of notice of intention. An emergency measure is an ordinance for the immediate preservation of the public peace, property, health or safety or providing for the daily operation of a municipal department. The emergency shall be stated in every such measure. 
(Code 1981, § 2-14; Ord. No. 1994-12, 10-11-94) 
Sec. 2-73. - Form in which introduced. 
(a)  All proposed ordinances introduced in the town council shall be in printed or typewritten form. 
(b)  All proposed resolutions having the effect of an ordinance shall be in writing. 
(Code 1981, § 2-15) 
Sec. 2-74. - Enacting clause. 
(a)  The enacting clause of all ordinances passed by the town council shall read substantially as follows: "Be it ordained by the Council of the Town of Warrenton, Virginia." 
(b)  The enacting clause of all resolutions passed by the town council shall read as follows: "Be it resolved by The Council of The Town of Warrenton, Virginia." 
(Code 1981, § 2-16) 
Sec. 2-75. - Numbering. 
    All ordinances of the town shall be consecutively numbered in annual series, the number of a particular ordinance to consist of the year in which passed and the consecutive number of the ordinance. 
(Code 1981, § 2-17) 
Sec. 2-76. - Ordinance book-Generally. 
    The town recorder shall enter in a permanent well-bound book copies of all ordinances passed by the town council. The book in which ordinances are thus entered shall be known as the "Ordinances at Large of the Town of Warrenton, Virginia" and shall be indexed. 
(Code 1981, § 2-18) 
Sec. 2-77. - Same-Notation as to amendment. 
    The town recorder shall write on the first page of every ordinance entered in the ordinance book if such ordinance has been amended or repealed, with a reference to the page of the ordinance book where the amending or repealing ordinance can be found. 
(Code 1981, § 2-19) 
Sec. 2-78. - Effect of repeal. 
    No new ordinance shall be construed to repeal a former ordinance as to any offense committed against the former ordinance or as to any act done or penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred or as to any right accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance or in any way whatsoever to affect any such offense or act committed or done, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred, right accrued, or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the precedings thereafter had shall conform, so far as practicable, to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceedings. 
(Code 1981, § 2-20) 
Sec. 2-79. - Revival of former ordinance upon repeal of repealer. 
    When an ordinance which has repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
(Code 1981, § 2-21) 
State Law reference- Repeal not to revive former law, Code of Virginia, § 1-17. 
Secs. 2-80-2-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- From time to time, the town adopts position classification and pay plans. The current provisions are on file in the office of the town recorder. 
Charter reference- Appointment and removal of officers and employees, § 6-2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-96. - Town recorder. 
    The town council shall appoint a recorder. The recorder shall attend all meetings of the town council and keep a record of the proceedings. He shall have such other functions, powers and duties as may be provided by the town council. 
(Code 1981, § 2-31) 
Charter reference- Appointment, duties, compensation and term of town recorder, § 3-8. 
Secs. 2-97-2-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TOWN ATTORNEY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference- Appointment, duties, compensation and term of town attorney, § 3-7. 

Sec. 2-111. - Appointment; qualifications. 
    The town council shall appoint an attorney for the town who shall have been admitted to practice in the courts of the state and who shall be a licensed practicing attorney. 
(Code 1981, § 2-22) 
State Law reference- Attorneys at law, Code of Virginia, § 54-42 et seq. 
Sec. 2-112. - Powers and duties generally. 
    The town attorney shall have the management, charge and control of all legal affairs of the town and shall be the legal adviser of the town council or any committee thereof, town officers and the several departments of the town government. When required by the mayor or town manager, he shall furnish written or verbal opinions upon any legal affairs of the town. 
(Code 1981, § 2-23) 
Secs. 2-113-2-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TOWN MANAGER[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference- Town manager, Art. VI. 
Cross reference- Responsibility for cemetery, § 5-2. 

Sec. 2-126. - Appointment and term. 
    The town manager shall be appointed by the town council and shall hold office at the pleasure of the council. 
(Code 1981, § 2-24) 
Sec. 2-127. - Duties generally. 
    The town manager shall be the general administrative and executive head of the town and he shall exercise all functions and powers vested in him by the town council or conferred upon him by this Code or other ordinances of the town. He shall have supervision and control over all employees, agents or representatives of the town, except the town recorder and the town attorney, and of all agents, departments and branches of the municipal government. He shall exercise general supervision over the care, maintenance and operation of all town property. He shall be responsible to the town council and shall make such reports to it and at such times as the council shall deem proper. 
(Code 1981, § 2-25) 
Secs. 2-128-2-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FINANCE DIRECTOR[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Charter reference- Financial administration generally, Art. VII; annual audit, Art. VIII. 

Sec. 2-141. - Appointment and term. 
    The finance director shall be appointed by the town manager and shall serve at his pleasure. In the event of a vacancy in the office, the town manager shall serve as finance director. 
(Code 1981, § 2-26) 
Sec. 2-142. - Powers and duties, deputy director. 
(a)  The finance director shall have charge, subject to the direction and control of the town manager, of the administration of the financial affairs of the town and shall perform all the duties of a town treasurer and such other duties as may be directed by the town manager or ordinances of the town. 
(b)  The finance director may appoint a deputy finance director, subject to approval of the town manager. 
(Code 1981, § 2-27) 
Sec. 2-143. - Bond. 
    Before entering upon the duties of his office, the finance director shall execute a bond, the premium on which shall be paid by the town, with surety approved by the town attorney and in an amount approved by the town council, conditioned upon the faithful discharge of the duties of his office. Such bond shall be for the proper collection of and accounting for all moneys received or which it shall be his duty to collect and for the payment of all moneys by him to those entitled to receive same. 
(Code 1981, § 2-28) 
Sec. 2-144. - Receipt and disbursement of funds. 
    The finance director shall receive all funds due and payable to the town and shall make all authorized disbursements for and on behalf of the town as provided in this Code or authorized by the town council. 
(Code 1981, § 2-29) 
Sec. 2-145. - Right of distress, levy, etc. 
    For the purposes of collecting taxes, license taxes, assessments and other money, revenues and funds due the town, the finance director shall have the right of distress, levy, attachment and all other remedies provided by general law. 
(Code 1981, § 2-30) 
State Law reference- Collection of local taxes by distress, suit, lien, etc., Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3940. 
Secs. 2-146-2-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PLANNING COMMISSION[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Planning, subdivision of land and zoning, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-427 et seq.; planning commissions generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-427.1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-161. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a planning commission for the town. 
(Code 1981, § 2-33) 
State Law reference- Duty of council to create planning commission, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-427.1. 
Sec. 2-162. - Composition; appointment and terms of members. 
    The planning commission shall be composed of not less than five (5) nor more than fifteen (15) members, who shall be appointed by the town council, all of whom shall be residents of the town qualified by knowledge and experience to make decisions on questions of community growth and development; at least half of such members shall be freeholders. One (1) member of the commission may be a member of the town council and one (1) member may be a member of the administrative branch of government of the town. The term of each of these two (2) members shall be coextensive with the term of the office to which they have been elected or appointed unless the town council, at the first regular meeting of each year, appoints others to serve as their representatives. Neither of these two (2) members is eligible to vote on any issue before the planning commission, however, they may engage in discussions regarding any item brought before the planning commission and they do not have a conflict with said item. The remaining members of the commission shall serve for four (4) years each. 
(Code 1981, § 2-34; Ord. No. 2006-09, 12-12-2006) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-437. 
Sec. 2-163. - Compensation. 
    All members of the planning commission shall serve as such with compensation, as established from time to time by the town council. 
(Code 1981, § 2-35; Ord. No. 1997-02, 3-11-97) 
State Law reference- Compensation of members of the planning commission, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-437. 
Sec. 2-164. - Removal of members. 
    Any member of the planning commission may be removed from office for malfeasance in office. 
(Code 1981, § 2-36) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-437. 
Sec. 2-165. - Filling of vacancies. 
    Vacancies upon the planning commission, however caused, shall be filled by the council for the unexpired term only. 
(Code 1981, § 2-37) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-437. 
Sec. 2-166. - Powers and duties. 
    The planning commission shall have the functions, powers and duties and shall be subject to the limitations which are prescribed by law. 
(Code 1981, § 2-38) 
State Law reference- General powers and duties of planning commissions, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-428, 15.1-439 et seq. 
Secs. 2-167-2-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PUBLIC PROCUREMENT; SURPLUS PROPERTY[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Virginia Public Procurement Act, Code of Virginia, § 11-35 et seq.; acquiring property adjoining parks, monuments, streets, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.1-275; acquiring public utilities, land, rights-of-way, fixtures, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.1-292; acceptance or refusal of gifts, donations, bequests, grants, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.1-848. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-181. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Brand name or equal specification: A specification limited to one (1) or more items by manufacturers' name or catalog numbers to describe the standard of quality performance, and other salient characteristics needed to meet town requirements and which provides for the submission of equivalent products. 
    Brand name specification: A specification limited to one (1) or more items by manufacturers' names or catalog numbers. 
    Business: Any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture or any other private legal entity. 
    Change order (unilateral): A written order signed and unilaterally issued by the town manager directing the contractor to make changes which the "changes" clauses of the contract authorizes the town manager to order without the consent of the contractor. 
    Confidential information: Any information which is available to an employee only because of the employee's status as an employee of this town and is not a matter of public knowledge or available to the public on request. 
    Construction: Building, altering, repairing, improving or demolishing any structure, building or highway and any draining, dredging, excavation, grading or similar work upon real property. 
    Construction management contract: A contract in which a party is retained by the owner to coordinate and administer contracts for construction services for the benefit of the owner, and may also include, if provided in the contract, the furnishing of construction services to the owner. 
    Contract: All types of town agreements, regardless of what they may be called, for the procurement of goods, services, insurance or construction. 
    Contract modification: Any written alteration in specifications, delivery point, rate of delivery, period of performance, price, quantity, or other provision of any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties to the contract. 
    Contractor: Any person having a contract with the town or a using agency thereof. 
    Cost reimbursement contract: A contract under which a contractor is reimbursed for costs which are allowable and allocable in accordance with the contract terms and the provisions of this article, and a fee or profit, if any. 
    Direct or indirect participation: Involvement through decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation, preparation of any part of a purchase request, influencing the content of any specification or procurement standard, rendering of advice, investigation, auditing, or in any other advisory capacity. 
    Employee: An individual drawing a salary or wages from the town whether elected or not; also any noncompensated individual performing personal services for the town or any department, agency, commission, council, board or any other entity established by the executive or legislative branch of this town and any noncompensated individual serving as an elected official of the town. 
    Goods: All materials, equipment, supplies, printing and automated data processing hardware and software. 
    Informality: A minor defect or variation of a bid or proposal from the exact requirements of the invitation to bid or the request for proposal, which does not affect the price, quality, quantity or delivery schedule for the goods, services or construction being procured. 
    Insurance: A contract whereby, for a stipulated consideration, one party undertakes to compensate the other for loss on a specified subject by specified perils. 
    Invitation for bids: All documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting sealed bids. No confidential or proprietary data shall be solicited in any invitation for bids. 
    Nominal value: So small, slight, or the like, in comparison to what might properly be expected, as scarcely to be entitled to the name but in no case to be more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
    Nonprofessional services: Any services not specifically identified as professional services in the definition of "professional services." 
    Professional services: Work performed by an independent contractor within the scope of the practice of accounting, architecture, land surveying, landscape architecture, law, medicine, optometry or professional engineering. 
    Public body: Any legislative, executive or judicial body, agency, office, department, authority, post, commission, committee, institution, board, or political subdivision created by law to exercise some sovereign power or to perform some governmental duty, and empowered by law to undertake the activities described in this article. 
    Qualified products list: An approved list of goods, services, or construction items described by model or catalog number, which prior to competitive solicitation, the town has determined will meet the applicable specification requirements. 
    Request for proposals: All documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting proposals. 
    Responsible bidder or offeror: A person who has the capability, in all respects, to perform fully the contract requirements and the moral and business integrity and reliability which will assure good faith performance, and who has been prequalified, if required. 
    Responsive bidder: A person who has submitted a bid which conforms in all material respects to the invitation to bid. 
    Services: Any work performed by an independent contractor wherein the service rendered does not consist primarily of acquisition of equipment or materials, or the rental of equipment, materials and supplies. 
    Specification: Any description of the physical or functional characteristics, or of the nature of a good, service or construction item. It may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing, or preparing a good, service or construction item for delivery. 
    Using agency: Any department, agency, commission, bureau, or other unit in the town government requiring goods, services, insurance or construction as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-45, 1-4-83) 
State Law reference- Definitions applicable to Virginia Public Procurement Act, Code of Virginia, § 11-37; use of brand names, Code of Virginia, § 11-49. 
Sec. 2-182. - Penalty for violation. 
    Upon conviction of violation of any provision of this article any public employee, in addition to the penalty provided in section 1-7, shall forfeit his employment. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-77, 1-4-83) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions concerning ethics in public contracting, Code of Virginia, § 11-80. 
Sec. 2-183. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the fair and equitable treatment of all persons involved in public purchasing by the town, to maximize the purchasing value of public funds in procurement, and to provide safeguards for maintaining a procurement system of quality and integrity. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-40, 1-4-83) 
State Law reference- Authority of town to adopt public procurement policies and procedures, Code of Virginia, § 11-35(D), (E). 
Sec. 2-184. - Application. 
    This article applies to contracts for the procurement of goods, services, insurance and construction entered into by the town involving every expenditure for public purchasing irrespective of its source. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-41, 1-4-83) 
Sec. 2-185. - Federal assistance or funds. 
    When the procurement involves the expenditure of federal assistance or contract funds, the procurement shall be conducted in accordance with any applicable mandatory federal law and regulation which are not reflected in this article. Nothing in this article shall prevent any public agency from complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift, or bequest which are otherwise consistent with law. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-42, 1-4-83) 
State Law reference- Acceptance or refusal of gifts, donations, bequests, grants, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.1-848. 
Sec. 2-186. - Effective date. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to those contracts entered into prior to January 1, 1983, which shall continue to be governed by the procurement policies and regulations of the town in effect at the time those contracts were executed. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-43, 1-4-83) 
Sec. 2-187. - Purchasing system established; appointment, bond of agent. 
(a)  There is hereby created a purchasing system to operate under the direction and supervision of the town manager. Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the town manager from designating a responsible person to perform the duties of purchasing agent, subject to his direction. 
(b)  The purchasing agent shall be appointed by the town manager and shall be subject to his general direction and control. 
(c)  The purchasing agent shall give an official bond, the form and amount shall be approved by the town attorney. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-46, 1-4-83) 
Sec. 2-188. - Authority and duties. 
(a)  Principal public purchasing official. The town manager or designated purchasing agent shall serve as the principal public purchasing official for this town and shall be responsible for the procurement of goods, services, insurance and construction in accordance with this article, as well as the management and disposal of supplies. 
(b)  Duties. In accordance with this article, and subject to the supervision of the town manager, the purchasing agent shall: 
(1)  Purchase or supervise the purchasing of all goods, services, insurance and construction needed by this town; 
(2)  Exercise direct supervision over the town's central stores and general supervision over all other inventories of goods belonging to the town; 
(3)  Sell, trade or otherwise dispose of surplus goods belonging to the town; and 
(4)  Establish and maintain programs for specifications development, contract administration and inspection and acceptance, in cooperation with the public agencies using the goods, services, and construction. 
(c)  Operational procedures. Consistent with this article, and with the approval of the town manager, the purchasing agent may adopt operational procedures relating to the execution of his duties. The town manager or designated purchasing agent shall have the power and duty to: 
(1)  Purchase or contract for all goods, services, insurance and construction required by using departments, except as provided herein; 
(2)  Ensure preparation and enforcement of standard specifications; 
(3)  Ensure the inspection of all deliveries of goods, services, or construction purchased through him to determine their conformance with the order or contract. 
(4)  Act to procure for the town the highest quality in goods, services, insurance and construction at the least expense to the town; 
(5)  Endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases and sales; 
(6)  Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions, and new products; 
(7)  Secure for the town the benefits of research done in the fields of purchasing by other governmental jurisdictions, national societies, national trade associations, and by private business and organizations; 
(8)  Prepare and adopt standard purchase nomenclature for the using departments and for goods; 
(9)  Prepare, adopt, and maintain a vendors' file containing catalogs, descriptions of commodities, prices and discounts; 
(10)  Declare vendors who default on their quotations as irresponsible bidders and to disqualify them from receiving business from the town for a stated period of time, subject to approval by the town manager; 
(11)  Maintain a current file of sources of goods, services, insurance and construction to be known as a "bidders' list" to which vendors can request to be included; 
(12)  Not issue any order for delivery on a purchase until the finance director, or other designated official shall have certified, after pre-audit, that there is to the credit of the using agencies concerned a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance, in excess of all unpaid obligations, to defray the amount of such order; 
(13)  Perform such other functions and duties in keeping with good purchasing practices and such other duties as the town manager may assign. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-47, 1-4-83) 
Sec. 2-189. - Delegation. 
    With the approval of the town manager, the purchasing agent may delegate authority to purchase certain supplies, services, or construction items to other town officials, if such delegation is deemed necessary for the effective procurement of those items. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-48, 1-4-83) 
Sec. 2-190. - Unauthorized purchases. 
    Except as herein provided no official, elected or appointed, or any employee shall purchase or contract for any goods, services, insurance, or construction within the purview of this article other than by and through the town manager and any purchase order or contract made contrary to the provisions hereof is not approved and the town shall not be bound thereby. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-49, 1-4-83) 
Sec. 2-191. - Cooperative procurement. 
    The town manager has the duty to develop, to the maximum extent possible, a program for the joint or cooperative purchasing of common use supplies with the surrounding governing bodies, the state and other public agencies in the surrounding area and to endeavor to arrange for a program of standardization of common use supplies. Items so procured under a cooperative agreement with other jurisdictions shall be exempted from the provisions of this article provided such procurements are the result of competitive bidding wherever practicable. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-50, 1-4-83) 
State Law reference- Cooperative procurement, Code of Virginia, § 11-40. 
Sec. 2-192. - Methods of procurement; competitive sealed bidding are required. 
(a)  All public contracts with nongovernmental contractors for the purchase or lease of goods, or for the purchase of services, insurance, or construction, shall be awarded after competitive sealed bidding or competitive negotiation, as provided in section 11-41, of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, unless otherwise authorized by law. 
(b)  The town council may from time to time establish purchase procedures in writing not requiring competitive sealed bids or competitive negotiation for single or term contracts for goods or services other than professional services if the aggregate or the sum of all phases is not expected to exceed thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-51(1), 1-4-83; Ord. No. 2000-11, 9-12-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-41(A)(F). 
Sec. 2-193. - Procedure for state-aid projects. 
    No contract for the construction of any building or for an addition to or improvement of an existing building by the town for which state funds of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) or more, either by appropriation, grant-in-aid or loan, are used, or are to be used for all or part of the cost of construction, shall be let except after competitive sealed bidding or after competitive negotiation as provided under subdivision 2 of subsection C of Code of Virginia, § 11-41. The procedure for the advertising for bids or for proposals and for letting of the contract shall conform, mutatis mutandis, to this article. A person who has been engaged as an architect or engineer for the same project under a separate contract shall not be eligible to bid on or submit a proposal for any such contract or to have the contract awarded to him. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-51, 1-4-83; Ord. No. 2000-11, 9-12-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-41.1. 
Sec. 2-194. - Public access to procurement information. 
    Except as provided herein, all proceedings, records, contracts and other public records relating to procurement transactions shall be open to the inspection of any citizen, or any interested person in accordance with the state freedom of information act. Cost estimates relating to a proposed transaction prepared by or for the town shall not be open to public inspection. Any bidder or offeror, upon request, shall be afforded the opportunity to inspect bid and proposal records within a reasonable time after the opening of all bids but prior to award, except in the event that the town decides not to accept any of the bids and to reopen the contract. Otherwise, bid and proposal records shall be open to public inspection only after award of the contract. Any inspection of procurement transaction record under this section shall be subject to reasonable restrictions to ensure the security and integrity of the records. Trade secrets or proprietary information submitted by a bidder, offeror or contractor in connection with a procurement transaction shall not be subject to public disclosure under the state freedom and information act; however, the bidder, offeror or contractor must invoke the protection of this section prior to or upon submission of the data or other materials, and must identify the data or other materials to be protected and state the reasons why protection is necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-51(2), 1-4-83) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-52; Virginia Freedom of Information Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-340 et seq. 
Sec. 2-195. - Employment discrimination by contractor prohibited; drug-free workplace to be maintained by contractor; required contract provision. 
(a)  Every contract of over ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall include the provisions in (1) and (2) below: 
(1)  During the performance of this contract, the contractor agrees as follows: 
a.  The contractor will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, religion, color, sex or national origin, age, disability, or any other basis prohibited by state law relating to discrimination in employment, except where there is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the normal operation of the contractor. The contractor agrees to post in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for employment, notices setting forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination clause. 
b.  The contractor, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the contractor, will state that such contractor is an equal opportunity employer. 
c.  Notices, advertisements and solicitations placed in accordance with federal law, rule or regulation shall be deemed sufficient for the purpose of meeting the requirements of this section. 
(2)  The contractor will include the provisions of the foregoing items (a), (b) and (c) in every subcontract or purchase order of over ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), so that the provisions will be binding upon each subcontractor or vendor. 
(b)  The town manager shall include in every contract over ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) the following provisions: 
During the performance of this contract, the contractor agrees to (i) provide a drug-free workplace for the contractor's employees; (ii) post in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for employment, a statement notifying employees that the unlawful manufacture, sale, distribution, dispensation, possession, or use of a controlled substance or marijuana is prohibited in the contractor's workplace and specifying the actions that will be taken against employees for violations of such prohibition; (iii) state in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the contractor that the contractor maintains a drug-free workplace; and (iv) include the provisions of the foregoing clauses in every subcontract or purchase order of over ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), so that the provisions will be binding upon each subcontractor or vendor. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, "drug-free workplace" means a site for the performance of work done in connection with a specific contract awarded to a contractor in accordance with this chapter, the employees of whom are prohibited from engaging in the unlawful manufacture, sale, distribution, dispensation, possession or use of any controlled substance or marijuana during the performance of the contract. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-51(3), 1-4-83; Ord. No. 2000-11, 9-12-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-51. 
Sec. 2-196. - Prequalification of bidders. 
(a)  The town manager is authorized to prequalify bidders prior to any solicitation of bids, whether for goods, services, insurance or construction, by requiring prospective bidders to submit such information as the town manager shall deem appropriate, including samples, financial reports, and references; provided, however, that opportunity to prequalify shall be given to any prospective bidder who has not been suspended or debarred under this article. 
(b)  The town manager may refuse to prequalify any prospective contractor, provided that written reasons for refusing to prequalify are made a part of the record in each case. The decision of the town manager shall be final. 
(c)  In considering any request for prequalification, the town manager shall determine whether there is reason to believe that the bidder possesses the management, financial soundness, and history of performance which indicate apparent ability to successfully complete the plans and specifications of the invitations for bid. The town manager may employ standard forms designed to elicit necessary information, or may design other forms for that purpose. 
(d)  Prequalification of a bidder shall not constitute a conclusive determination that the bidder is responsible, and such bidder may be rejected as nonresponsible on the basis of subsequently discovered information. 
(e)  Failure of a bidder to prequalify with respect to a given procurement shall not bar the bidder from seeking prequalification as to future procurements, or from bidding on procurements which do not require prequalification. 
(f)  In addition to the prequalification provisions in this section for all contractors, the town manager may prequalify perspective contractors for construction contract approved by the town council and such prequalification shall be consistent with the provisions of this section 2-196 and the provisions of section 11-46(B) of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-51(4), 1-4-83; Ord. No. 2000-11, 9-12-2000) 
State Law reference- Prequalification of prospective contractors, Code of Virginia, § 11-46. 
Sec. 2-197. - Notice of invitation to bid. 
(a)  Notice inviting bids except as otherwise provided herein, shall be published once in at least one (1) official newspaper in the town and at least ten (10) days preceding the last day set for the receipt of proposals. 
(b)  The newspaper notice required herein shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased or sold, shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured, and the time and place for opening bids. 
(c)  The town manager shall also solicit sealed bids from all responsible prospective suppliers who have requested their names to be added to a "bidders' list" which the town manager shall maintain, by sending other notice as will acquaint them with the proposed purchase or sale. In any case, invitations sent to the vendors on the bidders' list shall be limited to commodities that are similar in character and ordinarily handled by the trade group to which the invitations are sent. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-51(5), 1-4-83) 
Sec. 2-198. - Use of brand names. 
    Unless otherwise provided in the invitation to bid, the name of a certain brand, make or manufacturer does not restrict bidders to the specific brand, make or manufacturer named; it conveys the general style, type, character, and quality of the article desired, and any article which the public body in its sole discretion determines to be the equal of that specified, considering quality, workmanship, economy of operation, and suitability for the purpose intended, shall be accepted. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-51(6), 1-4-83) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-49. 
Sec. 2-199. - Comments on specifications. 
    For complex equipment, supplies or repair, prebid conferences with prospective bidders are desirable after draft specifications have been prepared. Such conferences help to detect unclear provisions and tend to widen competition by removing unnecessarily restrictive language. Conferences on purchasing bids will be called by the town manager and attended by, if necessary, the town attorney. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-51(7), 1-4-83) 
Sec. 2-200. - Bid bonds on construction contract. 
(a)  Except in cases of emergency, all bids or proposals for construction contracts in excess of seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) shall be accompanied by a bid bond from a surety company selected by the bidder which is legally authorized to do business in the state, as a guarantee that if the contract is awarded to such bidder, that bidder will enter into the contract for the work mentioned in the bid. The amount of the bid bond shall not exceed five (5) percent of the amount bid. 
(b)  No forfeiture under a bid bond shall exceed the lesser of (1) the difference between the bid for which the bond was written and the next low bid, or (2) the face amount of the bid bond. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the town manager from requiring bid bonds to accompany bids or proposals for construction contracts anticipated to be less than seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-51(8), 1-4-83; Ord. No. 2000-11, 9-12-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-57. 
Sec. 2-201. - Bonds for other than construction contracts. 
(a)  At the discretion of the town manager, bidders may be required to submit with their bid a bid bond, or a certified check, in an amount to be determined by the town manager and specified in the invitation to bid, which shall be forfeited to the town as liquidated damages upon the bidder's failure to execute a contract awarded to him or upon the bidder's failure to furnish any required performance or payment bonds in connection with a contract awarded to him. 
(b)  The town manager may require successful bidders to furnish a performance bond and/or a payment bond at the expense of the successful bidder, in amounts to be determined by the town manager and specified in the invitation to bid, to ensure the satisfactory completion of the work for which a contract or purchase order is awarded. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-51(9), 1-4-83) 
State Law reference- Bonds on other than construction contracts, Code of Virginia, § 11-62. 
Sec. 2-202. - Rejection of bids. 
    An invitation to bid, a request for proposal, any other solicitation, or any and all bids or proposals, may be cancelled or rejected. The reasons for cancellation or rejection shall be made part of the contract file. The council may waive informalities in bids. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-51(10), 1-4-83) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-42. 
Sec. 2-203. - Bid opening. 
    Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one (1) or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. The amount of each bid, and such other relevant information as the town manager deems appropriate, together with the name of each bidder shall be recorded; the record and each bid shall be open to public inspection. Bids shall be submitted sealed to the town manager and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-51(11), 1-4-83) 
Sec. 2-204. - Withdrawal of bid due to error. 
(a)  A bidder for a public construction contract, other than a contract for construction or maintenance or public highways, may withdraw his bid from consideration if the price bid was substantially lower than the other bids due solely to a mistake therein, provided the bid was submitted in good faith, and the mistake was a clerical mistake as opposed to a judgment mistake, and was actually due to a unintentional arithmetic error or an unintentional omission of a quantity of work, labor or material made directly in the compilation of a bid, which unintentional arithmetic error or unintentional omission can be clearly shown by objective evidence drawn from inspection of original work papers, documents and materials used in the preparation of the bid sought to be withdrawn. If a bid contains both clerical and judgment mistakes, a bidder may withdraw his bid from consideration if the price bid would have been substantially lower than the other bids due solely to the clerical mistake, that was an unintentional arithmetic error or an unintentional omission of a quantity of work, labor or material made directly in the compilation of a bid original work papers, documents and materials used in the preparation of the bid sought to be withdrawn. 
(b)  The procedure for bid withdrawal must be stated in the advertisement for bids. The procedure for withdrawal of bids is: 
(1)  The bidder shall give notice in writing of his claim of right to withdraw his bid within two (2) business days after the conclusion of the bid opening procedure. 
(2)  Procedures for the withdrawal of bids for other than construction contracts may be established by the town manager. 
(3)  No bid may be withdrawn under this section when the result would be the awarding of the contract on another bid of the same bidder or of another bidder in which the ownership of the withdrawing bidder is more than five (5) percent. 
(4)  If a bid is withdrawn under the authority of this section, the lowest remaining bid shall be deemed to be the low bid. 
(5)  No bidder who is permitted to withdraw a bid shall, for compensation, supply any material or labor to or perform any subcontract or other work agreement for the person to whom the contract is awarded or otherwise benefit, directly or indirectly, from the performance of the project for which the withdrawn bid was submitted. 
(6)  If the council denies the withdrawal of a bid under the provisions of this section, it shall notify the bidder in writing stating the reasons for its decision and award the contract to such bidder at the bid price, provided such bidder is a responsible and responsive bidder. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-51(12), 1-4-83; Ord. No. 2000-11, 9-12-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-54. 
Sec. 2-205. - Bid evaluation. 
    In determining the "lowest responsible bidder," in addition to price, the town manager shall consider: 
(1)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required; 
(2)  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
(3)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and efficiency of the bidder; 
(4)  The quality of performance of previous contracts or service; 
(5)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service; 
(6)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service; 
(7)  The quality, availability and adaptability of the goods, or services to the particular use required; 
(8)  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract; 
(9)  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-51(13), 1-4-83) 
Sec. 2-206. - Bid award. 
(a)  Bids shall be awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. When the terms and conditions of multiple bids are so provided in the invitation to bid, awards may be made to more than one (1) bidder. 
(b)  Unless cancelled or rejected, a responsible bid from the lowest responsible bidder shall be accepted as submitted except that if the bid from the lowest responsible bidder exceeds available funds, the town may negotiate with the apparent low bidder to obtain a contract price within available funds. 
(c)  When the award is not given to the lowest bidder, a full and complete statement of the reasons for placing the order elsewhere shall be prepared by the town manager and filed with the other papers relating to the transaction. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-51(14), 1-4-83) 
State Law reference- Negotiation with lowest responsible bidder, Code of Virginia, § 11-53. 
Sec. 2-207. - Tie bids. 
(a)  In the case of a tie bid, preference shall be given to goods, services and construction produced in the state or provided by persons residing in the state if such a choice is available; otherwise the tie shall be decided by lot. 
(b)  Whenever any bidder is a resident of any other state and such state under its laws allows a resident contractor of that state a preference, a like preference may be allowed to the lowest responsible bidder who is a resident of this state. 
(c)  In the event that none of the foregoing provisions of this section resolve the tie, the town manager may cancel the solicitation and rebid. Records shall be kept on any proceeding connected with tie bids. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-51(15), 1-4-83) 
Sec. 2-208. - Multi-step sealed bidding. 
    When it is considered impractical to initially prepare a purchase description to support an award based on price, an invitation for bids may be issued requesting the submission of unpriced offers to bidders whose offers have been determined to be technically acceptable under the criteria set forth in the first solicitation. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-51(16), 1-4-83) 
Sec. 2-209. - Contract pricing arrangement. 
(a)  Except as prohibited herein, public contracts may be awarded on a fixed price or cost reimbursement basis, or on any other basis that is not prohibited. 
(b)  Subject to the limitations of this section, any type of contract which is appropriate to the procurement and which will promote the best interests of the town may be used; provided that the use of a cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost contract or a cost-plus-a-percentage-of-construction-cost contract are prohibited. A cost reimbursement contract may be used only when a determination is made in writing that such contract is likely to be less costly to the town than any other type or that it is impracticable to obtain the supply, service, or construction item required except under such a contract. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-51(17), 1-4-83) 
Sec. 2-210. - Multi-term contracts. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided by law, a contract for goods, services or insurance may be entered into for any period of time deemed to be in the best interests of the town provided the term of the contract and conditions of renewal or extension, if any, are included in the solicitation and funds are available for the first fiscal period at the time of contracting. Payment and performance obligations for succeeding fiscal periods shall be subject to the availability and appropriation of funds therefor. 
(b)  When funds are not appropriated or otherwise made available to support continuation of performance in a subsequent fiscal period, the contract shall be cancelled. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-51(17a), 1-4-83) 
Sec. 2-211. - Contract modification. 
    A public contract may include provisions for modification of the contract during performance, but no fixed price contract may be increased by more than twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the contract or ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), whichever is greater, without the advance written approval of the council. In no event may the amount of any contract, without adequate consideration, be increased for any purpose, including, but not limited to, relief of an offeror from the consequences of an error in its bid or offer. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-51(18), 1-4-83) 
State Law reference- Modification of the contract, Code of Virginia, § 11-55. 
Sec. 2-212. - Retainage on construction contracts. 
(a)  In any public contract for construction which provides for progress payments in installments based upon an estimated percentage of completion, the contractor shall be paid at least ninety-five (95) percent of the earned sum when payment is due, with not more than five (5) percent being retained to assure faithful performance of the contract. All amounts withheld may be included in the final payment. 
(b)  Any subcontractor for a public project which provides for similar progress payments shall be subject to the same limitations. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-51(19), 1-4-83) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-56. 
Sec. 2-213. - Performance and payment bonds. 
(a)  Upon the award of any public construction contract exceeding seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) awarded to any prime contractor, such contractor shall furnish to the town the following bonds: 
(1)  A performance bond in the sum of the contract amount conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract in strict conformity with the plans, specifications and conditions of the contract. 
(2)  A payment bond in the sum of the contract amount. Such bond shall be for the protection of claimants who have and fulfill contracts to supply labor or materials to the prime contractor to whom the contract was awarded, or to any subcontractors, in the prosecution of the work provided for in such contract, and shall be conditioned upon the prompt payment for all such material furnished or labor supplied or performed in the prosecution of the work. "Labor or materials" shall include public utility services and reasonable rentals of equipment, but only for periods when the equipment rented is actually used at the site. 
(b)  Each of such bonds shall be executed by one (1) or more surety companies selected by the contractor which are legally authorized to do business in the state. 
(c)  Bonds shall be made payable to the town. 
(d)  Each of the bonds shall be filed with the town, or a designated office or official thereof. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the town manager from requiring payment or performance bonds for construction contracts below seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00). 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall preclude such contractor from requiring each subcontractor to furnish a payment bond with surety thereon in the sum of the full amount of the contract with such subcontractor conditioned upon the payment to all persons who have and fulfill contracts which are directly with the subcontractor for performing labor and furnishing materials in the prosecution of the work provided for in the subcontract. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-51(20), 1-4-83; Ord. No. 2000-11, 9-12-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-58. 
Sec. 2-214. - Action on performance bond. 
    No action against the surety on a performance bond shall be brought unless within one (1) year after (1) completion of the contract, including the expiration of all warranties and guarantees, or (2) discovery of the defect or breach of warranty, if the action be for such. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-51(21), 1-4-83) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-59. 
Sec. 2-215. - Actions on payment bonds. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (b) hereof, any claimant who has performed labor or furnished material in accordance with the contract documents in the prosecution of the work provided in any contract for which payment bond has been given, and who has not been paid in full therefor before the expiration of ninety (90) days after the day on which such claimant performed the last of such labor or furnished the last of such materials for which he claims payment, may bring an action on such payment bond to recover any amount due him for such labor or material, and may prosecute such action to final judgment and have execution on the judgment. The obligee named in the bond need not be named a party to such action. 
(b)  Any claimant who has a direct contractual relationship with any subcontractor from whom the contractor has not required a subcontractor payment bond under section 2-213(f) but who has no contractual relationship, express or implied, with such contractor, may bring an action on the contractor's payment bond only if he has given written notice to such contractor within one hundred eighty (180) days from the day on which the claimant performed the last of the labor or furnished the last of the materials for which he claims payment, stating with substantial accuracy the amount claimed and the name of the person for whom the work was performed or to whom the material was furnished. Any claimant who has a direct contractual relationship with a subcontractor from whom the contractor has required a subcontractor payment bond under section 2-213(f) but who has no contractual relationship, express or implied, with such contractor, may bring an action on the subcontractor's payment bond. Notice to the contractor shall be served by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, in an envelope addressed to such contractor at any place where his office is regularly maintained for the transaction of business. Claims for sums withheld as retainages with respect to labor performed or materials furnished, shall not be subject to the time limitations stated in this subsection. 
(c)  Any action on a payment bond must be brought within one (1) year after the day on which the person bringing such action last performed labor or last furnished or supplied materials. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-51(22), 1-4-83) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-60. 
Sec. 2-216. - Alternative forms of security. 
(a)  In lieu of a bid, payment, or performance bond, a bidder may furnish a certified check or cash escrow in the face amount required for the bond. 
(b)  If approved by the town attorney, a bidder may furnish a personal bond, property bond, or bank or saving and loan association's letter of credit on certain designated funds in the face amount required for the bid bond. Approval shall be granted only upon a determination that the alternative form of security proffered affords protection to the town equivalent to a corporate surety's bond. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-51(23), 1-4-83) 
State Law reference- Alternative forms of security, Code of Virginia, § 11-61; Applicability of Virginia Public Procurement Act, Code of Virginia, § 11-35. 
Sec. 2-217. - Competitive negotiations. 
(a)  Conditions for use. When the town manager determines in writing that use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not advantageous to the town, a contract may be entered into by use of the competitive sealed proposal method. 
(b)  Request for proposals. Proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposals. 
(c)  Public notice. Adequate public notice except as otherwise provided herein, of the request for proposals shall be given in the same manner as provided for competitive sealed bids provided the minimum time shall be ten (10) calendar days. 
(d)  Receipt of proposals. No proposals shall be handled so as to permit disclosure of the identity of any offeror or the contents of any proposal to competing offerors during the process of negotiation. 
(e)  Evaluation factors. The request for proposals shall state the relative importance of price and other evaluation factors. 
(f)  Discussion with responsible offerors and revision to proposals. As provided in the request for proposals, discussion may be conducted with responsible offerors who submit proposals determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for award for the purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of, and conformance to, the solicitation requirements. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals and such revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers. In conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure of the identity of competing offerors or of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors. 
(g)  Award. Award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the town taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals. No other factors or criteria shall be used in the evaluation. The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award is made. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-52, 1-4-83) 
Sec. 2-218. - Contracting for professional services by competitive negotiation. 
(a)  Professional services shall be procured by competitive negotiation. The process includes sections 2-194-2-196, 2-198, 2-199, 2-202, 2-209, 2-211 and 2-217(b) and (c). 
(b)  The town manager shall engage in individual discussion with all offerors deemed fully qualified, responsible and suitable on the basis of initial response and with emphasis on professional competence, to provide the required services. Repetitive informal interviews shall be permissible. Such offerors shall be encouraged to elaborate on their qualifications and performance data or staff expertise pertinent to the proposed project as well as alternative concepts. These discussions may encompass nonbinding estimates of total project costs, including where appropriate, design, construction and life cycle costs. Methods to be utilized in arriving at price for services may also be discussed. Proprietary information from competing offerors shall not be disclosed to the public or to competitors. At the conclusion of discussion, outlined herein, on the basis of evaluation factors published in the request for proposal and all information developed in the selection process to this point, the town manager shall select in the order of preference two (2) or more offerors whose professional qualifications and proposed services are deemed most meritorious. Negotiations shall then be conducted, beginning with the offeror ranked first. If a contract satisfactory and advantageous to the town can be negotiated at a price considered fair and reasonable, the award shall be made to that offeror. Otherwise, negotiations with the offeror ranked first shall be formally terminated and negotiations conducted with the offeror ranked second, and so on until such a contract can be negotiated at a fair and reasonable price. Should the town manager determine in writing and in his sole discretion that only one (1) offeror is fully qualified, or that one (1) offeror is clearly more highly qualified and suitable than the others under consideration, a contract may be negotiated and awarded to that offeror. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-53, 1-4-83) 
Sec. 2-219. - Sole source procurement. 
    A contract may be awarded without competition when the town manager determines in writing, after conducting a good faith review of available sources, that there is only one (1) source for the required good, service, insurance or construction item. The town manager shall conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as to price, delivery, and terms. A record of sole source procurements shall be maintained that lists each contractor's name, the amount, each type of each contract, a listing of the item(s) procured under each contract, and the identification number of each contract file. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-54, 1-4-83) 
Sec. 2-220. - Emergency purchases. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the town manager may make or authorize others to make emergency procurements of goods, services, or construction items when there exists a threat to public health, welfare or safety; provided that such emergency procurements shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file. As soon as practicable, a record of each emergency procurement shall be made and shall set forth the contractor's name, the amount and type of the contract, a listing of the item(s) procured under the contract, and the identification number of the contract file. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-55, 1-4-83) 
Sec. 2-221. - Small purchases. 
    All purchases of goods, contractual services, insurance and capital improvements estimated to be less than thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) in value, shall not be subject to the requirements of the competitive bidding section of this article; provided, however, that the town manager shall, whenever the amount thereof exceeds thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00), secure three (3) or more proposals in the commodity area of the transaction. Written quotations from vendors shall be obtained where practical, although verbal quotations will be permitted provided the town manager shall cause a written record of all such verbal quotations to be made and filed with the records of the transaction. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-56, 1-4-83; Ord. No. 2000-11, 9-12-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-41. 
Sec. 2-222. - Miscellaneous sources. 
    The following transactions are hereby exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Purchases from the state penitentiary or state contracts from the state purchasing department warehouse. 
(2)  Legal services associated with actual or potential litigation. 
(3)  Purchases for special police work when the chief of police certifies to the town manager that items are needed for undercover police operations. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-57, 1-4-83) 
Sec. 2-223. - Disposal of surplus property. 
(a)  All using agencies shall submit to the town manager at such time and in such form as he shall prescribe, reports showing stocks of all supplies which are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn out or scrapped. 
(b)  The town manager shall have the authority to transfer surplus stock to other using agencies. 
(c)  The town manager shall have the authority to sell all supplies which have been unsuitable for public use, or to exchange the same for, or trade in the same on, new supplies. 
(d)  Sales under this section shall be made to the highest responsible bidder. The town manager shall have the right to reject any and all bids and no town employee shall be eligible to bid or purchase surplus property. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-58, 1-4-83) 
Sec. 2-224. - Authority to debar or suspend. 
    After reasonable notice to the person involved and reasonable opportunity for that person to be heard, the town manager, after consulting with the town attorney, is authorized to debar a person for cause from consideration for award of contracts. The debarment shall not be for a period of more than three (3) years. After consultation with the town attorney, the town manager is authorized to suspend a person from consideration for award of contracts if there is probable cause to believe that the person has engaged in any activity which might lead to debarment. The suspension shall not be for a period exceeding three (3) months. The causes for debarment include: 
(1)  Conviction for commission of a criminal offense as an incident to obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in the performance of such contract or subcontract; 
(2)  Conviction under state and federal statutes of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen property, or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty which currently, seriously, and directly affects responsibility as a town contractor; 
(3)  Conviction under state or federal antitrust statutes arising out of the submission of bids or proposals; 
(4)  Violation of contract provisions, as set forth below, of a character which is regarded by the town manager to be so serious as to justify debarment action: 
a.  Deliberate failure without good cause to perform in accordance with the specifications or within the time limit provided in the contract; or 
b.  A recent record of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory performance in accordance with the terms of one (1) or more contracts; provided that failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance caused by acts beyond the control of the contractor shall not be considered to be a basis for debarment; 
(5)  Any other cause the town manager may determine to be so serious and compelling as to affect responsibility as a town contractor including debarment by another governmental entity for any cause in this article; and for violation of the ethical standards set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-59, 1-4-83) 
Sec. 2-225. - Decision to debar or suspend. 
(a)  The town manager shall issue a written decision to debar or suspend. The decision shall state the reasons for the action taken and inform the debarred or suspended person involved of his rights concerning judicial or administrative review. 
(b)  A copy of the decision required by this section shall be mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the debarred or suspended person. 
(c)  A decision under this section shall be final and conclusive, unless the debarred or suspended person within ten (10) days after receipt of the decision takes an appeal to the town council or commences a timely action in court in accordance with applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-60, 1-4-83) 
Secs. 2-226-2-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPEALS AND REMEDIES FOR BID PROJECTS 

Sec. 2-241. - Ineligibility of bidder, offeror or contractor. 
(a)  Any bidder, offeror or contractor refused permission to participate, or disqualified from participation, in public contracts shall be notified in writing. Prior to the issuance of a written determination of disqualification or ineligibility, the town manager shall (i) notify the bidder in writing of the results of the evaluation, (ii) disclose the factual support for the determination, and (iii) allow the bidder an opportunity to inspect any documents which relate to the determination, if so requested by the bidder within five (5) business days after receipt of the notice. Within ten (10) business days after receipt of the notice, the bidder may submit rebuttal information challenging the evaluation. The town manager shall issue its written determination of disqualification or ineligibility based on all information in the possession of the town manager, including any rebuttal information, within five (5) business days of the date the town manager received such rebuttal information. If the evaluation reveals that the bidder, offeror or contractor should be allowed permission to participate in the public contract, the town manager shall cancel the proposed disqualification action. If the evaluation reveals that the bidder should be refused permission to participate, or disqualified from participation, in the public contract, the town manager shall so notify the bidder, which shall be final unless the bidder appeals the decision within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice by invoking administrative procedures meeting the standards of section 2-249, or in the alternative by instituting legal action as provided in section 2-248. 
(b)  If, upon appeal, it is determined that the action taken was arbitrary or capricious, or not in accordance with the Constitution of Virginia, statues or regulations, the sole relief shall be restoration of eligibility. (1982, c. 647; 1998. c. 753.) 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-61, 1-4-83; Ord. No. 2000-11, 9-12-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-63. 
Sec. 2-242. - Appeal of denial of withdrawal of bid. 
(a)  A decision denying withdrawal of bid under the provisions of section 2-204 shall be final and conclusive unless the bidder appeals the decision within ten (10) days after receipt of the decision by invoking administrative procedures meeting the standards of section 2-249, or in the alternative by instituting legal action as provided in section 2-248. 
(b)  If no bid bond was posted, a bidder refused withdrawal of a bid under the provisions of section 2-204, prior to appealing, shall deliver to the town manager a certified check or cash bond in the amount of the difference between the bid sought to be withdrawn and the next low bid. Such security shall be released only upon a final determination that the bidder was entitled to withdraw the bid. 
(c)  If, upon appeal, it is determined that the decision refusing withdrawal of the bid was not an honest exercise of discretion, but rather was arbitrary or capricious or not in accordance with the Constitution of Virginia, applicable state law or regulation, or the terms or conditions of the invitation to bid, the sole relief shall be withdrawal of the bid. (1982, c. 647; 1985, c. 164; 1999, c. 1008.) 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-62, 1-4-83; Ord. No. 2000-11, 9-12-2000) 
Editor's note- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-64. 
Sec. 2-243. - Determination of nonresponsibility. 
(a)  Following public opening and announcement of bids received on an invitation to bid, the town manager shall evaluate the bids. At the same time, the town manager shall determine whether the apparent low bidder is responsible. If the town manager so determines, then it may proceed with an award. If the town manager determines that the apparent low bidder is not responsible, he shall proceed as follows: 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of a written determination of nonresponsibility, the town manger shall (i) notify the apparent low bidder in writing of the results of the evaluation, (ii) disclose the factual support for the determination, and (iii) allow the apparent low bidder an opportunity to inspect any documents which relate to the determination, if so requested by the bidder within five (5) business days after receipt of the notice. 
(2)  Within ten (10) business days after receipt of the notice, the bidder may submit rebuttal information challenging the evaluation. The town manager shall issue its written determination of responsibility based on all information in the possession of the town manager, including any rebuttal information, with five (5) business days of the date the town manager received such rebuttal information. At the same time, the town manager shall notify with return receipt requested the bidder in writing of its determination. 
(3)  Such notice shall state the basis for the determination, which shall be final unless the bidder appeals the decision within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice by invoking administrative procedures meeting the standards of section 2-249, or in the alternative by instituting legal action as provided in section 2-248. 
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to procurements involving the prequalification of bidders and the rights of any potential bidders under such prequalification to appeal a decision that such bidders are not responsible. 
(b)  If, upon appeal pursuant to section 2-248 or section 2-249, it is determined that the decision of the town manager was not an honest exercise of discretion, but rather was arbitrary or capricious or not in accordance with the Constitution of Virginia, applicable state law or regulation, or the terms or conditions of the invitation to bid, and the award of the contract in question has not been made, the sole relief shall be a finding that the bidder is a responsible bidder for the contract in question or directed award as provided in section 2-248 or both. If it is determined that the decision of the town manager was not an honest exercise of discretion, but rather was arbitrary or capricious or not in accordance with the Constitution of Virginia, applicable state law or regulation, or the terms or conditions of the invitation to bid, and an award of the contract has been made, the relief shall be as set forth in subsection (b) of section 2-244. 
(c)  A bidder contesting a determination that he is not a responsible bidder for a particular contract shall proceed under this section, and may not protest the award or proposed award under section 2-244. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to require a town manager, when procuring by competitive negotiation, to furnish a statement of the reasons why a particular proposal was not deemed to be the most advantageous. (1982, c. 647; 1997, c. 864; 1998, c. 753; 1999, c. 1008.) 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-63, 1-4-83; Ord. No. 2000-11, 9-12-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-65. 
Sec. 2-244. - Protest of award or decision to award. 
(a)  Any bidder or offeror, who desires to protest the award or decision to award a contract shall submit such protest in writing to the town manager, or an official designated by the town manager, no later than ten (10) days after public notice of the award or the announcement of the decision to award, whichever occurs first. Public notice of the award or the announcement of the decision to award shall be given by the town manager in the manner prescribed in the terms or conditions of the invitation to bid or request for proposal. Any potential bidder or offeror on a contract negotiated on a sole source or emergency basis who desires to protest the award or decision to award such contract shall submit such protest in the same manner no later than ten (10) days after the award. However, if the protest of any actual or potential bidder or offeror depends in whole or in part upon information contained in public records pertaining to the procurement transaction which are subject to inspection under section 2-194, then the time within which the protest must be submitted shall expire ten (10) days after those records are available for inspection by such bidder or offeror under section 2-194, or at such later time as provided in this section. No protest shall lie for a claim that the selected bidder or offeror is not a responsible bidder or offeror. The written protest shall include the basis for the protest and the relief sought. The town manager or designated official shall issue a decision in writing within ten (10) days stating the reasons for the action taken. This decision shall be final unless the bidder or offeror appeals within ten (10) days of the written decision by invoking administrative procedures meeting the standards of section 2-249, or in the alternative by instituting legal action as provided in section 2-248. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to permit a bidder to challenge the validity of the terms or conditions of the invitation to bid or request for proposal. 
(b)  If prior to an award it is determined that the decision to award is arbitrary or capricious, then the sole relief shall be a finding to that effect. The town manager shall cancel the proposed award or revise it to comply with the law. If, after an award, it is determined that an award of a contract was arbitrarily or capricious, then the sole relief shall be as hereinafter provided. Where the award has been made but performance has not begun, the performance of the contract may be enjoined. Where the award has been made and performance has begun, the town manager may declare the contract void upon a finding that this action is in the best interest of the public. Where a contract is declared void, the performing contractor shall be compensated for the cost of performance up to the time of such declaration. In no event shall the performing contractor be entitled to lost profits. 
(c)  Where a town manager, an official designated by that town manager, or an appeals board determines, after a hearing held following reasonable notice to all bidders, that there is probable cause to believe that a decision to award was based on fraud or corruption or on an act in violation of division 3, section 2-261 et seq. of this chapter, the town manager, designated official or appeals board may enjoin the award of the contract to a particular bidder. (1982, c. 647; 1985, c. 164; 1997, c. 864; 2000, c. 641.) 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-64, 1-4-83; Ord. No. 2000-11, 9-12-2000 ) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-66. 
Sec. 2-245. - Effect of appeal upon contract. 
    Pending final determination of a protest or appeal, the validity of a contract awarded and accepted in good faith in accordance with this article shall not be affected by the fact that a protest or appeal has been filed. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-65, 1-4-83) 
Sec. 2-246. - Stay of award during protest. 
    An award need not be delayed for the period allowed a bidder or offeror to protest, but in the event of a timely protest as provided in section 2-244, or the filing of a timely legal action as provided in section 2-248, no further action to award the contract will be taken unless there is a written determination that proceeding without delay is necessary to protect the public interest or unless the bid or offer would expire. (1982, c. 647; 1997, c. 864.) 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-66, 1-4-83; Ord. No. 2000-11, 9-12-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-68. 
Sec. 2-247. - Contractual disputes. 
(a)  Contractual claims, whether for money or other relief, shall be submitted in writing no later than sixty (60) days after final payment; however, written notice of the contractor's intention to file such claim shall have been given at the time of the occurrence or beginning of the work upon which the claim is based. Nothing herein shall preclude a contract from requiring submission of an invoice for final payment within a certain time after completion and acceptance of the work or acceptance of the goods. Pendency of claims shall not delay payment of amounts agreed due in the final payment. 
(b)  A procedure for consideration of contractual claims shall be included in each contract. Such procedure, which may be incorporated into the contract by reference, shall establish a time limit for a final decision in writing by the town manager. 
(c)  A contractor may not invoke or institute legal action as provided in section 2-248, prior to receipt of the decision on the claim, unless the town manager fails to render such decision within the time specified in the contract. 
(d)  The decision of the town manager shall be final and conclusive unless the contractor appeals within six (6) months of the date of the final decision on the claim by the town manager by instituting legal action as provided in section 2-248. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-67, 1-4-83) 
Sec. 2-248. - Legal actions. 
(a)  A bidder or offeror, actual or prospective, who is refused permission or disqualified from participation in bidding or competitive negotiation, or who is determined not to be a responsible bidder or offeror for a particular contract, may bring an action in the Circuit Court of Fauquier County, Virginia, challenging that decision, which shall be reversed only if the petitioner establishes that the decision was not an honest exercise of discretion, but rather was arbitrary or capricious or not in accordance with the Constitution of Virginia, applicable state law or regulation, or the terms or conditions of the invitation to bid, or, in the case of denial of prequalification, that the decision to deny prequalification was not based upon the criteria for denial of prequalification set forth in subsection (b) of section 2-196. In the event the apparent low bidder, having been previously determined by the town manager to be not responsible in accordance with section 2-181, is found by the court to be a responsible bidder, the court may direct the town manager to award the contract, forthwith, to such bidder in accordance with the requirements of this section and the invitation to bid. 
(b)  A bidder denied withdrawal of a bid under section 2-242 may bring an action in the appropriate circuit court challenging that decision, which shall be reversed only if the bidder establishes that the decision of the town manager was not an honest exercise of discretion, but rather was arbitrary or capricious or not in accordance with the Constitution of Virginia, applicable state law or regulation, or the terms or conditions of the invitation to bid. 
(c)  A bidder, offeror or contractor, or a potential bidder or offeror on a contract negotiated on a sole source or emergency basis whose protest of an award or decision to award under section 2-244 is denied, may bring an action in the Circuit Court of Fauquier County, Virginia, challenging a proposed award or the award of a contract, which shall be reversed only if the petitioner establishes that the proposed award or the award is not an honest exercise of discretion, but rather is arbitrary or capricious or not in accordance with the Constitution of Virginia, applicable state law or regulation, or the terms and conditions of the invitation to bid or request for proposal. 
(d)  If injunctive relief is granted, the court, upon request of the town, shall require the posting of reasonable security to protect the town. 
(e)  A contractor may bring an action involving a contract dispute with the town in the Circuit Court of Fauquier County, Virginia 
(f)  A bidder, offeror or contractor need not utilize administrative procedures meeting the standards of Code of Virginia, § 2-249, if available, but if those procedures are invoked by the bidder, offeror or contractor, the procedures shall be exhausted prior to instituting legal action concerning the same procurement transaction unless the town manager agrees otherwise. 
(g)  Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent a town from instituting legal action against a contractor. (1982, c. 647; 1985, c. 164; 1994, c. 918; 1995, c. 527; 1997, c. 864; 1998, cc. 205, 753; 1999, c. 1008.) 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-68, 1-4-83; Ord. No. 2000-11, 9-12-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-70. 
Sec. 2-249. - Administrative appeals procedure. 
(a)  The town manager may, but shall not be required to, establish an administrative procedure for hearing protests of a decision to award or an award, appeals from refusals to allow withdrawal of bids, appeals from disqualifications and determinations of nonresponsibility, and appeals from decisions on disputes arising during the performance of a contract, or any of these. Such administrative procedure shall provide for a hearing before a disinterested person or panel, the opportunity to present pertinent information and the issuance of a written decision containing findings of fact. The disinterested person or panel shall not be an employee of the governmental entity against whom the claim has been filed. The findings of fact shall be final and conclusive and shall not be set aside unless the same are (i) fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious; (ii) so grossly erroneous as to imply bad faith; or (iii) in the case of denial of prequalification, such findings were not based upon the criteria for denial of prequalification set forth in subsection (b) of section 2-196. No determination on an issue of law shall be final if appropriate legal action is instituted in a timely manner. 
(b)  Any party to the administrative procedure, including the town, shall be entitled to institute judicial review if such action is brought within thirty (30) days of receipt of the written decision. 
(Ord. No. 2000-11, 9-12-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-71.1 
Secs. 2-250-2-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ETHICS IN PUBLIC CONTRACTING[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Ethics in public contracting, Code of Virginia, § 11-72 et seq. 

Sec. 2-261. - Definitions. 
    The words defined in this section shall have the meaning set forth below throughout division 3. 
    Immediate family shall mean a spouse, children, parents, brothers and sisters, and any other person living in the same household as the employee. 
    Official responsibility shall mean administrative or operating authority, whether intermediate or final, to initiate, approve, disapprove or otherwise affect a procurement transaction, or any claim resulting therefrom. 
    Pecuniary interest arising from the procurement shall mean a personal interest in a contract as defined in the Virginia State and Local Government Conflict of Interest Act (Code of Virginia, § 2.1-639.1 et seq.). 
    Procurement transaction shall mean functions that pertain to the obtaining of any goods, services or construction, including description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract administration. 
    Public employee shall mean any person employed by the town, including elected officials of the town. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-70, 1-4-83; Ord. No. 2000-11, 9-12-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-73; State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-639.1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-262. - Purpose. 
    The provisions of this division supplement, but do not supersede, other provisions of law including, but not limited to, the State and Local Government Conflicts of Interests Act (Section 2.1-639.1 et seq.), and Articles 2 (Section 18.2-438 et seq.) and 3 (Section 18.2-446 et seq.) of Chapter 10 of Title 18.2, all of the Code of Virginia. The provisions of this division apply notwithstanding the fact that the conduct described may not constitute a violation of the Virginia State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-69, 1-4-83; Ord. No. 2000-11, 9-12-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-72; bribery and related offenses, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-438 et seq.; bribery of public servants and party officials, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-446 et seq.; Virginia Governmental Frauds Act, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-498.1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-263. - Proscribed participation by public employees in procurement transactions. 
    Except as may be specifically allowed by subdivisions A2 and A3 of Section 2.1-639.11, of the Code of Virginia, no public employee having official responsibility for a procurement transaction shall participate in that transaction on behalf of the town manager when the employee knows that: 
(1)  The employee is contemporaneously employed by a bidder, offeror or contractor involved in the procurement transaction; or 
(2)  The employee, the employee's partner, or any member of the employee's immediate family holds a position with a bidder, offeror or contractor such as an officer, director, trustee, partner or the like, or is employed in a capacity involving personal and substantial participation in the procurement transaction, or owns or controls an interest of more than five (5) percent; or 
(3)  The employee, the employee's partner, or any member of the employee's immediate family has a pecuniary interest arising from the procurement transaction; or 
(4)  The employee, the employee's partner, or any member of the employee's immediate family is negotiating, or has an arrangement concerning, prospective employment with a bidder, offeror contractor. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-71, 1-4-83; Ord. No. 2000-11, 9-12-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-74; State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-639.1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-264. - Solicitation or acceptance of gifts. 
    No public employee having official responsibility for a procurement transaction shall solicit, demand, accept or agree to accept from a bidder, offeror, contractor or subcontractor any payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, services or anything of more than nominal or minimal value, present or promised, unless consideration of substantially equal or greater value is exchanged. The town may recover the value of anything conveyed in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-72, 1-4-83) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-75. 
Sec. 2-265. - Disclosure of subsequent employment. 
    No public employee or former public employee having official responsibility for procurement transactions shall accept employment with any bidder, offeror or contractor with whom the employee or former employee dealt in an official capacity concerning procurement transactions for a period of one (1) year from the cessation of employment by the town manager, unless the employee or former employee provides written notification to the town manager prior to commencement of employment by that bidder, offeror or contractor. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-73, 1-4-83) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-76. 
Sec. 2-266. - Gifts by bidders, offerors, contractors or subcontractors. 
    No bidder, offeror, contractor or subcontractor shall confer upon any public employee having official responsibility for a procurement transaction any payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, services or anything of more than nominal value, present or promised, unless consideration of substantially equal or greater value is exchanged. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-74, 1-4-83) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-77. 
Sec. 2-267. - Kickbacks. 
(a)  No contractor or subcontractor shall demand or receive from any of his suppliers or his subcontractors, as an inducement for the award of a subcontractor or order, any payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, services or anything, present or promised, unless consideration of substantially equal or greater value is exchanged. 
(b)  No subcontractor or supplier shall make, or offer to make, kickbacks as described in this section. 
(c)  No person shall demand or receive any payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, services or anything of value in return for an agreement not to compete on a public contract. 
(d)  If a subcontractor or supplier makes a kickback or other prohibited payment as described in this section, the amount thereof shall be conclusively presumed to have been included in the price of the subcontract or order and ultimately borne by the town and will be recoverable from both the maker and the recipient. Recovery from one (1) offending party shall not preclude recovery from other offending parties. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-75, 1-4-83) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-78. 
Sec. 2-268. - Purchase of building material, etc., from architect or engineer prohibited. 
(a)  No building materials, supplies or equipment for any building or structure constructed by or for the town shall be sold by or purchased from any person employed as an independent contractor by the town manager to furnish architectural or engineering services, but not construction, for such building or structure or from any partnership, association or corporation in which such architect or engineer has a personal interest as defined in Code of Virginia, § 2.1-639.2. 
(b)  No building materials, supplies or equipment for any building or structure constructed by or for a town manger shall be sold by or purchased from any person which has provided or is currently providing design services specifying a sole source for such materials, supplies or equipment to be used in such building or structure to the independent contractor employed by the town manager to furnish architectural or engineering services in which such person has a personal interest as defined in Code of Virginia, § 2.1-639.2. 
(c)  The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply in cases of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 1982-8, § 2-76, 1-4-83; Ord. No. 2000-11, 9-12-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-79. 
Sec. 2-269. - Participation in bid preparation; limitation on submitting bid for same procurement. 
    No person who, for compensation, prepares an invitation to bid or request for proposal for or on behalf of a town manager shall (i) submit a bid or proposal for that procurement or any portion thereof or (ii) disclose to any bidder or offeror information concerning the procurement which is not available to the public. However, a town manager may permit such person to submit a bid or proposal for that procurement or any portion thereof if the town manager determines that the exclusion of such person would limit the number of potential qualified bidders of offerors in a manner contrary to the best interests of the town manager. (1997, c. 68.) 
(Ord. No. 2000-11, 9-12-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-78.1 
Sec. 2-270. - Certification of compliance required; penalty for false statements. 
(a)  Town managers may require public employees having official responsibility for procurement transactions in which they participated to annually submit for such transactions a written certification that they complied with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any public employee required to submit a certification as provided in subsection (a) of this section who knowingly makes a false statement in such certification shall be punished as provided in [Virginia Code] section 11-80. 
(Ord. No. 2000-11, 9-12-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-79.1 
Sec. 2-271. - Misrepresentations prohibited. 
    No public employee having official responsibility for a procurement transaction shall knowingly falsify, conceal, or misrepresent a material fact; knowingly make any false, fictitious or fraudulent statements or representations; or make or use any false writing or document knowing the same to contain any false, fictitious or fraudulent statement or entry. 
(Ord. No. 2000-11, 9-12-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-79.2 
Sec. 2-272. - Penalty for violation. 
    Willful violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. Upon conviction, any public employee, in addition to any other fine or penalty provided by law, shall forfeit his employment. 
(Ord. No. 2000-11, 9-12-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-80. 
Chapter 3 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, Ch. 9; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 10; permits for parades and processions, § 10-8; noise, § 11-19. 
State Law reference- Livestock and poultry, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-723 et seq.; nuisance birds, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-1011 et seq.; power of town to prevent injury or annoyance from anything dangerous, offensive or unhealthy, and to cause any nuisance to be abated, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-14(5); ordinances prohibiting cruelty to animals, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-29.1:1; municipal regulation of animals and fowl generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-870; offenses related to disabled or dead animals, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-323; penalties for offenses involving animals, Code of Virginia, §§ 3.1-796.128, 18.2-403.1 et seq.; game, inland fisheries and boating, Code of Virginia, Title 29.1; comprehensive animal laws, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.66 et seq.; cruelty to animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.122 et seq.; dogs deemed personal property, rights relating thereto, Code of Virginia, § 3.1796.127; estrays, Code of Virginia, § 55-202 et seq. 

ARTICLE. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
Sec. 3-2. - Animal warden. 
    The county animal warden shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and state regulations concerning dogs within the town. 
(Code 1981, § 3-1) 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Animal wardens and humane investigators, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.104 et seq. 
Sec. 3-3. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  Any person who (1) overrides, overdrives, overloads, tortures, ill-treats, abandons, willfully inflicts inhumane injury or pain not connected with bona fide scientific or medical experimentation, or cruelly or unnecessarily beats, maims, mutilates, or kills any animal, whether belonging to himself or another; or (2) deprives any animal of necessary sustenance, food, drink or shelter; or (3) willfully sets on foot, instigates, engages in, or in any way furthers any act of cruelty to any animal; or (4) carries or causes to be carried in or upon any vehicle, vessel, or otherwise any animal in a cruel, brutal, or inhumane manner, so as to produce torture or unnecessary suffering; or (5) causes any of the above things, or being the owner of such animal permits such acts to be done by another, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who abandons any dog, cat or other domesticated animal in any public place including the right-of-way of any public highway, road or street or on the property of another shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the dehorning of cattle. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, the word "animal" shall be construed to include birds and fowl. 
(Code 1981, § 3-2) 
Charter reference- Adoption of statutory powers of cities and towns, § 2-7. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.122; power of town to prevent or prohibit cruelty to and abuse of animals and fowl, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-29.1:1, 15.1-870; animal welfare, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.68 et seq. 
Sec. 3-4. - Fowl, poultry and livestock running at large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit any fowl, poultry or livestock of any description, to stray to public property or private premises of another, and all fowl, poultry or livestock shall be sufficiently housed or fenced up by the owner or person exercising control over such fowl, poultry or livestock, so as to prevent such fowl, poultry or livestock from trespassing or straying. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any animal belonging to him or under his control, and known by him individually or by repute to be dangerous, mischievous or vicious, to go at large. Any animal at large in violation of this provision may be killed by any police officer upon the written order of the judge of the general district court. This section shall not be construed to apply to dogs. 
(Code 1981, § 3-3) 
State Law reference- Power of town to regulate or prohibit the running at large of animals and fowl, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-870; estrays, Code of Virginia, § 55-202 et seq. 
Sec. 3-5. - Keeping swine. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep pigs or hogs, or to maintain any pigpen or pigsty within the town, without first obtaining a written permit from the town council in meeting assembled so to do. Before any such permit is issued by a majority vote, the council shall be satisfied that the keeping of such swine will not create a nuisance or be injurious to the health, comfort and general welfare of the occupants of surrounding property. Any such permit may later be revoked by the council after its finding that such conditions precedent to the granting of such permit have been violated. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4) 
State Law reference- Power of town to regulate or prohibit the keeping of animals, Code of Virginia, § 15 1-870 
Sec. 3-6. - Location of stables. 
    Private stables shall not be built nearer than one hundred (100) feet to any dwelling. 
(Code 1981, § 3-5) 
Sec. 3-7. - Condition of stables, sheds, pens, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning, occupying and having use of any stable, shed, pen, stall or other place wherein animals or fowl of any kind are kept to permit such stable, shed, pen, stall or other place to become or remain filthy or unwholesome. 
(Code 1981, § 3-6) 
Sec. 3-8. - Odors arising from the keeping of animals and fowl. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep fowl, poultry, or animals within the town in such a manner or to such extent as to give rise to disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission or generation of such odors and stenches, upon the public streets or upon any premises within the town. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished in the same manner as a Class 4 Misdemeanor as set forth in Title 18.2 of the Code of Virginia. Each day of violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1981, § 3-7; Ord. No. 2006-2, 3-14-2006) 
Sec. 3-9. - Dead animals or fowl. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any dead animal or fowl of any kind on vacant lots or anywhere within the town. 
(Code 1981, § 3-8) 
State Law reference- Disposal of dead poultry, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-742 et seq, leaving disabled or dead animal in road or allowing dead animal to remain unburied, Code of Virginia, § 18 2-323; burial or cremation of dead animals or fowl, Code of Virginia, § 18 2-510. 
Sec. 3-10. - Vicious and dangerous dogs generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep within the town any vicious dog, as defined under state law. Upon finding that a dog is vicious, a court of competent jurisdiction may order the dog to be impounded and destroyed or to be removed from the town. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep within the town any dangerous dog, as defined under state law, except in compliance with a permit issued by the town manager under section 3-10.2. 
(Code 1981, § 3-9; Ord. No. 1983-8, 12-6-83; Ord. No. 1990-1, 6-12-90; Ord. No. 1999-14, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 3-10.1. - Complaints of vicious and dangerous dogs; processing of complaints. 
(a)  Any person may make a verbal or written complaint to the chief animal control officer of a dog which the complainant believes to be vicious or dangerous. The complaint shall include sufficient information to enable the chief animal control officer to ascertain the location and owner of the dog and shall also include the reasons why the complainant believes the dog to be vicious or dangerous. In the case of a verbal complaint, the complaint shall be put in writing by the chief animal control officer. A copy of the complaint shall then be mailed by the chief animal control officer to the owner of the dog at the owner's last known address and a copy shall be delivered to the town manager. 
(b)  Within five (5) days of the making of the complaint, the chief animal control officer shall undertake an investigation to determine whether the dog identified in the complaint is vicious or dangerous. Such investigation shall include an opportunity for the owner of the dog to present evidence to the chief animal control officer pertinent to the viciousness or dangerousness of the dog, and may include interviews with the complainant and other persons having personal knowledge regarding the dog and observations of the dog in its normal habitat. 
(c)  Upon completion of the investigation, the chief animal control officer shall determine whether the dog identified in the complaint is vicious or dangerous. 
(1)  If the chief animal control officer determines that the dog is neither vicious nor dangerous, they shall inform the complainant, the owner and the town manager of the determination and no further action shall be taken on the complaint. 
(2)  If the chief animal control officer determines that the dog is vicious, they shall put the determination in writing, as well as the reasons supporting it. The chief animal control officer shall then forward this written determination to the complainant and the owner and, in addition, notify the town manager as well as notify the owner that the dog must be destroyed or removed from the town within seven (7) days of the court action specified in section 3-10.1(d). If the owner fails to destroy or remove the dog within such period, the dog shall be impounded and the chief animal control officer shall recommend to the town manager that the town seek an order from a court of competent jurisdiction requiring that the dog be destroyed or removed from the town. Nothing in this section shall be construed as impairing or affecting, in any way, the authority of the chief animal control officer to issue a summons or notice of violation against the owner of a vicious dog and immediately to impound the dog. 
(3)  If the chief animal control officer determines that the dog is dangerous, they shall notify the town manager of the determination and of the requirements which should be included in the permit to be issued by the manager under section 3-10.2. 
(d)  The chief animal control officer shall, upon his determination that a dog is dangerous or vicious, in addition to his other obligations hereunder, immediately make application to a Magistrate of Fauquier County for issuance of a summons requiring the owner or custodian, if known, of such animal to appear before the General District Court of Fauquier County pursuant to Section 3.1-796.93:1(C)(1) of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1999-14, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 3-10.2. - Dangerous dog permit. 
(a)  Requirements; issuance; determination of dangerousness of dog. Upon receipt of a determination by the chief animal control officer that a dog is dangerous, the town manager shall immediately issue to the owner of such dog a dangerous dog permit. This permit shall authorize the continued keeping of the dog within the town only so long as the owner complies with the requirements set forth in the permit. Such requirements shall include those recommended to the town manager by the chief animal control officer and such others as the town manager determines necessary to ensure that no person or animal is injured by the dog. Permit requirements may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  That the dog wear a special and conspicuous form of identification (such as a blaze orange collar); 
(2)  That the owner immediately notify the chief animal control officer and the owner's abutting property owners in the event the dog is loose and unconfined, has attacked or injured a human being or another animal, has been sold or given to another person, or has died; 
(3)  That the dog, while on the property of the owner, be confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked structure, suitable to prevent the entry of children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping; 
(4)  That the owner display one (1) or more signs on his/her property which provide a clear warning to children of all ages and adults that a dangerous dog is present on the property; 
(5)  That, while off the owner's property, the dog be muzzled and/or restrained in a particular manner and be under the control of an adult; 
(6)  That the owner attend one (1) or more educational classes on the responsible keeping of dangerous dogs; and 
(7)  That, upon request of the town manager, the owner make the dog available for inspection by the chief animal control officer within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(8)  That the owner(s), within five (5) business day of permit issuance, obtain and present evidence of liability insurance which covers animal bites with a minimum coverage per occurrence of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), which shall be effective at any renewals of this permit. 
(b)  Reconsideration of requirements; hearing; evidence allowed; revocation of permit; modification of requirements. 
(1)  Within ten (10) days of receipt of a permit issued under subsection (a), the owner of the dog may request, in writing, the town manager to reconsider the determination that the dog is dangerous and/or some or all of the requirements set forth in the permit. Upon receipt of such a request the town manager shall offer the owner an opportunity to present, at an informal hearing, evidence pertinent to the dangerousness of the dog and to the requirements identified in the request for reconsideration. Written notice of the date, time and place of such hearing, as well as of the person designated by the town manager to serve as the hearing officer, shall be sent to the owner and the complainant at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. At the hearing, in addition to receiving evidence from the owner and the complainant, the hearing officer may receive evidence from the chief animal control officer, a veterinarian, a licensed animal trainer, a humane society agent and any person having personal knowledge of the dog's condition. 
(2)  Within ten (10) days of the hearing the hearing officer shall notify, in writing, the owner and the complainant of his decision whether to confirm the determination that the dog is dangerous and the requirements set out in the permit. If the hearing officer determines the dog not to be dangerous, the permit issued under subsection (a) shall be revoked and no further action shall be taken on the complaint. If the hearing officer confirms that the dog is dangerous but decides that certain requirements set out in the permit issued under subsection (a) are not necessary for the protection of the public and other animals, they shall delete or modify those requirements but otherwise confirm both the permit, as modified, and the owner's obligation to comply with it. If the hearing officer confirms the permit and the requirements set out in it, he shall also confirm the owner's obligation to comply with it. 
(c)  Compliance; removal of dog for noncompliance by owner. In the event an owner of a dangerous dog fails to comply with any of the requirements imposed by a permit issued under this section, the chief animal control officer shall notify the owner of his/her failure and the owner shall have ten (10) days following receipt of the notice in which to come into compliance with the permit. If the owner fails to do so, the town manager is authorized to seek an order from a court of competent jurisdiction requiring that the dog be removed from the town. 
(d)  Request for rescission or modification of permit by chief animal control officer; fee; information required. An owner of a dangerous dog who believes that the dog is no longer dangerous within the meaning of section 3-10 or that certain requirements set out in the dog's permit are no longer necessary for the protection of the public and other animals may request the chief animal control officer to rescind the determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or to delete or modify those permit requirements; provided, that no such request may be made within the first twelve (12) months following the initial determination that the dog is dangerous. Such a request must be accompanied by the fee required by subsection (e). In reviewing such a request, the chief animal control officer may require the owner to produce the dog for inspection, to allow the chief animal control officer to observe the dog in its natural habitat and to submit information pertinent to the dangerousness of the dog. In the event the chief animal control officer determines that the dog is no longer dangerous, the permit issued under this section shall be revoked. In the event the chief animal control officer determines that the dog still constitutes a dangerous dog but that certain requirements contained in the permit are no longer necessary, he may delete those conditions from the permit or modify them. 
(e)  Fees. The owner of any dog subject to a permit issued under this section shall pay to the chief animal control officer, within ten (10) days of the issuance of the permit or, if applicable, of the town manager's confirmation of the permit, a fee of one hundred fifty ($150.00). Any owner requesting the rescission or modification of a permit under subsection (d) shall pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) at the time he/she makes the request. 
(f)  The chief animal control officer may delegate the authority and responsibilities assigned to him by this section, or any part thereof, to any deputy animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 1999-14, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 3-10.3. - Impounding of vicious dog; confinement of dog which has committed an attack. 
(a)  Whenever a summons or notice of violation is issued against the owner of a dog charging maintenance of a vicious dog, the dog in question shall be impounded and kept at the animal shelter, at the owner's expense, pending final disposition of the case, provided such animal is not destroyed. 
(b)  Whenever a report is made of a person being bitten by a dog or a notice is received by the police department, health department, an animal control officer or the operators of the animal shelter, of a dog having bitten a person or another animal, but no summons or notice of violation is issued charging maintenance of a vicious dog, an animal control officer shall forthwith issue an order to the owner of the dog directing that the dog be confined under quarantine and kept under observation on the premises of the owner or a private kennel for a period of ten (10) days, at the expense of the owner, during which time the dog shall never leave the premises, and the order shall be served upon the owner by an animal control officer in the manner provided by section 8.01-296, Code of Virginia, no summons or notice of violation is forthcoming and an authorized representative of the director of public health or a licensed veterinarian report that the dog shows no symptoms of rabies within the ten (10) days, the dog shall be released. If a report of rabies is made or if a summons or notice of violation is issued before the expiration of the ten-day period, the dog shall be immediately removed to the animal shelter pending a final disposition of the case; and costs thereby incurred shall be charged to the owner of the dog. 
(c)  If any owner does not comply with the provisions of this section within twenty-four (24) hours from the time they are served with an order issued pursuant to the provisions of this section, the dog in question shall be impounded at the animal shelter and kept under observation, at the owner's expense, for a period of ten (10) days and the owner shall be charged with a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1999-14, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 3-11. - Running at large prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of a dog to permit the same to run at large at any time within the town limits and off of the property of the owner or custodian while not under leash control. For the purpose of this section, a dog shall be deemed running at large while roaming, running or self-hunting off the property of its owner or custodian and not under its owner or custodian's immediate control by leash. 
(b)  When dogs to be impounded. The officials charged with the enforcement of this chapter shall cause to be impounded (a) any dog found running at large in the town, (b) any dog which has not been inoculated with a rabies vaccine in accordance with the requirements of state law, and (c) Any vicious dog which is found not controlled or confined as required by the provisions of section 3-10 of this article. 
    For the purposes of this section, a dog not wearing a valid and current county dog license may be presumed to have not been inoculated with a rabies vaccine in accordance with state law, unless the owner or custodian of the dog can be immediately ascertained and located, and the owner or custodian promptly presents a valid rabies certificate for the dog. 
(c)  Any person who permits his dog or dogs to run at large, and not under leash control, shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of this section and shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor and shall be fined not more that one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each such violation. 
(Ord. No. 1990-1, 6-12-90; Ord. No. 2017-02 , 3-14-17) 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit dogs running at large, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6539. 
Sec. 3-12. - Dogs must have valid county license. 
    No person shall own or harbor a dog four (4) months old or older within the town unless a valid and current county license has been obtained for such dog. 
    Any dog not wearing a collar bearing a current dog license tag shall prima facie be deemed to be unlicensed and in any proceedings under this section the burden of proof of the fact that such dog has been licensed or is not required to have a license shall be on the owner of the dog. 
(Ord. No. 1990-1, 6-12-90) 
State Law reference- Dog licenses, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.85 et seq. 
Sec. 3-13. - Allowing dogs to defecate. 
(a)  Public property. It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog to allow his dog to defecate on any public street, roadway, curb, public parking lot, or sidewalk. 
(b)  Private property. It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog to allow his dog to defecate on property of another over the objection of the owner to the property, his agent, or a person having control of such property. 
(c)  Exceptions. It shall not be unlawful to allow defecation by such animal within the described public or private property if the owner of the animal removes the animal's excrement immediately and disposes of it in a public trash receptacle or in a public sanitary sewer, or on the owner's own property in a lawful manner. 
(d)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Owner shall be construed to mean: 
a.  Any person having a property interest in a dog or other animal; or 
b.  Any person who keeps such dog or other animal or has it in his care, or who acts as its custodian. 
(2)  Objection of the owner shall be construed to mean: 
a.  Any verbal or written communication objecting to the defecation of the dog on any specific parcel of property from any source; or 
b.  Notice mailed to the owner of the dog at his last known address of the objection to the defecation of the dog on the parcel of property. 
(e)  Violation. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of fifteen dollars ($15.00). Each violation and each day's continuation thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1992-29, 12-8-92) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1992-92, adopted December 8, 1992, amended the Code by adding a new § 3-11. Inasmuch as said section already existed in the Code, such new provisions were added as § 3-13 at the editor's discretion. 
State Law reference- County, city or town may provide for removal of trash, garbage, etc., weeds and other foreign growth, disposal of trash and garbage, covers on water wells, penalty in certain counties, § 15.1-11 of the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended; streets, parking facilities, public grounds and buildings, markets, nuisances, powder and combustibles, cemeteries, § 15.1-14 of the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended; litter control and recycling, § 10-277 of the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended. 
ARTICLE II. - KEEPING OF WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS 

Sec. 3-14. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)  Animal shall include any live vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, not to include birds. 
(2)  Pet shall mean any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility. 
(3)  Wild or exotic animal shall mean any live monkey (non-human primate), raccoon, skunk, wolf, squirrel, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any other warm-blooded animal, poisonous snake, constricting snake greater than three (3) feet in length, or tarantula which can normally be found in the wild state or any other member of crocodilian, including but not limited to alligators, crocodiles, caymans, and gavials. Ferrets, rabbits, and laboratory rats which have been bred in captivity and which have never known the wild shall be excluded from the definition. 
(Ord. No. 1994-14, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 3-15. - Keeping, Displaying or Exhibiting Exotic of Wild Animals. 
    No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild or exotic animal(s) as a pet or for display or exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee, without first registering the animal with the animal warden pursuant to section 3-17 of this article. This section shall not apply to veterinary clinics, itinerant circuses, temporary performing animal exhibitions, or educational programs which are properly licensed by the Federal Government or Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 1994-14, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 3-16. - Notice required at place of sale. 
    Any person who offers for sale any wild or exotic animal(s) as defined by section 3-14 of this article shall post conspicuously at the place of sale or display the following notice. 
    "No person may lawfully keep or permit to be kept in the Town of Warrenton, without first registering the animal(s) with the Animal Warden, any wild or exotic animal, including: live monkey (non-human primate), raccoon, skunk, wolf, squirrel, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any other warm-blooded animal, poisonous snake, constricting snake greater than three (3) feet in length or tarantula, crocodile or alligator, which can normally be found in the wild state or any other member of the crocodilian, including, but not limited to alligators, crocodiles, caymans, and gavials." 
(Ord. No. 1994-14, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 3-17. - Registration of certain wild animals. 
    The animal warden shall develop and implement a registration system for the keeping, care, and protection of wild or exotic animals as defined in section 3-14 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1994-14, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 3-18. - Release of certain wild animals. 
    No person keeping any wild or exotic animal(s) shall release the animal(s) to the wild except as authorized by the Animal Warden. 
(Ord. No. 1994-14, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 3-19. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished in the same manner as a Class 4 Misdemeanor as set forth in Title 18.2 of the Code of Virginia. Each day of violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1994-14, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 3-20. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Town of Warrenton Chief of Police, Town of Warrenton Police Officer, county game warden, the county animal warden or deputy county animal warden, or any other person duly designated by the town council for the Town of Warrenton. 
(Ord. No. 1994-14, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 3-21. - Effective date. 
(a)  Any person who keeps a wild or exotic animals(s) in contravention of this article may dispose of the animal(s) by removal of the animal(s) to a zoological park or by releasing the animal(s) to the animal warden. The animal warden is authorized to release the animal(s) to the wild, to a zoological park, or to any other proper organization or party, or to euthanize the animal(s), should the circumstances warrant. 
(b)  This article shall be effective thirty (30) days from adoption provided that any person currently keeping any wild or exotic animal(s) in the Town of Warrenton shall register with the Fauquier County Animal Warden within ninety (90) days from the date of adoption of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1994-14, 11-8-94) 
Chapter 4 - BUILDINGS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1994-15, adopted November 8, 1994, amended Ch. 4, Arts. I-IV, §§ 1-4-9, 4-16-4-18, 4-31-4-45, 4-61-4-66, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 4 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1981, §§ 4-2-4-25; Ord. No. 1980-9 §§ 5-6-5-11, adopted August 5, 1980 and Ord. No. 1991-6, adopted June 11, 1991. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; garbage, trash and weeds, Ch. 8; licenses, Ch. 9; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 14; properly and building numbering, § 14-91 et seq.; taxation, Ch. 15; water and sewers, Ch. 17; noise, § 11-19; building operations abutting streets or sidewalks, § 14-3; barbed wire fencing along streets, etc., § 14-9; house sewers, § 17-196 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority of town to require removal, repair, etc., of buildings and other structures, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-11.2; local certification to do building-related work, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-11.4, 36-99.1; power of town to regulate the building of houses, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-15(1); construction, maintenance, etc., of municipal buildings, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-846; repair or other abatement of dangerous buildings, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.1-867; power of town to regulate the light, ventilation, sanitation, use and occupancy of buildings, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-869; limitation of prosecutions, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-8; Virginia Public Building Safety Law, Code of Virginia, § 27-63 et seq.; Virginia Industrialized Building Safety Law, Code of Virginia, § 36-70 et seq.; Uniform Statewide Building Code, Code of Virginia, § 36-97 et seq.; effect of building code on other building regulations, Code of Virginia, § 36-98; enforcement of building code, appeals from decisions of local building department, inspection of buildings, Code of Virginia, § 36-105; voluntary apprenticeship, Code of Virginia, § 40.1-117 et seq.; contractors, Code of Virginia, § 54-113 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-1. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person guilty of a violation of the provisions of this chapter or of the Uniform Statewide Building Code shall be punished by a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Any person convicted of a second offense committed within less than five (5) years after a first offense shall be punished by a fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Any person convicted of a second offense committed within a period of five (5) to ten (10) years of a first offense of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Any person convicted of a third or subsequent offense committed within ten (10) years of an offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(Ord. No. 1994-15, 11-8-94) 
State Law reference- Violations of Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, Code of Virginia, § 36-106. 
Sec. 4-2. - Building official. 
    The Town manager shall appoint a building official qualified, as required by Section 102.4.1-3 of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, who shall serve at his pleasure and under his control. The building official shall be charged with the administration and enforcement of the building code and other provisions of this chapter. The town manager may serve as the building official until such appointment is made, and he may contract with other jurisdictions for the services of a building inspector or other technical assistants. 
(Ord. No. 1994-15, 11-8-94) 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Power of town to enter into agreement for building code enforcement and appeals, Code of Virginia, § 36-105. 
Sec. 4-3. - Board of appeals. 
(a)  There is hereby established a board of building code appeals. 
(b)  The owner of a building or structure or any other person may appeal from a decision of the building official refusing to grant a modification of the provisions of the Uniform Basic Building Code covering the manner of construction or materials to be used in the erection, alteration or repair of a building or structure to the board of building code appeals. Application for appeals may be made when it is claimed that the true intent of the basic code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of the basic code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction can be used. 
(c)  The board of appeals shall be appointed and function in conformance with the provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 1994-15, 11-8-94) 
DIVISION 2. - VIRGINIA TRADESMEN CERTIFICATION STANDARDS 

Sec. 4-4. - Official action. 
    The building official for the Town of Warrenton is designated to act as the enforcing agency for the enforcement of the Virginia Tradesmen Certification Standards, adopted by the Virginia Board of Housing and Community Development under authority of 15.1-11.4 and 36-99 of the Code of Virginia. Enforcement shall be according to the terms of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1994-15, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 4-5. - Enforcement. 
    The enforcement of the tradesmen certification standards shall be instituted by the building official in accordance with the provisions of the Virginia Tradesmen Certification Standards. 
(Ord. No. 1994-15, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 4-6. - Fees. 
    Every person making application for examination pursuant to this division shall pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). Application fees paid pursuant to this division shall not be refunded to either successful or unsuccessful applicants. 
(Ord. No. 1994-15, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 4-7. - Appeals. 
    The building code board of appeals for the Town of Warrenton is hereby designated as the appeals board to hear appeals arising from the application or interpretation of the tradesmen certification standards. 
(Ord. No. 1994-15, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 4-8. - Administrative practices. 
    The building official shall establish such procedures or requirements as may be necessary for administration and enforcement of this division. The procedures are to be approved by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 1994-15, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 4-9. - Violation of division. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division derives, to violate any provision. Any such violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor and any person, firm or corporation convicted of a violation shall be punished by fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 1994-15, 11-8-94) 
Secs. 4-10-4-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-16. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases when used in the building code adopted in section 4-17 shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
    Building department or building inspection department. The office of the building official. 
    Building official. The building official or his designated representative. 
    Municipality or name of municipality. Whenever the words "municipality" or "name of municipality" are enclosed within brackets or parentheses or otherwise used in the building code adopted in section 4-17, they shall be held to mean the Town of Warrenton. 
    State or name of state. Wherever the words "state" or "name of state" are enclosed in brackets or parentheses or otherwise used in the building code adopted in section 4-17, they shall be held to mean the State of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 1994-15, 11-8-94) 
State Law reference- Definitions applicable to building code statute, Code of Virginia, § 36-97. 
Sec. 4-17. - Uniform Statewide Building Code adopted. 
    The provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, 2000 edition, effective September 15, 2000, together with all model codes and statutes as referenced and adopted therein including, but not limited to, the BOCA National Building Code, 1996 edition, adopted and incorporated in whole as if fully set out at length herein, save and except such portions as are deleted, modified or amended by this article are hereby adopted by reference. The Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code shall control all matters concerning the design, construction, alteration, addition, enlargement, repair, removal, demolition, conversion, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of buildings, and all other functions which pertain to the installation of systems vital to buildings and structures and their service equipment as defined by the building code, and shall apply to buildings or other structures within the town. 
(Ord. No. 1994-15, 11-8-94; Ord. No. 1998-16, 11-10-98; Ord. No. 2001-10, 5-8-2001) 
State Law reference- Provisions of Uniform Statewide Building Code, Code of Virginia § 36-99. 
Sec. 4-18. - Expansive soil testing. 
    Building permits shall not be issued for residential construction for properties located in an expansive soil zone, or located within one hundred fifty (150) feet thereof, as the same is delineated on the county soils maps, until the owner shall file with the building official a report, prepared by a licensed engineer, identifying soil types located in the vicinity of the proposed building foundation. Should the report demonstrate expansive soils are present, a remediation plan must be approved by the building official prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 1998-16, 11-10-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 15.2-2241. 
Secs. 4-19-4-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 4-31. - Adoption. 
    Volume II, Building Maintenance Code of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, 1993 edition, effective April 1, 1994, is hereby adopted by reference, including but not limited to, The BOCA National Property Maintenance Code/1993 edition amended by Sections 101.2 and 101.3 and adopted therein for the purpose of ensuring public safety, health and welfare through proper building maintenance and use and continued compliance with minimum standards, including the elimination of conditions that render buildings unsafe and thereby constituted serious and dangerous to life and health or to public welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1994-15, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 4-32. - Code official. 
    The building official for the town shall serve as the code official for administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Building Maintenance Code. 
(Ord. No. 1994-15, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 4-33. - Appeals. 
    The building code board of appeals for the town is hereby designated as the appeals board to hear appeals arising from the code official's application of the Building Maintenance Code or refusal to grant a modification to the provisions of the Building Maintenance Code covering the manner of maintenance or use or the materials to be used in the maintenance or repair of that building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 1994-15, 11-8-94) 
Secs. 4-34-4-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of town to require removal, repair, etc., of buildings and other structures, Code of Virginia, § 15.1.11.2; local enforcement of state regulations applicable to existing buildings, Code of Virginia, § 36-105. 

Sec. 4-61. - When examination required. 
    Whenever the town manager or his duly appointed designee shall be informed that any building or structure or part thereof in the town is dangerous or unsafe, by reason of dilapidation or otherwise, to the occupants or to persons passing in the vicinity thereof or to adjoining property, he shall cause to be made an examination of such building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 1994-15, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 4-62. - Notice to owner, etc., to show cause as to removal. 
(a)  If upon examination as provided in section 4-61, it shall appear that the building or structure in question, or part thereof, is in such condition as is indicated in section 4-61, the town manager or his duly appointed designee shall issue a notice to the owner of the property or to his agent, if he is a nonresident, or to his guardian or other legal representative, as the case may be, requiring him to appear at the town planning and zoning office at a specified time, to show cause why such building or structure should not be removed or put in a safe condition. 
(b)  The notice provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be served personally if possible but if the person upon whom personal service is to be made cannot be found in the town, such notice shall be sent by certified mail to the last known post office address of such person and proof thereof shall be taken and accepted in lieu of personal service. 
(Ord. No. 1994-15, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 4-63. - Order to remove or repair. 
    If after hearing the case, pursuant to notice as provided in section 4-62 it shall appear that a building or structure, or part thereof, is in such condition as is indicated in section 4-61, the town manager or his duly appointed designee shall issue an order directing the owner or his agent or legal representative, within a specified time, to remove such building or structure or part thereof or to put such building or structure or part thereof in safe condition. 
(Ord. No. 1994-15, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 4-64. - Procedure in event of noncompliance. 
    If the building or structure or part thereof in question is not removed or put in a safe condition within the time specified in the order provided for in section 4-63, the town attorney shall cause a summons to be issued by the judge of the general district court, directing the owner or his agent or legal representative failing to comply with the order in question to appear before the general district court to show cause why the building or structure or part thereof in question should not be removed or put in a safe condition, at the expense of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 1994-15, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 4-65. - Court order to comply. 
    If, at a hearing before the general district court, held pursuant to a summons issued as provided in section 4-64, no sufficient cause be shown for failure to comply with the order in question, the owner of the building or structure or part thereof in question shall be guilty of a violation of this article for each day his failure to comply with such order has continued, and the general district court shall require such building or structure or part thereof in question to be removed or put in a safe condition at the expense of the owner thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1994-15, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 4-66. - Removal, etc. by town manager. 
    If the requirement of the general district court relative to the removal or putting in a safe condition of a building or structure or part thereof authorized by section 4-65, is not properly complied with, the town manager or his duly appointed designee shall have the building or structure or part thereof, in question removed or put in a safe condition and the costs thereof shall be a lien upon the real estate of the owner and may be collected as taxes or other claims due the town are collected. A suit in chancery may be brought in the circuit court of the county for the purpose of subjecting the property to the payment of such debt. 
(Ord. No. 1994-15, 11-8-94) 
Chapter 5 - CEMETERY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; licenses, Ch. 9; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 10; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Municipal cemeteries generally, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-14(7), 15.1-883; municipal regulation and inspection of cemeteries and burials, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-860; trespass at night upon cemetery, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-125; violation of sepulchre, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-126; injuries, to cemeteries, etc., Code of Virginia, § 18.2-127; cemeteries generally, Code of Virginia, § 57-22 et seq.; condemnation of land for cemeteries, Code of Virginia, § 57-25; regulation of location and size of cemeteries, Code of Virginia, § 57-26; lot in burial ground exempt from levy and distress, Code of Virginia, §§ 34-26, 34-28. 

Sec. 5-1. - Definition, application of chapter. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the word "cemetery" shall mean the Warrenton Cemetery and the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the Warrenton Cemetery. 
(Code 1981, § 18-1) 
State Law reference- Definitions relating to endowment trusts for perpetual care, Code of Virginia, § 57-35.1; definitions relating to pre-need burial contracts, Code of Virginia, § 57-39.8. 
Sec. 5-2. - Powers and duties of town manager. 
    The town manager shall have full charge and control of the cemetery and shall generally exercise full and complete authority in all matters pertaining to the cemetery, subject to such restraints as the town council may see proper to impose. 
(Code 1981, § 18-2) 
Charter reference- Duties and powers of town manager, § 6-3. 
Cross reference- Town manager, § 2-126 et seq. 
Sec. 5-3. - Cemetery caretaker. 
    The position of cemetery caretaker is hereby established. The cemetery caretaker shall be appointed by the town manager and shall serve during his pleasure. He shall perform such duties relative to the cemetery as may be provided by the town manager. 
(Code 1981, § 18-3) 
Charter reference- Authority of town manager to appoint and remove officers and employees, § 6-2. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Person in charge of any public or private cemetery authorized to maintain order and enforce the law, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-14. 
Sec. 5-4. - Employment of laborers, etc. 
    The town manager shall employ such laborers and other assistants as may be necessary in the management and improvement of the cemetery. 
(Code 1981, § 18-4) 
Sec. 5-5. - Improvements generally. 
    The town manager shall direct and superintend all improvements made in and upon the cemetery. 
(Code 1981, § 18-5) 
Sec. 5-6. - Removal, etc., of trees, etc., from lots. 
    It shall be unlawful for any lot or grave site owner to sell or offer for sale, remove or attempt to remove any sound or living trees or plantings used to beautify the cemetery, from a cemetery lot, unless the removal of such trees and plantings shall be necessary for the purpose of opening a grave site or shall be deemed necessary by the town manager. 
(Code 1981, § 18-6) 
State Law reference- Injuries to cemeteries, etc., Code of Virginia, § 18.2-127. 
Sec. 5-7. - Promulgation, etc. of additional rules and regulations. 
    The town manager shall have the power to promulgate such reasonable rules and regulations, not otherwise in conflict with the provisions of this Code, or other ordinances of the town, or the Commonwealth of Virginia, as shall be necessary for the safe and proper use of the Warrenton Cemetery. Such rules and regulations shall be subject to the approval of the town council. The rules and regulations, shall be posted prominently at the entrance to the Warrenton cemetery property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any other of such rules and regulations so established, promulgated, approved and posted, the violation of which shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 18-7; Ord. No. 1990-8, 11-13-90) 
Cross reference- General penalty, § 1-7. 
Sec. 5-8. - Sale of lots. 
(a)  The purchase price of a lot or grave site in the cemetery shall be paid to the finance director who shall forthwith cause to be delivered to the purchaser of the lot in question an instrument signed by the town manager. 
(b)  Lots and grave sites in the cemetery shall be sold only with provisions for perpetual care. Lots and grave sites in the cemetery shall be sold at prices in accordance with the schedule of prices for lots and grave sites in the cemetery established by the town council. The cost of perpetual care for lots or gravesites in the cemetery, when purchased separately, shall be in accordance with the schedule of charges for perpetual care when purchased separately established by the town council. Such perpetual care shall not be deemed to include maintenance and repairs of monuments. 
(Code 1981, § 18-8) 
State Law reference- Endowment trusts for perpetual care, Code of Virginia, § 57-35.1 et seq. 
Sec. 5-9. - Opening or closing graves. 
    Charges for opening and closing of a grave shall be in accordance with the schedule of charges for the opening and closing of graves in the cemetery established by the town council. 
(Code 1981, § 18-9) 
State Law reference- Abandonment of graveyards, removal of remains, Code of Virginia, § 57-36 et seq. 
Sec. 5-10. - Cemetery fund. 
(a)  All monies received by the finance director from the sale of lots in the cemetery, subject to such charges against such lots as the council may deem proper, together with such sums as may from time to time be specially appropriated by the council, shall constitute and be designated the cemetery fund. 
(b)  The finance director shall keep a distinct and separate account for the cemetery fund. 
(c)  The cemetery fund shall be set apart to the uses of the cemetery and to the care, maintenance and preservation of the cemetery as directed by the council. 
(Code 1981, §§ 18-10-18-12) 
Sec. 5-11. - Trespass at night. 
    If any person, without the consent of the owner, proprietor or custodian, go or enter in the nighttime, upon the premises, property, driveways or walks of the Warrenton Cemetery, for any purpose other than to visit the burial lot or grave of some member of his family, he shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 10-30) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-125. 
Sec. 5-12. - Injuries to churches, church property, cemeteries, burial grounds, etc.; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who willfully or maliciously commits any of the following acts is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor: 
(1)  Destroys, mutilates, defaces, injures or removes any object or structure placed within any church or on church property, any tomb, monument, gravestone, or other structure placed within any cemetery, graveyard, or place of burial, or within any lot belonging to any memorial or monumental association, or any fence, railing, or other work for the protection or ornament of any tomb, monument, gravestone, or other structure aforesaid, or of any cemetery lot within any cemetery; 
(2)  Destroys, removes, cuts, breaks or injures any tree, shrub, or plant on any church property or within any cemetery or lot of any memorial or monumental association; 
(3)  Destroys, mutilates, injures, or removes and carries away any flowers, wreaths, vases, or other ornaments placed within any church or on church property, or placed upon or around any grave, tomb, monument, or lot in any cemetery, graveyard, or other place of burial; or 
(4)  Obstructs proper ingress to and egress from any church or any cemetery or lot belonging to any memorial or monumental association. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any work which is done by the authorities of a church or congregation in the maintenance or improvement of any church property or any burial ground or cemetery belonging to it and under its management or control and which does not injure or result in the removal of a tomb, monument, gravestone, grave marker or vault. For purposes of this section, "church" shall mean any place of worship, and "church property" shall mean any educational building or community center owned or rented by a church. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-127. 
Chapter 6 - DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, Ch. 9; solicitors, Ch. 13; taxation, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference- Dealers in precious metals, Code of Virginia, § 54-859.15 et seq.; local ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 54-859.26. 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Coin means any piece of gold, silver or other metal fashioned into a prescribed shape, weight and degree of fineness, stamped by authority of a government with certain marks and devices, and having a certain fixed value as money. 
    Dealer means any person engaged in the business of purchasing secondhand precious metals or gems; removing in any manner precious metals or gems from manufactured articles not then owned by such person; or buying, acquiring, or selling precious metals or gems removed from such manufactured articles. "Dealer" shall mean all employers and principals on whose behalf a purchase is made, and any employee or agent who makes any such purchase for or on behalf of his employer or principal. This definition shall not be construed so as to include persons engaged in the following: 
(1)  Purchases of precious metals or gems directly from other dealers, manufacturers, or wholesalers for retail or wholesale inventories, provided the selling dealer has complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Purchases of precious metals or gems from a duly qualified fiduciary who is disposing of the assets of the estate being administered by such fiduciary in the administration of an estate. 
(3)  Acceptance by a retail merchant of trade-in merchandise previously sold by such retail merchant to the person presenting that merchandise for trade-in. 
(4)  Repairing, restoring or designing jewelry by a retail merchant, if such activities are within his normal course of business. 
(5)  Purchases of precious metals or gems by industrial refiners and manufacturers, insofar as such purchases are made directly from retail merchants, wholesalers, dealers, or by mail originating outside the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(6)  Persons regularly engaged in the business of purchasing and processing nonprecious scrap metals which incidentally may contain traces of precious metals recoverable as a by-product. 
    Gem means any item containing precious or semiprecious stones customarily used in jewelry. 
    Precious metal means any item except coins composed in whole or in part of gold, silver, platinum, or platinum alloys. 
(Ord. No. 1981-7, § 8-75.1, 7-7-81) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54-859.15. 
Sec. 6-2. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor for the first offense. Upon conviction of any subsequent offense, he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Upon the first conviction by any court of a dealer for violation of any provision of this chapter, the chief of police may revoke his permit to engage in business as a dealer under this chapter for a period of one (1) full year from the date the conviction becomes final. Such revocation shall be mandatory upon a second conviction. 
(Ord. No. 1981-7, § 8-75.11, 7-7-81) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54-859.25. 
Sec. 6-3. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The chief of police may waive by written notice implementation of any one (1) or more of the provisions of this chapter, except section 6-6, for particular numismatic, gem, or antique exhibitions or craft shows sponsored by nonprofit organizations, provided that the purpose of the exhibitions is nonprofit in nature, notwithstanding the fact that there may be casual purchases and trades made at such exhibitions. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any bank, branch thereof, trust company or bank holding company, or any wholly owned subsidiary thereof, engaged in the business of buying and selling gold and silver bullion. 
(Ord. No. 1981-7, § 8-75.10, 7-7-81) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 54-859.24, 54-859.28. 
Sec. 6-4. - Records to be kept; distribution; inspection. 
(a)  Every dealer shall keep at his place of business an accurate and legible record of each purchase of precious metals or gems. The record of each purchase shall be retained by the dealer for not less than twenty-four (24) months. These records shall set forth the following: 
(1)  A complete description of all precious metals or gems purchased from each seller. The description shall include all names, initials, serial numbers or other identifying marks or monograms on each item purchased, the true weight or carat of any gem, and the price paid for each item; 
(2)  The date and time of receiving the items purchased; 
(3)  The name, address, age, sex, race, driver's license number or social security number and one (1) other identification number, vehicle license number, and the signature of the seller; and 
(4)  A statement of ownership from the seller. 
(b)  The information required by subsection (a)(1)-(3) shall appear on each bill of sale for all precious metals and gems purchased by a dealer, and a copy shall be delivered within twenty-four (24) hours of the time of purchase to the chief of police. 
(c)  Every dealer shall admit to his premises during regular business hours the chief of police, or his sworn designee, or any law enforcement official of the state or federal government, and shall permit such law enforcement officer to examine all records required by this chapter, and to examine any article listed in a record which is believed by the officer or official to be missing or stolen. 
(Ord. No. 1981-7, § 8-75.2, 7-7-81) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54-859.16. 
Sec. 6-5. - Credentials required from seller. 
(a)  No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems without first: 
(1)  Ascertaining the identity of the seller by requiring an identification issued by a governmental agency with a photograph of the seller thereon, and at least one (1) other corroborating means of identification; and 
(2)  Obtaining a statement of ownership from the seller. 
(b)  The council may determine the contents of the statement of ownership. 
(Ord. No. 1981-7, § 8-75.3, 7-7-81) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54-859.17. 
Sec. 6-6. - Prohibited purchases. 
(a)  No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems from any seller who is under the age of eighteen (18). 
(b)  No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems from any seller who the dealer believes or has reason to believe is not the owner of such items, unless the seller has written and duly authenticated authorization from the owner permitting and directing such sale. 
(Ord. No. 1981-7, § 8-75.4, 7-7-81) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54-859.18. 
Sec. 6-7. - Retention of purchases. 
(a)  The dealer shall retain all precious metals or gems purchased for a minimum of fifteen (15) calendar days from the date on which a copy of the bill of sale is received by the chief of police. Until the expiration of this period, the dealer shall not sell, alter, or dispose of a purchased item in whole or in part, or remove it from the town. 
(b)  If a dealer performs the service of removing precious metals or gems, he shall retain the metals or gems removed and the article from which the removal was made for a period of fifteen (15) calendar days after receiving such article and precious metals or gems. 
(Ord. No. 1981-7, § 8-75.5, 7-7-81) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54-859.19. 
Sec. 6-8. - Record of disposition. 
    Each dealer shall keep and maintain for at least twenty-four (24) months an accurate and legible record of the name and address of the person to whom he sells any precious metal or gem in its original form after the waiting period required by section 6-7. This record shall also show the name and address of the seller from whom the dealer purchased such item. 
(Ord. No. 1981-7, § 8-75.6, 7-7-81) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54-859.20. 
Sec. 6-9. - Bond or letter of credit required of dealers when permit obtained. 
(a)  Every dealer shall secure a permit as required by section 6-11, and each dealer at the time of obtaining such permit, shall enter into a recognizance to the town secured by a corporate surety authorized to do business in the commonwealth in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned upon due observance of the terms of this chapter. In lieu of a bond, a dealer may cause to be issued by a bank authorized to do business in the commonwealth a letter of credit in favor of the town in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
(b)  A single bond upon an employer or principal may be written or a single letter of credit issued to cover all employees and all transactions occurring at a single location. 
(Ord. No. 1981-7, § 8-75.7, 7-7-81) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54-859.21. 
Sec. 6-10. - Private action on bond or letter of credit. 
    If any person shall be aggrieved by the misconduct of any dealer who has violated the provisions of this chapter, he may maintain an action for recovery in any court of proper jurisdiction against such dealer and his surety, provided that recovery against the surety shall be only for that amount of the judgment, if any, which is unsatisfied by the dealer. 
(Ord. No. 1981-7, § 8-75.8, 7-7-81) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54-859.22. 
Sec. 6-11. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the activities of a dealer as defined in section 6-1 without first obtaining a permit from the chief of police. 
(b)  To obtain a permit, the dealer shall file with the chief of police an application form which shall include the dealer's full name, any aliases, address, age, date of birth, sex, and fingerprints; the name, address and telephone number of the applicant's employer, if any, and the location of the dealer's place of business. Upon filing this application and the payment of a two hundred-dollar application fee, the dealer shall be issued a permit by the chief of police, provided that the applicant has not been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within seven (7) years prior to the date of application. The permit shall be denied if the applicant has been denied a permit or has had a permit revoked under any provision of this Code or other town ordinance similar in substance to the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Before a permit may be issued, the dealer must have all weighing devices used in his business inspected and approved by local or state weights and measures officials and present written evidence of such approval to the chief of police. 
(d)  This permit shall be valid for one (1) year from the date issued and may be renewed in the same manner as such permit was initially obtained with an annual permit fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00). No permit shall be transferable. 
(e)  If the business of the dealer is not operated without interruption, with Saturdays, Sundays, and recognized holidays excepted, the dealer shall notify the chief of police of all closings and reopenings of such business. The business of a dealer shall be conducted only from the fixed and permanent location specified in his application for a permit. 
(f)  All fees in this chapter are in addition to those required by chapter 9 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1981-7, § 8-75.9, 7-7-81) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54-859.23. 
Chapter 7 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings, Ch. 4; garbage, trash and weeds, Ch. 8; licenses, Ch. 9; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 10; police department, Ch. 12; water and sewers, Ch. 17; emergency disconnection of electrical equipment, § 4-42; burning refuse, etc., § 8-3 et seq.; defacing fire hydrants, § 11-8; false alarms, § 11-12; general powers and duties of chief of police, § 12-32; duties of town manager with respect to water, § 17-66. 
State Law reference- Forest resources and department of forestry, Code of Virginia, § 10-31.1 et seq.; authority of town council to require removal, repair, etc., of dangerous structures, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-11.2; powers of town as to nuisances, keeping of gunpowder and other combustibles, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.1-14; power of town council to make fire prevention and building regulations, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-15; regulation of fires on public and private property, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-872, 27-54.5; false fire or ambulance alarms, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212; fire protection generally, Code of Virginia, Title 27; explosives generally, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-137 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 7-1-7-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1993-3, adopted March 9, 1993, amended §§ 7-16-7-24 to read as set out herein. Prior to such amendment, said sections contained similar provisions and derived from §§ 6-1-6-9 of the 1981 Code. 
State Law reference- Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code Act, Code of Virginia, § 27-94 et seq. 

Sec. 7-16. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
    Chief of the fire department. The chief of the Warrenton Volunteer Fire Company or other duly authorized officer. 
    Fire official. The town manager or his designee. 
    Legal official. The town attorney or the commonwealth's attorney of the county. 
(Code 1981, § 6-2; Ord. No. 1993-3, 3-9-93) 
State Law reference- Fire departments and fire companies, Code of Virginia, § 27-6.1 et seq. 
Sec. 7-17. - Adopted. 
    For purposes of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, those certain codes known as the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, 1990 Edition as amended February 1, 1992, and the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code (SFPC), 1990 edition, together with all model codes and standards as referenced and adopted therein, including, but not limited to, the BOCA National Building Code/1990 Edition, are hereby adopted and incorporated in whole, as if fully set out at length herein, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1993-3, 3-9-93) 
Sec. 7-18. - Fire official. 
    The town manager is hereby authorized to appoint a fire official. In the event of a vacancy in this office, the town manager may serve as the fire official or he may designate an officer of the fire department to serve until the vacancy is filled. 
(Ord. No. 1993-3, 3-9-93) 
State Law reference- Local fire marshals, Code of Virginia, § 27-30 et seq. 
Sec. 7-19. - Enforcement. 
    The fire official shall be responsible for the enforcement of the Statewide Fire Prevention Code. Upon receipt of complaint, or by observation of the fire official, of possible violations of the Statewide Fire Prevention Code, the fire official shall conduct such investigation and undertake such procedures as authorized by the Statewide Fire Prevention Code, or the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended, as reasonably necessary for the adequate enforcement of the provisions of this article and the Statewide Fire Prevention Code. 
(Ord. No. 1993-3, 3-9-93) 
Sec. 7-20. - Appeals. 
    There shall be established a board of fire prevention code appeals for the purpose of hearing appeals concerning the application of the fire prevention code. The composition, duties and responsibilities of the board of fire prevention code appeals shall be prescribed in the Statewide Fire Prevention Code. Appeals concerning the application of the Statewide Fire Prevention Code by the fire official shall first lie to the board of fire prevention code appeals for the town and then to the state building code technical review board. 
(Ord. No. 1993-3, 3-9-93) 
Sec. 7-21. - Fees. 
    Fees for all permits required under the provisions of the Statewide Fire Prevention Code, and as necessary to defray the cost of such enforcement and appeals, shall be as fixed from time to time by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 1993-3, 3-9-93) 
Sec. 7-22. - Copies of file. 
    Copies of the fire prevention code adopted by this article and the ordinances adopting deletions, modifications, and amendments to this Code shall be on file in the office of the town manager and the fire official, and shall be available for public inspection between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. Monday through Friday, inclusive, except for legal holidays. 
(Ord. No. 1993-3, 3-9-93) 
State Law reference- Legal holidays, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-21. 
Sec. 7-23. - Violation of article. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article, upon which there is no specific penalty provided for such violation, shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1993-3, 3-9-93) 
Sec. 7-24. - Juvenile membership. 
    Pursuant to the authority of Section 40.1-79.1, Code of Virginia, the Town of Warrenton hereby authorizes any minor sixteen (16) years of age or older, with parental or legal guardian approval, may work with or participate fully in all activities of a volunteer fire company, provided such minor has attained certification under National Fire Protection Association NFPA 1001, Level One, fire fighter standards, as administered by the Virginia Department of Fire Programs. 
    Any trainer or instructor of such minor or any member of a paid or volunteer fire company who supervises such minor shall be exempt from the provisions of Section 40.1-103, Code of Virginia, provided the volunteer fire company or the board of supervisors has purchased insurance which provides coverage for injuries to, or the death of, such minor in the performance of activities under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2005-2, 6-14-2005) 
Secs. 7-25-7-30. - Reserved. 
Sec. 7-31. - Burning on streets or alleys. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to burn trash, lumber, leaves, straw, or any combustible material in or on any street or alley within the town. 
(Ord. No. 1993-3, 3-9-93) 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of fires in streets, alleys and other public places, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-872. 
Sec. 7-32. - Burning on private property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any trash, lumber, leaves, straw, or any combustible material in or on any private property of the town without first obtaining a permit from the fire official. 
(b)  The fire official shall issue permits after consideration of safety factors and standards contained in the State Fire Prevention Code. 
(c)  The burning of materials in the use of cooking devices, barbecues, grills, etc. is specifically exempted from application of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1993-3, 3-9-93) 
State Law reference- Air pollution control, Code of Virginia, § 10-17.9:1 et seq.; local ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 10-17.30; municipal regulation of fires on private property, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-872. 
Sec. 7-33. - Fire lanes. 
(a)  The fire official shall require and designate public or private fire lanes as deemed necessary for the efficient and effective use of fire apparatus as approved by the town manager. 
(b)  Fire lanes shall have a minimum width of eighteen (18) feet and shall be designated by appropriate curb and pavement markings or signs, or a combination thereof, so that an ordinarily observant person will be aware of the fire lane designation. 
(c)  The town manager is authorized to establish within the parking regulations promulgated pursuant to section 10-3 of this Code, a standard fine for the prepayment of a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1993-3, 3-9-93) 
State Law reference- Local parking regulations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 
Sec. 7-34. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park his vehicle within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant or in such a manner as to block or otherwise impede the use of such fire hydrant. 
(b)  The town manager is authorized to establish, within the parking regulations he promulgates pursuant to section 10-3 of this Code, a standard fine for the prepayment of a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1993-3, 3-9-93) 
State Law reference- Local parking regulations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 
Sec. 7-35. - Fire extinguishers. 
    The fire official is authorized to establish reasonable regulations concerning the number, size and location of fire extinguishers for any structure or facility as deemed prudent and necessary considering the requirements of the fire prevention code; these structures or facilities include those required by the § F-517.0 of fire prevention code. 
(Ord. No. 1993-3, 3-9-93) 
Sec. 7-36. - Fire protection systems. 
(a)  Any person or persons engaged in selling, servicing, testing, leasing, installing, inspecting, altering, modifying, repairing or removing any portable or fixed fire protection, suppression or detection equipment and systems in the town shall be registered with and operate under a permit issued by the fire official. 
(b)  Each registrant will provide the fire official with proof of adequate general liability insurance, including product or completed operations liability insurance, which will protect the public (both from property damage and personal injury) from negligence of his personnel performing the aforementioned activities, considering the nature and extent of the registrant's proposed activities. 
(c)  Any person or persons engaged in the aforementioned activities shall demonstrate proof of qualification, in a manner prescribed by the fire official. 
(d)  All servicing, inspection, testing, installing, altering, modifying, repairing or removing of such equipment and systems shall be done in accordance with the practices, standards, codes and requirements of the National Fire Protection Association, the fire prevention code and the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and the orders of the fire official. 
(e)  Failure to comply with this section shall be cause for revocation of the permit and shall be a violation of the fire prevention code. 
(Ord. No. 1993-3, 3-9-93) 
State Law reference- Construction of fire escapes, etc., over streets, Code of Virginia § 15.1-376; contracts as to installation of automatic sprinklers with incidental insurance clauses, Code of Virginia, § 27-5. 
Secs. 7-37-7-40. - Reserved. 
Sec. 7-41. - Explosives. 
    No person shall handle, store, or use any explosives or blasting agents within the town without obtaining a permit from the town. Any such handling, storage or use of explosives within the town shall be in conformity with prescribed regulations of the Statewide Fire Prevention Code. Any person or persons violating this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1993-3, 3-9-93) 
Sec. 7-42. - Fireworks generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, expose for sale, or to buy, use, ignite or explode, within the limits of the town, any firecracker, torpedo, skyrocket, or other substance or thing of whatever form or construction, that contains any explosive or inflammable compound or substance and intended or commonly known as fireworks; except for "permissible fireworks" as defined in Virginia Code § 27-95; provided, that the town manager may, upon application in writing, at any time issue a permit for the public display of fireworks by fair associations, amusement parks or by any organization or group of individuals. Such display shall be permitted within public parks or other places open to the public, when the use of fireworks will be under the supervision and control of an expert in the handling of fireworks. This shall not prohibit the sale of legal fireworks which shall be granted by the issuance of a permit by the fire official. 
(Ord. No. 1993-3, 3-9-93; Ord. No. 2015-01(a), 3-10-15 ) 
State Law reference- Fireworks, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-142 et seq.; local ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-148; permits for display of fireworks, sales for use thereunder, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-144. 
Chapter 8 - GARBAGE, TRASH AND WEEDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; animals and fowl, Ch. 3; buildings, Ch. 4; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; licenses, Ch. 9; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 10; solicitors, Ch. 13; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 14; water and sewers, Ch. 17; inoperative vehicles, § 10-84 et seq.; discharge of garbage into sewer system, § 17-216. 
State Law reference- Virginia Waste Management Act, Code of Virginia, § 10-263 et seq.; removal of trash, garbage, weeds, etc., from property, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-11; contracts for garbage and refuse pickup and disposal services, waste recovery facilities, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-28.02; ordinances requiring delivery of garbage, trash and refuse to certain facilities, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-28.03; regulation of garbage and refuse pickup and disposal services, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-28.1; municipal collection and disposal of refuse, regulation of disposal facilities, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-857; mailing of summons for violation of trash ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-76.2; dumping trash, etc. on highway, right-of-way or private property, Code of Virginia, §§ 33.1-346, 33.1-346.1; dump creating fire hazard to public bridge, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-347. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Garbage. All wastes to be disposed of from the preparation, cooking and serving of food, vegetables, fruit and meat scraps from residences, hotels, restaurants and other places where food is prepared for human consumption, and all offal from fish, meat and vegetable markets, and all vegetable or organic substances unfit for food that are subject to immediate decay. 
    Trash. All rubbish, refuse, shrubbery cuttings, leaves, cans, bottles, boxes, paper and other similar materials. "Trash" as defined in this section shall not include batteries, tires, household furniture and appliances, or any automotive parts or equipment. 
(Code 1981, § 7-1) 
State Law reference- Definitions applicable to Virginia Waste Management Act, Code of Virginia, § 10-264. 
Sec. 8-2. - Depositing, etc., garbage, etc., in public places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street or public place of the town or the premises of any other person any garbage, rubbish, dirt, filth, shavings, manure, offal, ashes or any other article or substance calculated to render streets, public places or premises unsightly or to affect injuriously the health of the community. 
(Code 1981, § 7-2) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Litter control and recycling, Code of Virginia, § 10-277 et seq. 
Secs. 8-3, 8-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1993-3, adopted March 9, 1993, repealed §§ 8-3 and 8-4 in their entirety. Formerly, such sections pertained to the burning of trash on streets, alleys or private property and derived from §§ 7-3, 7-4 of the 1981 Code. 
Secs. 8-5-8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-21. - By town; method and supervision generally. 
    Garbage and trash shall be removed by the town from dwellings, apartment houses, restaurants, hotels, commercial houses and other places where human beings may dwell or assemble. Such removal shall be under the direction of the town manager and in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 7-5) 
Sec. 8-22. - Frequency. 
    Collections of garbage and trash made pursuant to this article shall be made at such intervals as, in the judgement of the town council, may be necessary and as the funds available for the purpose will permit, in the interests of maintenance of public health. 
(Code 1981, § 7-6) 
Sec. 8-23. - Storage of garbage, etc., pending removal. 
    It shall be the duty of every owner or other person in charge of premises within the town to keep all garbage and trash which may have accumulated on the premises suitably confined pending its removal. 
(Code 1981, § 7-7) 
Sec. 8-24. - Preparation of certain paper items. 
    In the commercial areas of town, all paper cartons shall be folded flat except where there is a large quantity of loose paper, which shall be stored in these cartons pending collection. Paper cartons and cartons containing loose paper shall be stored within a building or enclosure pending removal and shall not be permitted to be scattered on the premises of the owner or others. 
(Code 1981, § 7-9) 
Sec. 8-25. - Certain materials prohibited from collection. 
(a)  Earth, rocks, building materials and tree limbs shall not be placed in any garbage or trash receptacle or collected by the town. 
(b)  Batteries, tires, household furniture and appliances or any automotive parts and equipment shall not be placed in any garbage or trash receptacle or collected by the town. 
(Code 1981, § 7-10) 
Sec. 8-26. - Separation of certain paper items. 
    All corrugated cardboard and trash newspapers shall be segregated and removed from garbage and trash generally to be collected and removed by the town as described in section 8-41. Any garbage or trash placed for pickup containing corrugated cardboard or newspaper shall not be picked up by the town for collection processing. 
(1)  On the day of the week designated by the town for newspaper collection and pickup, all newspapers to be collected and recycled shall be placed curbside in the same manner and location as required by section 8-43 herein. 
(2)  All corrugated cardboard shall be placed curbside in the same location as required by section 8-43 herein, and identified in a manner as to be separate from all other garbage and trash to be collected. 
(3)  On the day of the week designated by the town for curbside recycling, collection recycling containers (bag, bin, etc.) used for the town's curbside recycling program shall be placed curbside in the same manner and location as required by section 8-43 herein. 
(Ord. No. 1992-14, 8-11-92; Ord. No. 1994-11, 8-9-94) 
Sec. 8-27. - Preparation of tree trimmings and brush. 
(a)  Tree trimmings or brush shall be placed on the shoulder of the road or at curbside, and not in the gutter, by citizens as required by section 8-43 herein. 
(b)  Tree limbs must be no larger than eight (8) inches in diameter and must be cut in lengths no greater than eight (8) feet. 
(c)  The following items are prohibited from collection: 
(1)  Limbs or brush mixed with construction debris. 
(2)  Stumps. 
(3)  Trees or brush cut by tree care or removal companies or contractors. 
(Ord. No. 1994-11, 8-9-94; Ord. No. 2006-06, 6-13-2006) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1994-11, adopted Aug. 8, 1994, amended the Code by adding § 8-45. For purposes of classification, such new provisions were included as § 8-27 at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 8-28-8-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONTAINERS 

Sec. 8-41. - Required. 
    All garbage and trash to be collected and removed by the town under this article shall be deposited in containers as described in section 8-42. 
(Code 1981, § 7-11) 
Sec. 8-42. - Duty of occupants, etc., to provide; specifications. 
    It shall be the duty of every tenant, lessee or occupant of any residence or establishment where people reside, congregate or are employed to provide sufficient garbage or trash containers to handle the accumulation of garbage or trash during the intervals between collections. The containers shall be made of metal or a suitable plastic with a close fitting metal or plastic lid and solid bottom and shall be provided with a handle or grips at the sides for the safe and convenient handling of the containers. In no case shall the containers have a capacity of less than ten (10) gallons nor more than thirty-two (32) gallons, nor shall any container be filled with garbage or other material in excess of seventy-five (75) pounds, except those containers manipulated by some mechanical means. It shall be unlawful to place garbage or trash for collection in a box, tub, crate or any other container except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Code 1981, § 7-12) 
Sec. 8-43. - Location. 
(a)  Placement. Containers in which garbage, trash, or recyclables have been deposited for collection by the town, pursuant to section 8-42 of this Code, shall be located for collection by 8:00 a.m. on the scheduled day of collection in the following manner along the said property line and a public/private street. 
(1)  Where curb exists, the containers shall be placed between the back of the curb line and the back of the sidewalk. Where no sidewalk exists, the containers shall be placed no more than ten (10) feet from the back of the curb line. 
(2)  Where there is no curb, the containers shall be placed between the edge of the pavement and the ditch, but in no case shall such container be placed greater than ten (10) feet from the edge of the pavement. 
(3)  Containers are not to be placed on or in front of another property unless written permission is granted. It is the intent that said debris be placed in front of the owner's property. 
(b)  Exceptions. The town reserves the right, in hardship cases, to collect garbage, trash, and recyclables in backyards. Hardship, as used herein, shall generally be deemed physical impairment, due to disability, age, or infirmity, that prevents the resident from being able to make placement of the containers in the required manner. The town manager, in his sole discretion, or his appointed representative shall make the determination, upon request, as to whether exceptions for hardship can be made. 
(Code 1981, § 7-13; Ord. No. 1992-16, 8-11-92; Ord. No. 1994-11. 8-9-94; Ord. No. 2006-06, 6-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-44. - Preparation of garbage. 
    All garbage, before being deposited in the container, shall be drained of all liquid and be securely wrapped in paper or other suitable wrappings or bags. 
(Code 1981, § 7-8) 
Secs. 8-45-8-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONDITION OF PREMISES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Noxious Weed Law, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-296.11 et seq.; removal of trash, garbage, weeds, etc. from property, Code of Virginia, section 15.1-11; authority of town council to control Johnson grass and multiflora rose, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-28.4; weeds and plants on highway rights-of-way, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-209. 

Sec. 8-61. - Duty of owners, etc. 
    It shall be the duty of every owner or other person in charge of premises within the town, whether or not he avails himself of the garbage and trash disposal service provided for in Articles I and II of this chapter, to keep such premises in a sanitary condition. 
(Code 1981, § 7-14) 
Sec. 8-62. - Notice to remove trash, garbage, etc. 
    Whenever the owner of any property permits trash, garbage, litter and other substances which might endanger the health or safety of other residents of the town and town manager deems it necessary, the owner of such property shall be notified in writing to remove such garbage, refuse, litter and other substances on such property within a reasonable time, specified in the notice. If the owner refuses to comply with the notice, the town manager may, in his discretion, have such trash, garbage, litter and other substances in question removed by the agents or employees of the town and the cost and expense thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of such property. If the cost and expenses are not paid by the owner, the amount shall be assessed against the owner and such assessment shall become a lien upon the property as in the case of taxes and levies and shall be collected as real estate taxes are collected. 
(Code 1981, § 7-15) 
Sec. 8-63. - Notice to cut weeds. 
    Whenever any property in the town is permitted to become unsightly or malodorous by being overgrown with grass, weeds, or other foreign growth, and other substances which might endanger the health, safety and welfare of other residents of the town, all of which is hereby declared a nuisance, and the town manager deems it necessary, the owner thereof shall be notified in writing to cut the grass, weeds and other foreign growth on such property within a reasonable time, specified in the notice. If the owner refuses to comply with the notice, the town manager may, in his discretion, have such grass, weeds and other foreign growth on the property in question cut by the agents or employees of the town and the cost and expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of such property. If such cost and expenses are not paid by such owner, the amount shall be assessed against the owner and such assessment shall become a lien upon the property as in the case of real estate taxes and shall be collected as real estate taxes are collected. For purposes of this provision, one (1) written notice per growing season to the owner of record of the subject property shall be considered reasonable notice. 
(Code 1981, § 7-16; Ord. No. 2016-09 , 6-14-16) 
Sec. 8-64. - Service of notice. 
    The notices provided for in this article shall be served personally, if possible, but if the person upon whom personal service is to be made cannot be found in the town, such notice shall be sent, by certified mail, to the last known post office address of such person and proof thereof shall be taken and accepted in lieu of personal service. 
(Code 1981, § 7-17) 
Chapter 9 - LICENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1996-21, adopted Nov. 12, 1996, has been codified as superseding Ch. 9, §§ 9-1-9-26, 9-46, 9-61-9-75, 9-77-9-87, 9-101-9-115, and 9-121, and designated as Ch. 9, §§ 9-1-9-27, 9-46, 9-61-9-75, 9-77-9-87, 9-101-9-115, and 9-121 herein. Former Ch. 9 pertained to similar provisions as derived from Ord. No. 1995-17, adopted Dec. 12, 1995. 
Cross reference- Town depositories, § 2-1; animals and fowl, Ch. 3; buildings, Ch. 4; dealers in precious metals and gems, Ch. 6; garbage, trash and weeds, Ch. 8; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 10; truck routes, § 10-7; permits for parades and processions, § 10-8; solicitors, Ch. 13; taxation, Ch. 15; taxicabs, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference- Taxation, Code of Virginia, Title 58.1; local license taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Overriding conflicting ordinances. 
    Except as may be otherwise provided by the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia, and notwithstanding any other current ordinances or resolutions enacted by the town council, whether or not compiled in the town Code, to the extent of any conflict, the following provisions shall be applicable to the levy, assessment, and collection of licenses required and taxes imposed on businesses, trades, professions and callings and upon the persons, firms and corporations engaged therein within this locality. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise required by the context: 
    Affiliated group means: 
(1)  One (1) or more chains of includable corporations connected through stock ownership with a common parent corporation which is an includable corporation if: 
a.  Stock possessing at least eighty (80) percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least eighty (80) percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of each of the includable corporations, except the common parent corporation, is owned directly by one or more of the other includable corporations; and 
b.  The common parent corporation directly owns stock possessing at least eighty (80) percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least eighty (80) percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of at least one of the other includable corporations. As used in this subdivision, the term "stock" does not include nonvoting stock which is limited and preferred as to dividends. The term "includable corporation" means any corporation within the affiliated group irrespective of the state or country of its incorporation; and the term "receipts" include gross receipts and gross income. 
(2)  Two (2) or more corporations if five (5) or fewer persons who are individuals, estates or trusts own stock possessing: 
a.  At least eighty (80) percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or at least eighty (80) percent of the total value of shares of all classes of the stock of each corporation; and 
b.  More than fifty (50) percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or more than fifty (50) percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of each corporation, taking into account the stock ownership of each such person only to the extent such stock ownership is identical with respect to each such corporation. 
When one or more of the includable corporations, including the common parent corporation, is a nonstock corporation, the term "stock" as used in this subdivision shall refer to the nonstock corporation membership or membership voting rights, as is appropriate to the context. 
    Amusement means any type of entertainment or show for which compensation is received and which is not specifically provided for or exempted under another section of this chapter. 
    Assessment means a determination as to the proper rate of tax, the measure to which the tax rate is applied, and ultimately the amount of tax, including additional or omitted tax, that is due. An assessment shall include a written assessment made pursuant to notice by the assessing official or a self-assessment made by a taxpayer upon the filing of a return or otherwise not pursuant to notice. Assessments shall be deemed made by the finance director when a written notice of assessment is delivered to the taxpayer by the finance director or an employee of the town or mailed to the taxpayer at his last known address. Self-assessments shall be deemed made when a return is filed, or if no return is required, when the tax is paid. A return filed or tax paid before the last day prescribed by ordinance for the filing or payment thereof shall be deemed to be filed or paid on the last day specified for the filing of a return or the payment of tax, as the case may be. 
    Assessor or assessing official means the director of finance or his duly authorized representative of this town. 
    Base year means the calendar year preceding the license year, except for contractors subject to the provisions of Section 58.1-3715, Code of Virginia. 
    Broker shall mean an agent of a buyer or a seller who buys or sells stocks, bonds, commodities, or services, usually on a commission basis. 
    Builder or developer means any person conducting or engaging in any of the activities enumerated below by force account on land or property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by such person, for the purpose of rental or eventual sale: 
(1)  Work on or in any building or structure requiring the use of paint, stone, brick, cement, wood, mortar, wallpaper, structural iron or steel, sheet iron, galvanized iron, metallic piping, tin, lead or other metal or any other building material. 
(2)  Any electrical work on or in any building or structure. 
    Business means a course of dealing which requires the time, attention and labor of the person so engaged for the purpose of earning a livelihood or profit. It implies a continuous and regular course of dealing, rather than an irregular or isolated transaction. A person may be engaged in more than one (1) business. The following acts shall create a rebuttable presumption that a person is engaged in a business: (i) advertising or otherwise holding oneself out to the public as being engaged in a particular business; or (ii) filing tax returns, schedules and documents that are required only of persons engaged in a trade or business. 
    Business service means a service for compensation to any business, trade or occupation licensed under this chapter or to any governmental agency, unless such service is specifically provided for under another section of this chapter. 
    Commodity means staples such as wool, cotton, etc. which are traded on a commodity exchange and on which there is trading in futures. 
    Contractor shall have the meaning prescribed in Section 58.1-3714.B of the Code of Virginia, as amended, whether such work is done or offered to be done by day labor, general contract or subcontract. 
    Dealer for purposes of this chapter shall mean any person engaged in the business of buying and selling securities for his own account, but does not include a bank, or any person insofar as he buys or sells securities for his own account, either individually or in some fiduciary capacity, but not as part of a regular business. 
    Definite place of business means an office or a location at which occurs a regular and continuous course of dealing for thirty (30) consecutive days or more. A definite place of business for a person engaged in business may include a location leased or otherwise obtained from another person on a temporary or seasonal basis; and real property leased to another. A person's residence shall be deemed to be a definite place of business if there is no definite place of business maintained elsewhere and the person is not licensable as a peddler or itinerant merchant. 
    Financial services means the buying, selling, handling, managing, investing, and providing of advice regarding money, credit, securities and other investments and shall include the service for compensation by a credit agency, an investment company, a broker or dealer in securities and commodities or a security or commodity exchange, unless such service is otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
    Gross receipts means the whole, entire, total receipts attributable to the licensed privilege, without deduction, except as may be limited by the provisions of Chapter 37 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
    License year means the calendar year for which a license is issued for the privilege of engaging in business. 
    Person shall mean any individual, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, association, company, business, trust, joint venture or other legal entity. 
    Personal services means rendering for compensation any repair, personal, business or other services not specifically classified as "financial, real estate or professional service" under this chapter, or rendered in any other business or occupation not specifically classified in this chapter unless exempted from local license tax by Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
    Professional services means services performed by architects, attorneys-at-law, certified public accountants, dentists, engineers, land surveyors, surgeons, veterinarians, and practitioners of the healing arts (the arts and sciences of dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, treatment and cure or alleviation of human physical or mental ailments, conditions, diseases, pain or infirmities) and such occupations, and no others, as the Virginia Department of Taxation may list in the BPOL guidelines promulgated pursuant to Section 58.1-3701 of the Code of Virginia. The department shall identify and list each occupation or vocation in which a professed knowledge of some department of science or learning, gained by a prolonged course of specialized instruction and study is used by its practical application to the affairs of others, either advising, guiding, or teaching them, and in serving their interests or welfare in the practice of an art or science founded on it. The word "profession" implies attainments in professional knowledge as distinguished from mere skill, and the application of knowledge to uses for others rather than for personal profit. 
    Purchases means all goods, wares and merchandise received for sale at each definite place of business of every wholesale merchant. The term shall also include the cost of manufacture of all goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by a wholesaler or wholesale merchant and sold or offered for sale. Such merchant may elect to report the gross receipts from the sale of manufactured goods, wares and merchandise if it cannot determine or chooses not to disclose the cost of manufacture. 
    Real estate services means rendering a service for compensation as lessor, buyer, seller, agent or broker and providing a real estate service, unless the service is otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, and such services include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Real estate appraisers 
Real estate escrow agents 
Real estate fiduciaries 
Real property lessors 
Real estate agents, brokers and managers 
Real estate selling agents 
Rental agents for real estate 
    Retailer or retail merchant means any person or merchant who sells goods, wares and merchandise for use or consumption by the purchaser or for any purpose other than resale by the purchaser, but does not include sales at wholesale to institutional, commercial and industrial users. 
    Security for purposes of this chapter shall have the same meaning as in the Securities Act (Section 13.1-501 et seq.) of the Code of Virginia, or in similar laws of the United States regulating the sale of securities. 
    Services means things purchased by a customer which do not have physical characteristics, or which are not goods, wares or merchandise. 
    Wholesaler or wholesale merchant means any person or merchant who sells wares and merchandise for resale by the purchaser, including sales when the goods, wares and merchandise will be incorporated into goods and services for sale, and also includes sales to institutional, commercial, government and industrial users which because of the quantity, price, or other terms indicate that they are consistent with sales at wholesale. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- "Person" defined, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.19; Definitions relating to taxation, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1; "contractor" defined, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3714; limitation on gross receipts, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3732. 
Sec. 9-3. - Violations and penalties generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person wilfully failing or refusing to timely file such license or return as required herein, or for the making of false statements with intent to defraud in such license application or return, upon conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a (i) Class 3 misdemeanor if the amount of the tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return or application is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less, or a (ii) Class 1 misdemeanor if the amount of the tax lawfully assessed in connection with the application or return is more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
    Failure to pay such taxes as required to accompany such license or return required by section 9-6 herein, shall be deemed a wilful failure or refusal to file such application or return. Each day any person shall continue to violate the provisions of this chapter after the due date of any license tax prescribed in this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Criminal penalties for failure to file returns, false statements, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916.1. 
Sec. 9-4. - Purpose of chapter. 
    It is the purpose and policy of the town council in enacting this chapter to equalize as far as practicable the burden of license taxation among those liable under this chapter by adopting, for general application but subject to any restrictions or exemptions imposed by state or federal law or to any restrictions or exemptions as may be imposed specifically in this chapter, a system of license taxes measured by classified gross receipts of the business, profession, trade or occupation in respect to which the tax is levied. The license tax shall be for the support of the town government and for the payment of the debt of the town. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- State guidelines for license taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3701; license tax shall be uniform, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3705. 
Sec. 9-5. - Enforcement generally. 
    The finance director is hereby given the responsibility of enforcing this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-6. - License requirement. 
(a)  Every person engaging in the town in any business, trade, profession, occupation or calling (collectively hereinafter "a business") as defined in this chapter, unless otherwise exempted by law, shall apply for a license for each such business if (i) such person maintains a definite place of business in the town, (ii) such person does not maintain a definite office anywhere but does maintain an abode in the town, which abode for the purposes of this chapter shall be deemed a definite place of business, or (iii) there is no definite place of business but such person operates amusement machines, is engaged as a peddler or itinerant merchant, carnival or circus as specified in Sections 58.1-3717, 58.1-3718, or 58.1-3728, respectively, of the Code of Virginia, or is a contractor subject to Section 58.1-3715 of the Code of Virginia, or is a public service corporation subject to Section 58.1-3731 of the Code of Virginia. A separate license shall be required for each definite place of business. A person engaged in two (2) or more businesses or professions carried on at the same place of business may elect to obtain one (1) license for all such businesses and professions if all of the following criteria are satisfied: (i) each business or profession is licensable at the location and has satisfied any requirements imposed by state law or other provisions of the ordinances of the town; (ii) all of the businesses or professions are subject to the same tax rate, or, if subject to different tax rates, the licensee agrees to be taxed on all businesses and professions at the highest rate; and (iii) the taxpayer agrees to supply such information as the assessor may require concerning the nature of the several businesses and their gross receipts. 
(b)  Each person subject to a license tax shall apply for a license prior to beginning business if he was not subject to licensing in the town on or before January 1 of the license year, or no later than March 1 of the current license year if he had been issued a license for the preceding license year. The application shall be on forms prescribed by the finance director. 
(c)  The tax shall be paid with the application in the case of any license not based on gross receipts. If the tax is measured by the gross receipts of the business, the tax shall be paid on or before June 30. 
(d)  The finance director may grant an extension of time, not to exceed ninety (90) days, in which to file an application for a license, for reasonable cause. The extension shall be conditioned upon the timely payment of a reasonable estimate of the appropriate tax, subject to adjustment to the correct tax at the end of the extension together with interest from the due date until the date paid and, if the estimate submitted with the extension is found to be unreasonable under the circumstances, a penalty of ten (10) percent of the portion paid after the due date. 
(e)  A penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax may be imposed upon the failure to file an application or the failure to pay the tax by the appropriate due date. Only the late filing penalty shall be imposed by the finance director if both the application and payment are late; however, both penalties may be assessed if the finance director determines that the taxpayer has a history of noncompliance. In the case of an assessment of additional tax made by the finance director, if the application and, if applicable, the return were made in good faith and the understatement of the tax was not due to any fraud, reckless or intentional disregard of the law by the taxpayer, there shall be no late payment penalty assessed with the additional tax. If any assessment of tax by the finance director is not paid within thirty (30) days the finance director may impose a ten (10) percent late payment penalty. The penalties shall not be imposed, or if imposed, shall be abated by the official who assessed them, if the failure to file or pay was not the fault of the taxpayer. In order to demonstrate lack of fault, the taxpayer must show that he acted responsibly and that the failure was due to events beyond his control. 
Acted responsibly means that: (i) the taxpayer exercised the level of reasonable care that a prudent person would exercise under the circumstances in determining the filing obligations for the business; and (ii) the taxpayer undertook significant steps to avoid or mitigate the failure, such as requesting appropriate extensions (where applicable), attempting to prevent a foreseeable impediment, acting to remove an impediment once it occurred, and promptly rectifying a failure once the impediment was removed or the failure discovered. 
Events beyond the taxpayer's control include, but are not limited to, the unavailability of records due to fire or other casualty; the unavoidable absence (e.g., due to death or serious illness) of the person with the sole responsibility for tax compliance; or the taxpayer's reasonable reliance in good faith upon erroneous written information from the assessing official, who was aware of the relevant facts relating to the taxpayer's business when he provided the erroneous information. 
(f)  Interest shall be charged on the late payment of the tax at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum from the due date until the date paid without regard to fault or other reason for the late payment. Whenever an assessment of additional or omitted tax by the finance director is found to be erroneous, all interest and penalty charged and collected on the amount of the assessment found to be erroneous shall be refunded together with interest on the refund from the date of payment or the due date, whichever is later. Interest shall be paid on the refund of any tax paid under this chapter from the date of payment or due date, whichever is later, whether attributable to an amended return or other reason. Interest on any refund shall be paid at the same rate charged under Section 58.1-3916 of the Code of Virginia. 
    No interest shall accrue on an adjustment of estimated tax liability to actual liability at the conclusion of a base year. No interest shall be paid on a refund or charged on a late payment, in event of such adjustment, provided the refund or the late payment is made not more than thirty (30) days from (i) the date of the payment that created the refund, or (ii) the due date of the tax, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- License requirement, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700, et seq. 
Sec. 9-7. - Engaging in business without license-Generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a business or engage in a profession, trade or occupation for which a license tax is provided in this chapter unless he shall have procured a license therefor as required under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Fraud in procurement of certificate, license or permit, Code of Virginia, §§ 54.1-102; licenses required by law generally, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700. 
Sec. 9-8. - Same-Expired license. 
    If any person shall commence to prosecute any business, employment or profession without a license or continue such business, employment or profession after the expiration of a license, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and each day's continuance without a license shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction thereof shall not relieve any such person from the payment of the prescribed license tax. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-9. - Procedure upon fraudulent, etc., failure to obtain. 
(a)  If the finance director shall ascertain that any person has fraudulently or with intent to evade the payment of the proper license taxes failed or refused to obtain the proper license as required by this chapter for any one (1) or more of the three (3) license tax years last past, or for the current license tax year and the liability therefor is ascertained, such omitted license taxes and interest computed at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum from the first day following the date on which such license tax first became due shall be assessed, together with an additional penalty of ten (10) percent of such unpaid license taxes, or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater. For the second and subsequent years of delinquency, the interest shall not exceed the rate established pursuant to Section 6621 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
(b)  The collection of taxes, interest and penalties under this chapter shall be enforced in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Fraud in procurement of certificate, license or permit, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-102; enforcement, collection, refunds, remedies and review of local taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3900 et seq.; authority of town to set penalties, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. 
Sec. 9-10. - Display. 
(a)  The license form issued to show payment of the license tax imposed by any section of this chapter shall be displayed in a conspicuous place at the regular place of business of the licensee, which license shall be produced by the licensee on request of the finance director or a duly authorized representative for his inspection. 
(b)  All licensees under this chapter who maintain no regular place of business shall carry on or about their persons the license form issued to show payment of the license tax, which form shall be produced by the licensee on request of the finance director or an authorized enforcement officer for his inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-11. - Transferability. 
(a)  Licenses issued under this chapter shall be transferable, except where otherwise provided, only where the business, profession, occupation or trade for which the license was issued has been sold or disposed of but is to be continued by the purchaser or transferee at the same location or at some other location. In no case shall any transfer of license be legal or valid unless and until a form of transfer has been filed with the finance director and he shall have approved such transfer in writing on the license in question. He shall give such approval upon being satisfied of the good faith of the transfer. Copies of such form of transfer shall be available in the office of the finance director. 
(b)  If the transferor's license for the current year is based on an estimate of gross receipts or gross expenditures as provided in this chapter, the transferor shall reveal his gross receipts or gross expenditures for the period he was in business during the current license year. If the accumulation of gross receipts or gross expenditures by transfer shall exceed the original estimate, the transferee shall amend the license by an estimate of the gross receipts or gross expenditures he will incur between the date of beginning business and the end of the current year. 
(c)  The finance director shall keep a record of all transfers made as provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-12. - License deemed a personal privilege; suspension for illegal transfer, etc. 
    Every license issued under this chapter shall be deemed to confer a personal privilege to transact, carry on or conduct the business, trade or occupation or profession in question subject to the license and such personal privilege shall not be exercised except by the person licensed. If it is determined that a licensee has transferred the license issued to him, except as prescribed in this chapter, or if the town manager has cause to believe that a licensee under this chapter is otherwise abusing the privilege for which the license was issued, the town manager may suspend the license in question. Such suspension shall remain in effect until the causes are removed. The town manager shall report the suspension to the town council at its next regular business meeting after the date of the suspension. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-13. - Compliance of business, etc., with zoning regulations. 
(a)  The finance director shall not issue a license for conducting any business, profession, trade or occupation at a location where the conduct of such business, profession, trade or occupation is prohibited by the zoning ordinance of the town. 
(b)  All such licenses shall be subject to verification to ascertain whether or not compliance with the zoning ordinance has been had. Failure to so comply shall be just cause for immediate revocation of the license in question by the finance director. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-14. - Purpose of taxes. 
    The license taxes imposed by this chapter are in all cases imposed upon the privilege of doing business or engaging in a profession, trade or occupation in the town, including all phases of the business, profession, trade or occupation conducted in the town. It is the intent of the town council to avoid either discriminatory or protective license taxation as it affects any business, profession, trade or occupation, regardless of location or type of transaction. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-15. - Businesses conducted by corporations, partnerships, or limited liability companies generally. 
    When a business, profession, trade or occupation taxed under this chapter is conducted by a corporation, partnership or limited liability company, the license tax shall be measured by the gross receipts or gross expenditures of the corporation, partnership or limited liability company and shall be paid by such corporation, partnership or limited liability company based upon the preceding calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-16. - Effect of payment of license tax by corporation, etc., upon officers, etc. 
    When a license tax is paid by a corporation, partnership or limited liability company, as provided in section 9-15, and when a license tax is paid by an individual employing persons who otherwise would be liable to the payment of a license tax, such payment shall be deemed to discharge the license tax liability of the officers, members, partners or employees of entities and of such persons employed by an employer who otherwise would be liable to such tax, insofar as the licensed business, profession, trade or occupation is concerned. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-17. - Record keeping and audits. 
    Every person who is assessable with a license tax shall keep sufficient records to enable the finance director to verify the correctness of the tax paid for the license years assessable and to enable the finance director to ascertain what is the correct amount of tax that was assessable for each of those years. All such records, books of accounts and other information shall be open to inspection and examination by the finance director in order to allow the finance director to establish whether a particular receipt is directly attributable to the taxable privilege exercised within the town. The finance director shall provide the taxpayer with the option to conduct the audit in the taxpayer's local business office, if the records are maintained there. In the event the records are maintained outside the town, copies of the appropriate books and records shall be sent to the finance director's office upon demand. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-18. - Situs of gross receipts. 
(a)  General rule. Whenever the tax imposed by this chapter is measured by gross receipts, the gross receipts included in the taxable measure shall be only those gross receipts attributed to the exercise of a licensable privilege at a definite place of business within the town. In the case of activities conducted outside of a definite place of business, such as during a visit to a customer location, the gross receipts shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which such activities are initiated, directed or controlled. The situs of gross receipts for different classifications of business shall be attributed to one or more definite places of business or offices as follows: 
(1)  The gross receipts of a contractor shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which his services are performed, or if his services are not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which his services are directed or controlled, unless the contractor is subject to the provisions of Section 58.1-3715 of the Code of Virginia. 
(2)  The gross receipts of a retailer or wholesaler shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which sales solicitation activities occur, or if sales solicitation activities do not occur at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which sales solicitation activities are directed or controlled; however, a wholesaler or distribution house subject to a license tax measured by purchases shall determine the situs of its purchases by the definite place of business at which or from which deliveries of the purchased goods, wares and merchandise are made to customers. Any wholesaler who is subject to license tax in two (2) or more localities and who is subject to multiple taxation because the localities use different measures, may apply to the department of taxation for a determination as to the proper measure of purchases and gross receipts subject to license tax in each locality. 
(3)  The gross receipts of a business renting tangible personal property shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which the tangible personal property is rented or, if the property is not rented from any definite place of business, then the definite place of business at which the rental of such property is managed. 
(4)  The gross receipts from the performance of services shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which the services are performed or, if not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which the services are directed or controlled. 
(b)  Apportionment. If the licensee has more than one (1) definite place of business and it is impractical or impossible to determine to which definite place of business gross receipts should be attributed under the general rule, except as to circumstances set forth in Section 58.1-3709 of the Code of Virginia, the gross receipts of the business shall be apportioned between the definite place of businesses on the basis of payroll. Gross receipts shall not be apportioned to a definite place of business unless some activities under the applicable general rule occurred at, or were controlled from, such definite place of business. Gross receipts attributable to a definite place of business in another town shall not be attributed to the town solely because the other town does not impose a tax on the gross receipts attributable to the definite place of business in such other town. 
(c)  Agreements. The finance director may enter into agreements with any other political subdivision of Virginia concerning the manner in which gross receipts shall be apportioned among definite places of business. However, the sum of the gross receipts apportioned by the agreement shall not exceed the total gross receipts attributable to all of the definite places of business affected by the agreement. Upon being notified by a taxpayer that its method of attributing gross receipts is fundamentally inconsistent with the method of one or more political subdivisions in which the taxpayer is licensed to engage in business and that the difference has, or is likely to, result in taxes on more than one hundred (100) percent of its gross receipts from all locations in the town, the finance director shall make a good faith effort to reach an apportionment agreement with the other political subdivisions involved. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Business located in more than one jurisdiction, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3709; situs for local license taxation of businesses, occupations, etc., Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3708. 
Sec. 9-19. - Calculation of gross receipts. 
    The calculation of gross receipts for license tax purposes shall be on a cash or accrual basis; provided, that the basis used shall coincide with the system of accounts used by the taxpayer and the method employed by the taxpayer for federal and state income taxes. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-20. - Exclusions and deductions from "gross receipts." 
(a)  General rule. Gross receipts for license tax purposes shall not include any amount not derived from the exercise of the licensed privilege to engage in a business or profession in the ordinary course of business or profession. 
(b)  The following items shall be excluded from gross receipts: 
(1)  Amounts received and paid to the United States, the Commonwealth or any county, city or town for the Virginia retail sales or use tax, or for any local sales tax or any local excise tax on cigarettes, for any federal or state excise taxes on motor fuels. 
(2)  Any amount representing the liquidation of a debt or conversion of another asset to the extent that the amount is attributable to a transaction previously taxed (e.g., the factoring of accounts receivable created by sales which have been included in taxable receipts even though the creation of such debt and factoring are a regular part of its business). 
(3)  Any amount representing returns and allowances granted by the business to its customer. 
(4)  Receipts which are the proceeds of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the obligor. 
(5)  Receipts representing the return of principal of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the creditor, or the return of principal or basis upon the sale of a capital asset. 
(6)  Rebates and discounts taken or received on account of purchases by the licensee. A rebate or other incentive offered to induce the recipient to purchase certain goods or services from a person other than the offeror, and which the recipient assigns to the licensee in consideration of the sale of goods and services shall not be considered a rebate or discount to the licensee, but shall be included in the licensee's gross receipts together with any handling or other fees related to the incentive. 
(7)  Withdrawals from inventory for purposes other than sale or distribution and for which no consideration is received and the occasional sale or exchange of assets other than inventory, whether or not a gain or loss is recognized for federal income tax purposes. 
(8)  Investment income not directly related to the privilege exercised by a licensable business not classified as rendering financial services. This exclusion shall apply to interest on bank accounts of the business, and to interest, dividends and other income derived from the investment of its own funds in securities and other types of investments unrelated to the licensed privilege. This exclusion shall not apply to interest, late fees and similar income attributable to an installment sale or other transaction that occurred in the regular course of business. 
(c)  The following shall be deducted from gross receipts or gross purchases that would otherwise be taxable: 
(1)  Any amount paid for computer hardware and software that are sold to a United States federal or state government entity, provided that such property was purchased within two (2) years of the sale to said entity by the original purchaser who shall have been contractually obligated at the time of purchase to resell such property to a state or federal government entity. This deduction shall not occur until the time of resale and shall apply to only the original cost of the property and not to its resale price, and the deduction shall not apply to any of the tangible personal property which was the subject of the original resale contract if it is not resold to a state or federal government entity in accordance with the original contract obligation. 
(2)  Any receipts attributable to business conducted in another state or foreign country in which the taxpayer is liable for an income or other tax based upon income. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-21. - Assessment and payment of additional taxes. 
(a)  Whenever the finance director shall ascertain that any person should be assessed with any additional license taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, it shall be his duty to assess such person in writing with such additional license taxes as may be reported to him to be due. 
(b)  If such additional license taxes so assessed shall be paid within fifteen (15) days from the date of such additional assessment, no penalty shall accrue. If such additional assessment shall not be paid within fifteen (15) days from the date of such additional assessment, interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum shall accrue thereon from the first day following the date of such additional assessment until the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Authority of town to set interest rate, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. 
Sec. 9-22. - Proration of flat rate taxes. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided, every flat rate license tax, for the unexpired portion of the license year, shall be assessed on a pro rata basis from the first day of the month in which the license is issued. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-23. - Refunds of taxes generally. 
(a)  The finance director may refund, after an audit of the tax account of a taxpayer, any refund that may be payable to any person due such an amount either because of any overassessment of license taxes against him or because such person overestimated anticipated gross receipts or gross expenditures. 
(b)  Refunds allowable under this section shall be calculated according to the following formulas: 
(1)  Where the refund is allowable because of an overassessment of license taxes, the overassessment minus the correct assessment shall equal the amount to be refunded. 
(2)  Where a refund is allowable because of an overestimation of anticipated gross receipts or gross expenditures, recomputed taxes shall be payable on the basis of actual gross receipts or actual gross expenditures. The resulting amount shall be subtracted from the original assessed amount and the resulting difference shall equal the amount to be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Ceasing business, refunds of taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3710. 
Sec. 9-24. - Issuance prohibited to persons owing delinquent tax to town. 
    The finance director shall not issue any license under this chapter to any person delinquent in the payment of any license tax, property tax or other tax which may be due by such person to the town. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-25. - Investigation of correct return. 
    If the finance director has reason to believe that any particular return or statement filed under this chapter is incorrect, he shall cause an investigation of the taxpayer's books and records to be made and shall ascertain whether the person filing the return or statement in question has made a true and correct return or statement. To that end, the finance director, when necessary, may summon such person before him and require the production of all of such person's books and papers which he has reasonable cause to believe will throw any light upon the matter under investigation and may make such other and further investigation and examination as he may deem proper in order to determine accurately the proper return or statement to be made by such person. In such investigation and examination the finance director may place under oath the person whose return or statement is under investigation. Failure of such witness to answer such summons or refusal to testify on questions of his tax liability or refusal to produce the specified records, books or papers as directed shall constitute a misdemeanor as prescribed in Chapter 39 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-26. - Limitations and extensions. 
(a)  Where, before the expiration of the time prescribed for the assessment of any license tax imposed pursuant to this chapter, both the finance director and the taxpayer have consented in writing to its assessment after such time, the tax may be assessed at any time prior to the expiration of the period agreed upon. The period so agreed upon may be extended by subsequent agreement in writing made before the expiration of the period previously agreed upon. 
(b)  Notwithstanding Section 58.1-5903 of the Code of Virginia, the finance director shall assess the local license tax omitted because of fraud or failure to apply for a license for the current license year and the six (6) preceding years. (Note that this applies to only 1997 and later. Prior to 1997 is current plus three (3) preceding years.) 
(c)  The period for collecting any local license tax shall not expire prior to the period specified in Section 58.1-3940 of the Code of Virginia, two (2) years after the date of assessment if the period for assessment has been extended pursuant to this subdivision, two (2) years after the final determination of an appeal for which collection has been stayed pursuant to the following section 9-27 of this chapter, or two (2) years after the final decision in a court application pursuant to Section 58.1-3984 of the Code of Virginia or similar law for which collection has been stayed, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-27. - Appeals and rulings. 
(a)  Any person assessed with a licensing tax under this chapter as the result of an audit may apply within ninety (90) days from the date of the assessment to the finance director for a correction of the assessment. The application must be filed in good faith and sufficiently identify the taxpayer, audit period, remedy sought, each alleged error in the assessment, the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies, and any other facts relevant to the taxpayer's contention. The finance director may hold a conference with the taxpayer if requested by the taxpayer, or require submission of additional information and documents, further audit, or other evidence deemed necessary for a proper and equitable determination of the applications. The assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct. The finance director shall undertake a full review of the taxpayer's claims and issue a determination to the taxpayer setting forth its position. Every assessment pursuant to an audit shall be accompanied by a written explanation of the taxpayer's right to seek correction and the specific procedure to be following in the town (e.g., the name and address to which an application should be directed). 
(b)  Provided an application is made within ninety (90) days of an assessment, collection activity shall be suspended until a final determination is issued by the finance director, unless the finance director determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of subsection (f) of section 9-6 of this chapter, but not further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The term "jeopardized by delay" includes a finding that the application is frivolous, or that a taxpayer desires (i) to depart quickly from the locality, (ii) to remove his property therefrom, (iii) to conceal himself or his property therein, or (iv) to do any other act tending to prejudice, or to render wholly or partially ineffectual, proceedings to collect the tax for the period in question. 
(c)  Any person assessed with a license tax under this chapter as a result of an audit may apply within ninety (90) days of the determination by the finance director on an application pursuant to subsection 9-27(a) above to the finance director for a correction of such assessment. The finance director shall issue a determination to the taxpayer within ninety (90) days of receipt of the taxpayer's application, unless the taxpayer and the assessing official are notified that a longer period will be required. The application shall be treated as an application pursuant to Section 58.1-1821 of the Code of Virginia, and the finance director may issue an order correcting such assessment pursuant to Section 58.1-1822 of the Code of Virginia. Following such an order, either the taxpayer or the finance director may apply to the appropriate circuit court pursuant to Section 58.1-3984 of the Code of Virginia. However, the burden shall be on the party making the application to show that the ruling of the finance director is erroneous. Neither the finance director nor the department of taxation shall be made a party to an application to correct an assessment merely because the finance director has ruled on it. 
(d)  On receipt of a notice of intent to file an appeal to the finance director under subsection 9-27(c) above, the finance director shall further suspend collection activity until a final determination is issued by the finance director, unless the finance director determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of this section, but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The term "jeopardized by delay" shall have the same meaning as set forth in subsection 9-27(b) above. 
(e)  Any taxpayer may request a written ruling regarding the application of the tax to a specific situation from the finance director. Any person requesting such a ruling must provide all the relevant facts for the situation and may present a rationale for the basis of an interpretation of the law most favorable to the taxpayer. Any misrepresentation or change in the applicable law or the factual situation as presented in the ruling request shall invalidate any such ruling issued. A written ruling may be revoked or amended prospectively if (i) there is a change in the law, a court decision, or (ii) the finance director notifies the taxpayer of a change in the policy or interpretation upon which the ruling was based. However, any person who acts on a written ruling which later becomes invalid shall be deemed to have acted in good faith during the period in which such ruling was in effect. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Enforcement, collection, refunds, remedies and review of local tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3900, et seq. 
Secs. 9-28-9-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESSES, PROFESSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-46. - Unspecified businesses. 
    Every person engaging in a business or profession not specifically embraced in this article shall be assessed the same license tax as provided in Code of Virginia, Title 58.1. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Secs. 9-47-9-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIAL LICENSE TAX PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9-61. - Illegal machines not legalized or licensed. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as permitting any person to keep, maintain, exhibit or operate any coin machine or other device, the operation of which is prohibited by law. The finance director shall not issue any license for coin machines which are unlawful under state law. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Gambling device defined, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-325. 
Sec. 9-62. - Beer and wine sales. 
(a)  Every person engaging in the business of wholesaling or retailing beer and wine shall pay for the privilege a license tax as follows: 
(1)  Wholesale beer license. For each wholesale beer license, seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per annum. 
(2)  Wholesale wine distributor's license. For each wholesale wine distributor's license, fifty dollars ($50.00) per annum. 
(3)  Retail on-premises wine and beer license for hotel, etc. For each retail on-premises wine and beer license for a hotel, restaurant or club, thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($37.50) per annum. 
(4)  Retail off-premises wine and beer license. For each retail off-premises wine and beer license, thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($37.50) per annum. 
(5)  Retail on-premises beer license for hotel, etc. For each retail on-premises beer license for a hotel, restaurant or club, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per annum. 
(6)  Retail off-premises beer license. For retail off-premises beer license, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per annum. 
(b)  The licenses provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be as respectively defined by the act of the General Assembly of Virginia as herebefore and hereafter amended, known as "The Alcoholic Beverage Control Act" and the words "beer" and "wine" wherever used in this section shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by such act. 
(c)  No license with reference to which the license tax is set out in this section shall be issued under this section to any person unless such person shall hold or shall secure simultaneously therewith the proper state license required by "The Alcoholic Beverage Control Act," which state license shall be exhibited to the finance director. All dining rooms, restaurants, lunchrooms and club rooms wherein beer and wine are sold for consumption on the premises shall at all times be open to inspection to the state police and the police authorities of the town. Any violation of the terms of this provision shall be sufficient grounds for the revocation of the license issued in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Local licenses and taxes, Code of Virginia, §§ 4.1-205, 4.1-233; definitions, Code of Virginia, § 4.1-100. 
Sec. 9-63. - Billiard parlors and poolrooms. 
    Every person engaging in operating a billiard parlor or poolroom shall pay for the privilege a license tax. In addition to the payment of such license tax, the council may require a bond conditioned for the preservation of good order within the billiard parlor or poolroom in question. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-64. - Bill posters. 
    Every person engaging in business as a bill poster shall pay for the privilege a license tax. For the purpose of this section, all persons who post or distribute notices, bills, labels, etc., for compensation shall be deemed to be bill posters; provided that persons advertising goods to be sold and delivered by merchants doing business in the town shall not be deemed to be bill posters. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-65. - Bondsmen. 
    Every person furnishing bail bonds for compensation shall have a certificate from the judge of the circuit court as required in Code of Virginia, Section 58.1-3724, and shall pay for the privilege a license tax which shall not be prorated. No bondsman's license shall be transferred. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Licensing of bondsmen, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3724. 
Sec. 9-66. - Book agents selling directly to customers. 
    Every person engaging in business as a book agent selling directly to customers shall pay for the privilege a license tax. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-67. - Circuses, carnivals, etc. 
    Every person engaging in presenting a circus, carnival, show or other like performance shall pay for the privilege a license tax. This section shall not be construed to apply to any resident person performing for charity or other benevolent purposes nor to resident volunteer fire companies. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Licensing of carnivals, circuses, speedways, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3728. 
Sec. 9-68. - Fortunetellers, etc. 
    Every person acting as a fortuneteller, clairvoyant, phrenologist, spirit medium, astrologist, or palmist and receiving compensation therefor shall pay for the privilege a license tax which shall not be prorated. No license obtained pursuant to this section shall be transferred. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Fortunetellers, clairvoyants and practitioners of palmistry, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3726. 
Sec. 9-69. - Itinerant merchants. 
(a)  As used in this section, "itinerant merchant" means any person who engages in, does, or transacts any temporary or transient business in the town and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, occupies any location for a period of less than one (1) year. 
(b)  All itinerant merchants whether principal or agent or salesman who shall engage in, do or transact any temporary or transient business for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise in the town and who for the purpose of carrying on such business shall hire, lease, use, occupy any building or structure, motor vehicle, tent, car, boat or public room or any part thereof including rooms in hotels, lodging houses or houses of private entertainment for a period of less than one (1) year for the exhibition of or sale of such goods, wares or merchandise shall pay for the privilege a license tax which shall not be prorated. No such license shall be transferred. 
(c)  Prior to the issuance of a license to any itinerant merchant the finance director shall require that the applicants submit written authorization of the owner or his authorized agent to occupy the premises on which they propose to locate their business. 
(d)  Any itinerant merchant who engages in the sale of good or beverages, (excluding ice cream trucks which are included under section 9-69(a)-(c) above) whether prepared on-site or off-site, and does so through the use of a mobile unit with a current certificate of inspection from the local health department, shall only be permitted in specific areas as provided within the rules and regulations administered by the town manager, or his designee. All other ordinances applicable to mobile food vendors remain in effect and shall be enforced by the town. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 2016-08 , 9-13-16) 
State Law reference- Licensing of itinerant merchants, Code of Virginia §§ 58.1-3717, 58.1-3719. 
Sec. 9-70. - Junk, secondhand articles, etc.-Generally. 
    Every person trading in any kind of secondhand articles, junk, metal, rags, paper, cardboard or other like commodities shall pay for the privilege a license tax which shall not be prorated. Any person doing business under this section may be required to give bond in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for his faithful compliance with the law. Any person who violates this section shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-71. - Same-Canvassers. 
    Every canvasser or agent canvassing the town for the purpose of buying junk or other secondhand materials for a principal or for themselves, shall pay for the privilege a license tax. Any person doing business under this section may be required to give bond in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for his faithful compliance with the law. Any person who violates this section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-72. - Manufacturers' sales agents. 
    Every person acting or doing business as a manufacturer's sales agent shall pay for the privilege a license tax which shall not be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Licensing of wholesale merchants, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3716. 
Sec. 9-73. - Operators of coin machines or devices-Tax imposed. 
    Every person engaged in the business of selling, leasing, renting or otherwise furnishing or providing a coin-operated amusement machine or device operated on the coin-in-the-slot principle shall be deemed an "operator" and shall pay for the privilege a license tax which shall not be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Licensing of coin-operated machines, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3720 et seq.; amount of license taxes, Code of Virginia § 58.1-3706. 
Sec. 9-74. - Same-Exemptions. 
(a)  The term "operator" as used in section 9-73 shall not include a person owning less than three (3) coin-operated amusement machines or devices and operating such machines on property owned or leased by him. 
(b)  The provisions of section 9-73 shall not be applicable to operators of weighing machines, automatic baggage or parcel checking machines or receptacles, nor to operators of vending machines which are so constructed as to do nothing but vend goods, wares and merchandise or postage stamps or provide service only, nor to operators of viewing machines or photomat machines, nor operators of devices or machines affording rides to children or for the delivery of newspapers. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- License exemptions for coin machines operators, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3721. 
Sec. 9-75. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1997-02, adopted March 11, 1997, repealed § 9-75 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to public dance halls and derived from Ord. No. 1996-21, adopted November 12, 1996. 
Sec. 9-76. - Reserved. 
Sec. 9-77. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1997-02, adopted March 11, 1997, repealed § 9-77 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to public dances on Sunday and derived from Ord. No. 1996-21, adopted November 12, 1996. 
Sec. 9-78. - Weighing, baggage and vending machines, etc. 
    On all weighing machines, automatic baggage and parcel checking machines or receptacles, and on vending machines which are so constructed as to do nothing but vend goods, wares and merchandise or postage stamps or provide service only, and on viewing machines and photomat machines, and devices or machines affording rides to children or for the delivery of newspapers, there shall be imposed a license tax. In addition, there shall be imposed a license tax on gross receipts actually received by the operator, as that term is defined in section 9-73, from such machines or devices located within the town. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-79. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1997-02, adopted March 11, 1997, repealed § 9-79 in its entirety. Formerly, § 9-79 pertained to patent medicine salesmen and derived from Ord. No. 1996-21, adopted November 12, 1996. 
Sec. 9-80. - Pawnbrokers. 
    Every person doing business as a pawnbroker, as defined in Code of Virginia, Section 54.1-4000, shall pay for the privilege a license tax which shall not be prorated. Any person who violates this section shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Power of circuit court to authorize town to issue pawnbroker licenses, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4001. 
Sec. 9-81. - Peddlers. 
(a)  Any person who shall carry from place to place any goods, wares or merchandise and offer to sell or barter the same, or who shall actually sell or barter the same, shall be deemed to be a peddler. All persons who do not keep a regular place of business, whether it be a house or a vacant lot or elsewhere, open at all times in regular business hours and at the same place, who shall offer for sale goods, wares or merchandise, shall be deemed peddlers under this section. All persons who keep a regular place of business, open at all times in regular business hours and at the same place, who shall, elsewhere than at such regular place of business, personally or through their agents, offer for sale or sell and, at the time of such offering for sale, deliver goods, wares or merchandise shall also be deemed peddlers as above, but this section shall not apply to those who sell or offer for sale in person or by their employees ice, wood, charcoal, meats, milk, butter, eggs, poultry, game, vegetables, fruits or other family supplies of a perishable nature or farm products grown or produced by them and not purchased by them for sale; provided, that a dairyman who uses upon the streets of the town one (1) or more vehicles may sell and deliver from his vehicles, milk, butter, cream and eggs in the town without procuring a peddler's license. 
(b)  The license taxes imposed by this section shall not apply to any peddler who is covered by Code of Virginia Sections 58.1-3718 and 58.1-3719, and who sells to licensed dealers or retailers only. 
(c)  Every person who is a peddler under this section and who is not excepted from the application of this section shall, for the privilege of peddling or bartering in the town, pay an annual license tax of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(d)  Every vehicle used in peddling under this section shall have conspicuously displayed thereon the name of the peddler using it, together with the street and number of his residence, if he resides in any city or town. 
(e)  Any person licensed as a peddler under this section may sell any personal property a merchant may sell or he may exchange the same for other articles. 
(f)  A peddler's license under this section shall not be transferable. Any person so licensed shall endorse his name on such license and such license shall confer authority to sell within the town only. 
(g)  Any person selling or offering to sell as a peddler shall exhibit his license on the demand of any citizen of the town. 
(h)  Any person excepted from the application of this section by the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall file with the finance director a written statement, duly notarized, setting out in detail the facts claimed to justify the exception. If, upon the filing of such an application, the averments therein contained demonstrate to the satisfaction of the finance director the propriety and legality of the exception requested, he shall issue to such applicant a certificate of exception from the application of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Licensing of peddlers, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3717 et seq. 
Sec. 9-82. - Pistol dealers. 
    Every person selling pistols in the town, in addition to any other tax provided, shall pay for the privilege a license tax which shall not be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Control of firearms, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-29.15. 
Sec. 9-83. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1997-02, adopted March 11, 1997, repealed § 9-83 in its entirety. Formerly, § 9-83 pertained to popcorn machines and the like and derived from Ord. No. 1996-21, adopted November 12, 1996. 
Sec. 9-84. - Savings and loan association. 
    Every savings and loan association having its main office in the town shall pay for the privilege a license tax. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Licensing of savings and loan associations, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3730. 
Sec. 9-85. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1997-02, adopted March 11, 1997, repealed § 9-85 in its entirety. Formerly, § 9-85 pertained slaughterhouses and abattoirs and derived from Ord. No. 1996-21, adopted November 12, 1996. 
Sec. 9-86. - Small loan companies. 
    Every person licensed under the Consumer Finance Act, Code of Virginia Section 6.1-244, et seq., shall pay for the privilege of doing business an annual license tax which shall not be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Licenses under Consumer Finance Act, Code of Virginia, § 6.1-254 et seq. 
Sec. 9-87. - Transporting baggage and passengers over streets and not on fixed schedules. 
    Every person transporting baggage or passengers for hire along the public streets and highways of the town and not operating over fixed routes or by schedules shall pay for the privilege a license tax. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Municipal permits for vehicles for hire, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-892, 46.1-353, 58.1-3703(B)(13). 
Secs. 9-88-9-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CLASSIFIED BUSINESSES AND OCCUPATIONS 

Sec. 9-101. - Amusements. 
    Every person conducting or engaged in any of the amusement occupations, businesses or trades set out in this section shall pay for the privilege a license tax. The amusement occupations, businesses and trades referred to in this section are as follows: 
(1)  Amusement parks. 
(2)  Arcades or buildings devoted to general amusement or entertaining. 
(3)  Auditoriums. 
(4)  Bowling alleys. 
(5)  Coliseums. 
(6)  Gardens, display or amusement. 
(7)  Golf driving ranges. 
(8)  Miniature golf courses. 
(9)  Movie theaters. 
(10)  Parks, athletic fields (operated for profit). 
(11)  Skating rinks. 
(12)  Theaters. 
(13)  Other amusements and entertainments. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Licensing of permanent coliseums, arenas or auditoriums, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3729. 
Sec. 9-102. - Builders and developers. 
    Every builder or developer, as defined in this chapter, operating and doing business in the town shall pay for the privilege a license tax. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-103. - Business service occupations, etc. 
    Every person conducting or engaging in any of the business service occupations, businesses or trades set out in this section shall pay for the privilege a license tax. The business service occupations, businesses and trades referred to in this section are as follows: 
(1)  Advertising agencies. 
(2)  Airports or heliports. 
(3)  Bid or building reporting services. 
(4)  Booking agents or concert managers. 
(5)  Brokers and commission merchants other than real estate or financial. 
(6)  Business and governmental research and consulting services. 
(7)  Collection agents or agencies. 
(8)  Court reporting and public stenographers. 
(9)  Data processing, computer and systems development services. 
(10)  Drafting services. 
(11)  Erecting, installing, removing, storing awnings. 
(12)  Freight traffic bureaus. 
(13)  Furnishing linen service. 
(14)  Furnishing wiper cloths. 
(15)  Hauling or transfer, not in connection with taxicab business. 
(16)  Impounding lots. 
(17)  Information bureaus. 
(18)  Job printers, print shops, bookbinding, duplicating processes. 
(19)  Leasing films for compensation. 
(20)  Mailing, messenger and correspondent services. 
(21)  Packing, crating, shipping, hauling or moving goods or chattels for others. 
(22)  Parking lots. 
(23)  Personnel services, labor agents and employment bureaus. 
(24)  Press clipping services. 
(25)  Professional sports (i.e., commercial rather than amateur). 
(26)  Promotional agents or agencies. 
(27)  Public garages. 
(28)  Public relations services. 
(29)  Realty multiple listing services. 
(30)  Renting bicycles. 
(31)  Reproduction services. 
(32)  Research and development laboratories. 
(33)  Secretarial services. 
(34)  Sign painting (unless the painting services involve performing functions defined as contracting under subsection B of Section 58.1-3714, Code of Virginia). 
(35)  Storage, all types. 
(36)  Tabulation services. 
(37)  Taxidermist. 
(38)  Telephone answering services. 
(39)  Temporary employee services. 
(40)  Testing laboratories. 
(41)  Trucking companies, intrastate. 
(42)  U-Drive-It firms or businesses. 
(43)  Vehicular advertising, electric advertising, bus advertising, commercial advertising. 
(44)  Washing, cleaning or polishing automobiles. 
(45)  Other business service occupations. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-104. - Contractors. 
    Subject to Code of Virginia, Section 58.1-3715, every person conducting or engaging in any of the contracting occupations, businesses or trades set out in this section shall pay for the privilege a license tax. The contracting occupations, businesses and trades referred to in this section are as follows: 
(1)  Air conditioning. 
(2)  Brick contracting, stone and other masonry. 
(3)  Building. 
(4)  Cement. 
(5)  Dredging sand and gravel. 
(6)  Electrical. 
(7)  Floor scraping or finishing. 
(8)  Foundations. 
(9)  Interior decorating. 
(10)  Paint, paper decorating. 
(11)  Plastering. 
(12)  Plumbing, heating, steam-fitting, gas-fitting. 
(13)  Road, street, bridge, sidewalk, curb and gutter. 
(14)  Roofing. 
(15)  Sewer drilling and well digging. 
(16)  Structural metal. 
(17)  Tile, glass, flooring, floor covering. 
(18)  Tree trimming. 
(19)  Wrecking, moving, excavating. 
(20)  Other contractors or contracting. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Contractors, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-1100 et seq.; licensing of certain contractors by towns, etc., Code of Virginia, § 54.1-1117; amount of license tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3706; authority of town to require bond from contractor, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3714; effect of location of principal office of contractor, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715. 
Sec. 9-105. - Financial services. 
    Every person conducting or engaging in any of the financial services occupations, businesses or trades set out in this section shall pay for the privilege a license tax. Those engaged in rendering financial services include, but without limitation, the following: 
(1)  Buying installment receivables. 
(2)  Chattel mortgage financing. 
(3)  Consumer financing. 
(4)  Credit card services. 
(5)  Credit unions. 
(6)  Factors. 
(7)  Financing accounts receivable. 
(8)  Industrial loan companies. 
(9)  Installment financing. 
(10)  Inventory financing. 
(11)  Loan or mortgage brokers. 
(12)  Loan or mortgage companies. 
(13)  Safety deposit box companies. 
(14)  Security and commodity brokers and services. 
(15)  Stockbroker. 
(16)  Working capital financing. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-106. - Manufacturing, milling and processing. 
    Every person conducting or engaging in any of the manufacturing, milling or processing occupations, businesses or trades set out in this section at retail shall pay for the privilege a license tax. The manufacturing, milling and processing occupations, businesses and trades referred to in this section are as follows: 
(1)  Awnings or tents. 
(2)  Barrels, crates, boxes and wood products. 
(3)  Bread, cakes, pies and other bakery products. 
(4)  Caskets, coffins and burial vaults. 
(5)  Cement and cement products. 
(6)  Chemicals or chemical products. 
(7)  Clothing, hose, cotton, wool, silk, textiles and textile products. 
(8)  Confections. 
(9)  Food for livestock. 
(10)  Furniture, novelties and wood products. 
(11)  Ice. 
(12)  Ice cream or similar products. 
(13)  Manufacturing, processing and assembling steel, iron and metal products, any and all. 
(14)  Medicines. 
(15)  Motor vehicles or parts thereof. 
(16)  Paints. 
(17)  Pasteurization. 
(18)  Pens and pencils. 
(19)  Planing and rolling mills. 
(20)  Potato chips, sandwiches. 
(21)  Sashes, frames, blinds, or wood products, saw mills. 
(22)  Soft drinks, manufacturing and bottling. 
(23)  Other manufacturing, milling and processing corporations. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Local licensing of manufacturers, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703(B)(4). 
Sec. 9-107. - Personal service occupations, etc. 
    Every person conducting or engaging in any of the personal service occupations shall pay for the privilege a license tax. A person engaged in providing a personal service is engaged in the rendering of any service specifically enumerated herein, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Ambulance services. 
(2)  Animal grooming services, kennels or stables. 
(3)  Auctioneers and common criers. 
(4)  Automobile driving schools. 
(5)  Barber shops, beauty parlors, and hairdressing establishments, schools and services. 
(6)  Bondsman. 
(7)  Chartered clubs. 
(8)  Child care attendants or schools. 
(9)  Commercial photography, art and graphics. 
(10)  Dance halls, studios and schools. 
(11)  Developing or enlarging photographs. 
(12)  Detective agency and protective services. 
(13)  Employment agencies. 
(14)  Engraving. 
(15)  Erecting, installing, removing or storing awnings. 
(16)  Extermination services. 
(17)  Farrier or blacksmith. 
(18)  Fumigating or disinfecting. 
(19)  Funeral services and crematories. 
(20)  Hauling of sand, gravel or dirt (excavated by others). 
(21)  Home for adults (licensed by department of social services). 
(22)  Hospitals, profit or nonprofit. 
(23)  Hotels, motels, tourist courts, boarding and rooming houses and trailer parks. 
(24)  House cleaning services. 
(25)  Instructors, tutors, schools and studios of music, ceramics, art, sewing, sports and the like. 
(26)  Interior decorating. 
(27)  Janitorial services. 
(28)  Laundry cleaning and garment services including laundries, dry cleaners, linen supply, diaper service, coin-operated laundries and carpet and upholstery cleaning. 
(29)  Nurse and physician registries. 
(30)  Nursing and personal care facilities including nursing homes, convalescent homes, homes for the retarded, old age homes and rest homes. 
(31)  Packing, crating, shipping, hauling or moving goods or chattels for others. 
(32)  Parcel delivery services. 
(33)  Parking lots, public garages and valet parking. 
(34)  Pawnbrokers. 
(35)  Photographs and photographic services. 
(36)  Piano tuning. 
(37)  Picture framing and gilding. 
(38)  Porter services. 
(39)  Renting or leasing any items of tangible personal property. 
(40)  Reproduction services. 
(41)  Septic tank cleaning. 
(41.1)  Storage-All types. 
(42)  Swimming pool maintenance and management. 
(43)  Tax preparers (other than professionals described in section 9-108. 
(44)  Taxicab companies. 
(45)  Towing services. 
(46)  Transportation services including buses and taxis. 
(47)  Travel bureaus. 
(48)  Tree surgeons, trimmers and removes services. 
(49)  Wakeup services. 
(50)  Other personal service occupations. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-108. - Professional services occupations. 
    Every person conducting or engaging in any of the professional occupations shall pay for the privilege a license tax. A person engaged in providing a professional service is engaged in the rendering of any service specifically enumerated herein following or is engaged in any occupation or vocation in which a professed knowledge of some department of science or learning, gained by a prolonged course of specialized instructions and study is used by its practical application to the affairs of others, either advising, guiding, or teaching them, and in serving their interests or welfare in the practice of an art or science found on it. The word "profession" implies attainments in professional knowledge as distinguished from mere skill and the application of knowledge to uses for others as a vocation: 
(1)  Accountant, public. 
(2)  Advertising agent or firm. 
(3)  Appraiser or evaluator of real estate for others for compensation. 
(4)  Architect. 
(5)  Attorneys-at-law. 
(6)  Dentists. 
(7)  Engineers. 
(8)  Financial consultants. 
(9)  Land surveyors. 
(10)  Pharmacists. 
(11)  Practitioners of the healing arts (as defined in Section 54.1-2900, Code of Virginia). 
(12)  Surgeons. 
(13)  Veterinarians. 
(14)  Other professional occupations. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-109. - Public utilities-Telephone companies. 
    Every person engaged in the business of providing telephone communications in the town shall pay for the privilege a license tax. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3731. 
Sec. 9-110. - Same-Telegraph companies. 
    Every person engaged in the business of sending telegrams and telegraphic communications from the town to any point within the state shall pay for the privilege a license tax. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3731. 
Sec. 9-111. - Same-Companies furnishing heat, light or power by electric current or gas. 
    Every person engaged in furnishing heat, light or power by means of electric current or gas in the town shall pay for the privilege a license tax. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3731. 
Sec. 9-112. - Repair services. 
    Every person conducting or engaging in any of the repair service occupations, businesses or trades set out in this section shall pay for the privilege a license tax. The repair service occupations referred to in this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  Auto repair and engine repair of any type. 
(2)  Bicycle repair. 
(3)  Business and office machine repair. 
(4)  Clothes, hats, carpets or rugs, repair of. 
(5)  Furniture and upholstering, repair of. 
(6)  Gunsmiths and gun repairing. 
(7)  Locksmiths. 
(8)  Machine shops and boiler shops. 
(9)  Mattresses, repair of. 
(10)  Nickel and chrome plating. 
(11)  Paint shops, other than contractors. 
(12)  Radios, refrigerators, electrical appliances and home appliances, repair of. 
(13)  Reweaving. 
(14)  Road machinery and farm machinery, repair of. 
(15)  Saws and tools, repair of. 
(16)  Scales, repair of. 
(17)  Shades, repair of. 
(18)  Shoes, repair of. 
(19)  Tires, repair of. 
(20)  Toys, repair of. 
(21)  Umbrellas, harnesses and leather goods, repair of. 
(22)  Washing and automatic cleaning of automobiles. 
(23)  Watches and clocks, repair of. 
(24)  Welding shops. 
(25)  Other repair services not otherwise taxes. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Sec. 9-113. - Retail merchants. 
    Every person conducting, operating or engaging in any of the retail merchant occupations, businesses or trades set out in this section shall pay for the privilege a license tax. The retail merchant occupations, businesses and trades referred to in the foregoing paragraph of this section shall be those businesses involved in the sale of goods, wares and merchandise for any purpose other than resale, but not including sales at wholesale to institutional, commercial and industrial users including, but not limited to, the sale of the following: 
(1)  Aircraft or aircraft parts. 
(2)  Antiques. 
(3)  Auto accessories, tire, battery. 
(4)  Auto sales and motor vehicle dealers. 
(5)  Bakeries and caterers. 
(6)  Bicycles. 
(7)  Boats and motors. 
(8)  Books and stationery. 
(9)  Building materials. 
(10)  Candy and nut stores. 
(11)  Cigar and tobacco stands and newsstands. 
(12)  Confectioneries. 
(13)  Custom tailors. 
(14)  Dairy products. 
(15)  Delicatessen stores. 
(16)  Department stores. 
(17)  Draperies, curtains and upholstery. 
(18)  Drugs. 
(19)  Dry goods stores. 
(20)  Eggs and poultry. 
(21)  Family clothing. 
(22)  Farm equipment. 
(23)  Filling stations. 
(24)  Fish and seafood markets. 
(25)  Floor coverings. 
(26)  Florists. 
(27)  Frozen food lockers. 
(28)  Fruit stores and vegetable markets. 
(29)  Fuel. 
(30)  Furniture. 
(31)  Furriers. 
(32)  Garden supplies. 
(33)  General stores. 
(34)  Gifts, novelties and souvenirs. 
(35)  Groceries. 
(36)  Hardware. 
(37)  Hay, grain, feed and seed. 
(38)  Heating, plumbing and electrical equipment. 
(39)  Hosiery. 
(40)  Ice. 
(41)  Jewelry. 
(42)  Livestock dealers. 
(43)  Luggage. 
(44)  Lumber goods. 
(45)  Meat markets. 
(46)  Men's and boys' clothing. 
(47)  Millinery. 
(48)  Motorcycles. 
(49)  Musical instruments. 
(50)  Office and store appliance supplies. 
(51)  Optical supplies. 
(52)  Paint, glass and wallpaper. 
(53)  Photographic supply equipment. 
(54)  Radio or household appliances. 
(55)  Restaurants, eating places and nightclubs. 
(56)  Scientific and medical supplies. 
(57)  Secondhand stores, other than junk. 
(58)  Shoes. 
(59)  Soda fountains. 
(60)  Sporting goods. 
(61)  Used cars. 
(62)  Variety stores. 
(63)  Video tape renters. 
(64)  Workmen's clothing. 
(65)  All clothing other than that enumerated in this section. 
(66)  Other retail stores and retail merchants. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- Amount of license tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3706; license tax on merchants in lieu of merchants' capital tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3704; license tax on motor vehicle dealers, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3734. 
Sec. 9-114. - Wholesale merchants. 
    Every person conducting or engaging in any of the wholesale merchant occupations, businesses or trades set out in this section shall pay for the privilege a license tax. The wholesale merchant occupations, businesses and trades referred to in this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  Automotive. 
(2)  Chemicals. 
(3)  Clothing and furnishings. 
(4)  Coal and coke. 
(5)  Commission merchants (who take title, others classed as brokers). 
(6)  Drugs. 
(7)  Dry goods. 
(8)  Electrical and plumbing goods. 
(9)  Farm equipment. 
(10)  Farm products or supplies. 
(11)  Furniture and house furnishings. 
(12)  Groceries and foods. 
(13)  Hardware. 
(14)  Jewelry. 
(15)  Lumber, paint and construction materials. 
(16)  Machinery, equipment and supplies. 
(17)  Metal and metal work. 
(18)  Paper and paper products. 
(19)  Petroleum and petroleum products. 
(20)  Seafood. 
(21)  Soft drinks. 
(22)  Sporting goods. 
(23)  Tobacco and tobacco products. 
(24)  Waste materials. 
(25)  Other goods, wares and merchandise. 
(26)  Other wholesale merchants. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
State Law reference- License tax on wholesale merchants, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3716. 
Sec. 9-115. - Real estate services. 
    Every person conducting or engaging in any of the real estate services occupations, businesses or trades set out in this section shall pay for the privilege a license tax. The real estate service occupations, businesses and trades referred to in this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  Real estate appraisers. 
(2)  Real estate escrow agents. 
(3)  Real estate fiduciaries. 
(4)  Real property lessors. 
(5)  Real estate agents, brokers and managers. 
(6)  Real estate selling agents. 
(7)  Rental agents for real estate. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96) 
Secs. 9-116-9-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - LICENSE FEE AND TAX 

Sec. 9-121. - License tax rates. 
(1)  A fee for the issuance of such license in the amount of thirty dollars ($30.00); and 
(2)  In addition to the license fee specified in subsection (1) above, and except as may be otherwise provided in Sections 58.1-3712, 58.1-3712.1 and 58-1-3713 of the Code of Virginia, every such person or business with annual gross receipts shall be assessed and required to pay annually a license tax on all the gross receipts of such persons includable as provided in this chapter at a rate as established from time to time by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 1996-21, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 1999-12, 11-9-99; Ord. No. 2000-2, 4-27-2000; Ord. No. 2002-6, 4-22-2002; Ord. No. 2004-3, 5-11-2004) 
State Law reference- Amount of license tax, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3706, 58.1-3731 for public service corporations. 
Chapter 10 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl, Ch. 3; cemetery, Ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; garbage, trash and weeds, Ch. 8; licenses, Ch. 9; noise, § 11-19; police department, Ch. 12; solicitors, Ch. 13; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 14; lights and barricades for excavation, § taxicabs. 
State Law reference- Municipal powers as to use of streets, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-14; motor vehicles, Code of Virginia, Title 46.2; local regulation of traffic, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, and unless otherwise stated, such violations shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-113; traffic control powers of local authorities, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300. 
Sec. 10-2. - Adoption of state law. 
    Pursuant to the authority of Section 46.2-1300 and 46.2-1313 and 1-13.39:2 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, all of the provisions and requirements of the laws of the Commonwealth contained in Article 2 (Section 18.2-266 et seq.) of Chapter 7 of Title 18.2, Article 9 (Section 16.1-278 et seq.) of Chapter 11 of Title 16.1 and Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia of 1950 as effective July 1, 2018, together with those provisions and requirements made by future general assemblies, it being the intent of the town council to adopt all future changes of the above-referenced sections of the Code of Virginia, except those provisions and requirements, the violation of which constitutes a felony and except those provisions and requirements which by their very nature can have no application to or within the town, are hereby adopted and incorporated in this chapter by reference and made applicable with the town. References to "highways of the state" contained in such provisions and requirements hereby adopted shall be deemed to include the streets, highways and other public ways within the town. Such provisions and requirements are hereby adopted, mutatis mutandis, and made a part of this chapter as fully as though set forth at length herein and it shall be unlawful for any person, within the town, to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any provision of Article 2 (Section 18.2-266 et seq.) of Chapter 7 of Title 18.2, Article 9 (Section 16.1-278 et seq.) of Chapter 11 of Title 16.1, and Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia of 1950 which is adopted by this section; provided, that in no event shall the penalty imposed for the violation of any provision or requirement hereby adopted exceed the penalty imposed for a similar offense under Article 2 (Section 18.2-266 et seq.) of Chapter 7 of Title 18.2, Article 9 (Section 16.1-278 et seq.) of Chapter 11 of Title 16.1, and Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia of 1950. 
(Code 1981, § 9-1; Ord. No. 1982-7, 11-2-82; Ord. No. 1983-3, 7-5-83; Ord. No. 1984-4, 6-18-84; Ord. No. 1985-4, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 1986-5, 6-12-86; Ord. No. 1987-2, 6-2-87; Ord. No. 1988-3, 4-5-88; Ord. No. 1989-6, 6-6-89; Ord. No. 1989-7, 10-3-89; Ord. No. 1990-3, 6-12-90; Ord. No. 1991-7, 6-11-91; Ord. No. 1992-8, 6-9-92; Ord. No. 1993-9, 6-8-93; Ord. No. 1994-9, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 1995-8, 6-13-95; Ord. No. 1996-14, 6-11-96; Ord. No. 1997-8, 7-8-97; Ord. No. 1998-9, 7-14-98; Ord. No. 1999-5, 7-13-99; Ord. No. 1999-13, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 2000-06, 7-11-2000; Ord. No. 2001-13, 7-10-2001; Ord. No. 2002-08, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 2003-6, 7-8-2003; Ord. No. 2004-5, 7-13-2004; Ord. No. 2005-7, 7-12-2005; Ord. No. 2006-08, 7-11-2006; Ord. No. 2007-03, 7-12-2007; Ord. No. 2008-03, 7-8-08; Ord. No. 2009-03, 7-14-09; Ord. No. 2010-03, 8-10-10; Ord. No. 2011-03, 8-9-11; Ord. No. 2012-3, 9-11-12; Ord. No. 2013-3, 8-13-13 ; Ord. No. 2014-3, 8-12-14 ; Ord. No. 2015-03, 8-11-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-05 , 7-12-16; Ord. No. 2017-09 , 9-12-17; Ord. No. 2018-06 , 8-14-18) 
State Law reference- Powers of local authorities generally; erection of signs and markers; maximum penalties, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300; incorporation of provisions of this Title, Article 9 (§ 16.2-278 et seq.) of Chapter 11 of Title 16.1 and Article 2 (§ 18.2-266 et seq.) of Chapter 7 of Title 18.2 ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1313. Future amendments, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.39:2. 
Sec. 10-3. - Powers of town manager to designate stop or yield right-of-way intersections and to promulgate parking regulations. 
(a)  The town manager may designate intersections at which vehicles shall come to a full stop or yield the right-of-way and may cause to be erected appropriate signs or markers at such intersections so that an ordinarily observant person will be aware of the existence of such designation. 
(b)  The town manager may classify vehicles with reference to parking and may designate the time, place and manner such vehicles may be allowed to park on town streets, and may make and enforce such additional rules and regulations as parking conditions may require. When any parking regulation is established, pursuant to this paragraph, the town manager shall cause to be erected appropriate signs or markers so that an ordinarily observant person, who may be affected by such regulation, will be aware of such regulation. 
(c)  When any regulation is made pursuant to this section and when appropriate signs or markers have been erected as required by this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to violate any such regulation. 
(Code 1981, § 9-1.1) 
State Law reference- Designation of stop and yield right-of-way intersections, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1301; local parking regulations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 
Sec. 10-4. - Direction of traffic by police officers. 
    Every police officer of the town is authorized to act as a traffic officer in the direction of traffic on any highway where traffic is heavy or continuous. 
(Code 1981, § 9-2) 
Sec. 10-5. - Speed limits on certain streets, etc. 
(a)  Thirty-five (35) miles per hour. Upon the streets and parts of streets set out in this subsection, the maximum speed limit is hereby established as thirty-five (35) miles per hour. No person shall drive a vehicle upon the following such streets or parts of streets in excess of thirty-five (35) [miles] per hour: 
(1)  Walker Drive from its intersection with Lee Street to the point of intersection with Breezewood Drive. 
(2)  Lee Street from its intersection with the eastern town limits to the point of intersection with Falmouth Street. 
(3)  Broadview Avenue from the town incorporated limits to intersection with Lee Highway. 
(4)  Blackwell Road from Lee Highway to a point two hundred (200) feet north of the intersection of Old Alexandria Pike. 
(b)  Forty (40) miles per hour. Upon the streets and parts of streets set out in this subsection, the maximum speed limit is hereby established as forty (40) miles per hour. No person shall drive a vehicle upon the following such streets or parts of streets in excess of forty (40) miles per hour: 
(1)  Broadview Avenue between intersection with Winchester Street and intersection with Waterloo Street. 
(2)  East Shirley Avenue - From the Southern Corporation Limit (SCL) to eight hundred fifty (850) feet west and from two thousand three hundred forty (2,340) feet west of the SCL to the intersection of East Shirley Avenue and Broadview Avenue. 
(3)  Frost Avenue. 
(4)  Lee Highway. 
(5)  West Shirley Avenue. 
(c)  Fifty-five (55) miles per hour. Upon the streets and parts of streets set out in this subsection, the maximum speed limit is hereby established as fifty-five (55) miles per hour. No person shall drive a vehicle upon the following such streets or parts of street in excess of such fifty-five (55) miles per hour: Route 17 spur from the east corporate limits of town to the north corporate limits. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4; Ord. No. 1989-4, 5-2-89; Ord. No. 1990-7, 12-11-90; Ord. No. 1994-17, 12-13-94; Ord. No. 1997-14, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 1998-1, 4-14-98; Ord. No. 2002-03, 1-8-2002; Ord. No. 2005-01, 3-8-2005; Ord. No. 2005-06, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 2006-01, 3-14-2006; Ord. No. 2019-01 , 1-8-19) 
State Law reference- Maximum speed limit in city and town business and residence districts-Section 46.2-874 of the Code of Virginia of 1950 as amended; Maximum speed limit on other highways in cities and towns-Section 46.2-875; Authority to change speed limits-Section 46.2-878 of the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended. 
Sec. 10-6. - One-way streets. 
(a)  The following streets are hereby established and designated as one-way streets and, except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven or moved on such streets in a direction other than as herein set forth: 
(1)  Academy Hill Road, from High Street to Boundary Lane, for traffic moving north. 
(2)  Calhoun Street, from Maine Street to Horner Street, for traffic moving north. 
(3)  Court Street, from Main Street to Hotel Street, for traffic moving south. 
(4)  Culpeper Street, from Lee Street to Main Street, for traffic moving north. 
(5)  Haiti Street, from Liberty Street to North Street, for traffic moving north. 
(6)  Fourth Street, from Main Street to East Lee Street, for traffic moving south. 
(7)  Second Street, from Main Street to East Lee Street, for traffic moving south. 
(8)  Smith Street, for Winchester Street to Waterloo Street for traffic moving south. 
(9)  Third Street, from Main Street to East Lee Street, for traffic moving south from Lee Street to Main Street for traffic moving north. 
(b)  This section shall become effective as to any such one-way street when signs have been provided therefor as set out in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  The town manager is authorized and directed to provide signs on the one-way streets designated in this section as will apprise an ordinarily observant person of such one-way streets. 
(d)  When it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the town manager or his duly authorized representative that the strict enforcement of this section will cause an unreasonable hardship on some particular person or persons relative to the loading and unloading of trucks or other vehicles on such one-way streets, then in such event the town manager or his duly authorized representative is authorized to issue a special permit to such person or persons permitting a variance from the provisions of this section. Any such special permit shall be in writing and shall specify the nature of such variance and the place and period of time when such variance shall be permitted. Such permit shall only be issued when it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the town manager or his duly authorized representative that the granting of such permit will alleviate a clearly demonstrable hardship as distinguished from a special privilege or convenience to the person or persons who seek such permit. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5; Ord. No. 1986-6, 8-5-86; Ord. No. 1989-1, 5-2-89; Ord. No. 1993-2, 3-9-93; Ord. No. 2001-18, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 2016-07 , 10-11-16) 
Sec. 10-7. - Motor truck routes and tractor trailer truck routes. 
(a)  Vehicles prohibited. The use of any street, or portion of street, hereinafter designated, by truck, trailer, and semi-trailer other than pickup trucks not exceeding an actual gross weight of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) pounds, except for the purpose of receiving passengers or goods or making residential deliveries, is prohibited, and the town manager is authorized and directed to erect suitable signs at such places as may be necessary to notify drivers of such vehicles of this prohibition. 
(b)  Definitions. For purposes of this chapter the definitions of truck, trailer and semi-trailer defined in Section 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia, as may be amended from time to time, are incorporated herein by reference. 
(c)  Operators of trucks, trailers and semi-trailers shall be restricted to the use of the following named streets in passing through the town: 
(1)  Broadview Avenue. 
(2)  East Shirley Avenue. 
(3)  Frost Avenue. 
(4)  Lee Highway. 
(5)  West Shirley Avenue. 
(d)  [ Specific prohibitions. ] Specifically all trucks, trailers and semi-trailers are prohibited from driving on Falmouth Street beginning at the intersection of Falmouth Street and Old Meetze Road through to the intersection of Falmouth Street and E. Lee Street. 
(e)  Exceptions: 
(1)  Fire trucks or other emergency vehicles on emergency business. 
(2)  Road repair, construction or maintenance vehicles while involved in repair, construction or maintenance of roads. 
(3)  Garbage service vehicles while providing services to town residents. 
(4)  Vehicles owned by the Town of Warrenton. 
(f)  Penalty for violation. The driver of any such vehicle operated in violation of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor for each occurrence. 
(Code 1981, § 9-6; Ord. No. 1989-3, 5-2-89; Ord. No. 2007-04, 12-11-07) 
Sec. 10-8. - Permits for parades and processions. 
    No funeral procession or parade, excepting the military forces of the United States, the military forces of the state and the forces of the police and fire departments of the town, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street, except in accordance with a permit issued by the town manager and such other regulations as are set forth in this chapter which may apply. 
(Code 1981, § 9-10.2) 
State Law reference- Power of town to permit the temporary use of streets from other than public purposes, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-14(9). 
Sec. 10-9. - Powers of town manager to designate reduced speed limits through construction zones. 
    The town manager may designate for a temporary period not to exceed sixty (60) days, a reduced speed limit upon any portion of street or highway of the town on which work is being done or where the street or highway is under construction or repair. The street or highway work zone shall be indicated by appropriately placed signs displaying the reduced maximum speed limit. Such designation shall constitute a "highway work zone" under section 46.2-878.1 of the Code of Virginia and a violation thereof shall be unlawful and constitute a traffic infraction punishable by fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) as provided therein. 
(Ord. No. 1995-10, 8-8-95) 
State Law reference- Decreased maximum speed limits in highway work zone, Code of Virginia § 46.2-878.1; powers of local authorities generally; maximum penalties, Code of Virginia § 46.2-1300. 
Secs. 10-10. - Additional assessment for electronic summons system. 
(a)  The sum of five dollars ($5.00) is hereby assessed as part of the costs in each criminal or traffic case in the Juvenile and Domestic Relations Court, General District Court, and Circuit Court of the county, in which the defendant is charged with a violation of any statute or ordinance within the town limits. The assessment shall be collected by the clerk of the court in which the action is filed, remitted to the town treasurer, and held by the town treasurer subject to disbursements by the town council to the Warrenton Police Department solely to fund software, hardware, and associated equipment costs for the implementation and maintenance of an electronic summons system. 
(b)  The assessment provided for herein shall be in addition to any other fees prescribed by law. 
( Ord. No. 2015-04, 8-11-15 ) 
State Law reference- Statutory authority, Code of Virginia § 17.1-279.1. 
Secs. 10-11-10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING OF VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-07 , adopted Aug. 14, 2018, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 10-26-10-35, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1981, §§ 9-11-9-19, 9-20; Ord. No. 1991-9, adopted Jan. 14, 1992; Ord. No. 1991-17, adopted Jan. 14, 1992; Ord. No. 1992-26, adopted Nov. 10, 1992; Ord. No. 1992-27, adopted Nov. 10, 1992; Ord. No. 1996-6, adopted May 14, 1996; Ord. No. 1998-13, adopted Oct. 13, 1998; Ord. No. 2001-7, adopted April 24, 2001; and Ord. No. 2003-5, adopted May 13, 2003. 

Sec. 10-26. - License registration fee required; exceptions. 
    The town hereby levies and assesses a license registration fee on every motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, automobiles and trucks having a situs pursuant to Code of Virginia § 58.1-3511, except: 
(1)  Vehicles used by an active member of the Warrenton Volunteer Fire and Rescue Company (WVFC), provided, however, that active members of WVFC shall provide to the finance director at the time of declaration of personal property a written certification by the WVFC chief that said applicant is an active member, and is a member whose name appears in the book of "volunteer fire fighters" kept by the clerk of the circuit court. The exception shall apply to no more than one (1) vehicle. 
(2)  Vehicles owned or leased by a person who is sixty-five (65) years of age or older shall be entitled to a fifty (50) percent reduction in the license registration fee assessed on that vehicle, provided that no such discount shall be available for more than one (1) vehicle owned or leased by the same person. 
(3)  Vehicles owned by town residents who are disabled veterans and have been issued special "DV" plates. The exception shall apply to no more than one (1) vehicle. 
(4)  Military personnel are entitled to an exception for one (1) vehicle. No exception applies to their spouses. 
(5)  Antique motor vehicles as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, as amended, are eligible for an exception. 
    The exceptions noted above do not apply if any taxes are due. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07 , 8-14-18) 
Sec. 10-27. - Amount of fee-motor vehicles; motorcycles. 
    The cost of the license registration fee required by this article shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00); except fifteen dollars ($15.00) for motorcycles and similar two-wheel vehicles. Purchasers of new or used automobiles shall be billed for such fee on the supplemental bill for such vehicle as may be required. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07 , 8-14-18) 
Sec. 10-28. - Limitations. 
    This article is subject to the limitations on the imposition of such license registration fees by the town as are set forth in Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-663, 46.2-683, 46.2-750, 46.2-752 and 46.2-755, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07 , 8-14-18) 
Sec. 10-29. - Vehicle registration fee year. 
    The vehicle registration year shall commence on January 1 of each year. The annual fee shall be payable December 5 of every year or the billing date for subsequent assessments made for that calendar year. The fee shall be collected as taxes are collected. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07 , 8-14-18) 
Sec. 10-30. - Transfer of license registration fees; refunds. 
    The license registration fee shall not be transferable between persons or vehicles. There shall be no refund of the license registration fee imposed herein for vehicles sold or otherwise disposed of during the tax year. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07 , 8-14-18) 
Sec. 10-31. - Collection. 
    The finance director shall, after the due date for any license registration fee required under this section, collect such license registration fee in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3919 and any other applicable state law. Additionally the finance director shall have the authority to take any action authorized by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07 , 8-14-18) 
State Law reference- Ordinance providing amount of local license fee or tax on vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752. 
Secs. 10-32-10-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS APPLICABLE IN EVENT OF SNOW, SLEET, ETC.[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of operation of vehicles in snow, sleet, etc., Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1302. 

Sec. 10-61. - Penalties for violation of article. 
    In addition to the charges for storage and removal referred to in section 10-64, any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each such offense. 
(Code 1981, § 9-25) 
Sec. 10-62. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of this article is hereby declared to be the regulation of the operation of vehicles on the streets in the town, in the event of snow, sleet, hail, freezing rain, ice, water, flood, high wind or storm or the threat thereof. 
(Code 1981, § 9-21) 
Sec. 10-63. - Snow routes-Enumerated; posting. 
(a)  The streets set out in this section are hereby declared to be snow routes and shall be so designated and posted. 
(b)  The streets referred to in the first paragraph of this section are hereby enumerated as follows: 
(1)  Alexandria Pike. 
(2)  Blackwell Road. 
(3)  Broadview Avenue. 
(4)  Culpeper Street. 
(5)  East Shirley Avenue. 
(6)  Falmouth Street. 
(7)  Frost Avenue. 
(8)  Lee Highway. 
(9)  Main Street. 
(10)  Waterloo Street. 
(11)  West Shirley Avenue. 
(12)  Winchester Street. 
(Code 1981, § 9-22) 
Sec. 10-64. - Same-Regulations generally. 
    In the event of snow, sleet, hail, freezing rain, ice, water, flood, high wind or storm or the threat thereof: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on any of the streets enumerated in section 10-63. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or impede traffic on any of the streets enumerated in section 10-63 by reason of his failure to have the vehicle operated by him equipped with snow tires or chains. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon a vehicle on any of the streets enumerated in section 10-63. 
(4)  Vehicles that are stalled, stuck, parked or abandoned on any of the streets enumerated in section 10-63 may be removed by the police. 
(5)  Vehicles removed pursuant to subsection (d) of this section shall be stored and a reasonable charge, to be determined by the town manager, is hereby imposed for such removal and storage. 
(Code 1981, § 9-23) 
Sec. 10-65. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1997-02, adopted March 11, 1997, repealed § 10-65 in its entirety. Formerly, § 10-65 pertained to play areas for sledding, etc., and derived from § 9-24 of the 1981 Code. 
Secs. 10-66-10-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARKING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-81. - Notice of violation; payment of penalty, contest. 
    It shall be the duty of police officers of the town, in the event a vehicle is found parked in violation of the parking regulations promulgated by the town manager pursuant to section 10-3 of this Code, to attach to the vehicle in question a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of a parking regulation, and instructing such owner or operator as follows: 
(1)  Uncontested payment of a parking violation may be made in person or by mail to the town in the amount provided by the parking regulations and indicated on the face of the notice of violation. The payment shall be made within seventy-two (72) hours from the issuance of the notice of violation. 
(2)  The vehicle owner or operator may contest the violation by notifying the police department within seventy-two (72) hours from the issuance of the notice of violation. A court date and time shall be provided to those persons wishing to contest a violation. Notice of all contested cases shall be given in writing by the police department to the clerk of the general district court. 
(3)  Failure to contest a violation or pay without contest shall result in an additional penalty of five dollars ($5.00) and the issuance of a summons by the police department to the registered owner of the vehicle requiring him or her to appear in court and answer to the violation after notice as prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 1981-4, 3-3-81) 
State Law reference- Conditions precedent to issuance of summons for violation of parking ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-941. 
Sec. 10-82. - Parking for certain purposes restricted, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle of any kind for the purpose of selling or offering for sale from such vehicle, or of accepting orders therefor from such vehicle, any fruit, vegetables or merchandise of any character or for the purpose of advertising or displaying merchandise or samples thereof in or on such vehicle, except in an area designated by the town manager; provided, that a person may properly park a vehicle for the purpose of making deliveries therefrom of merchandise previously sold. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or place any automobile, truck, trailer or other vehicle upon or in any street, alley or parkway for the purpose of selling or offering the same for sale or rent. No sign or lettering shall be attached or placed upon any automobile, truck, trailer or other vehicle parked in or upon any public street, alley or parkway of the city indicating that such vehicle is offered for sale or rent. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck or trailer loaded with livestock to park such truck or trailer upon any street within the town. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck or trailer used for the transportation of livestock of any kind to park such truck or trailer when unloaded, upon any street, alley, parking lot or elsewhere within the town for a period longer than one (1) hour in any twenty-four-hour period, if such vehicle is in the condition that it gives off such nauseous, noxious or offensive odors as to constitute a public nuisance. 
(Code 1981, § 9-3) 
Sec. 10-83. - Manner of using loading zones. 
    Where a loading and unloading zone has been set apart by the town manager in accordance with applicable provisions of this chapter, the following regulations shall apply with respect to the use of such areas: 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any place marked as a curb loading zone except for the purpose of the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials. Such allowed usage shall not exceed one (1) hour. All delivery vehicles, other than regular delivery trucks, using such loading zones shall be identified by the owner's or company's name in letters three (3) inches high on both sides of the vehicle. 
(Code 1981, § 9-7; Ord. No. 1995-16, 2-13-96; Ord. No. 2013-04, 8-13-13 ) 
Sec. 10-84. - Storage of inoperative vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on any property zoned for residential, commercial or agricultural purposes, any motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer, as such are defined in Section 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia, which is inoperate, unless such motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer is kept within a fully enclosed building or structure, or is otherwise shielded or screened from view. 
(b)  As used in this section, "inoperative motor vehicle" shall mean any motor vehicle: 
(1)  Not in operating condition; or 
(2)  Partially or totally disassembled by the removal of tires and wheels, the engine, or other essential parts required for operation of the vehicle, for a period of sixty (60) days or longer; or 
(3)  Not displaying valid license plates; or 
(4)  Not displaying a valid inspection decal. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to licensed business regularly engaged in business as an automobile dealer, salvage dealer or scrap processor. 
(d)  Violation of this section shall constitute a Class Three (3) misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 9-8; Ord. No. 1985-5, 9-3-85; Ord. No. 1991-12, 9-10-91) 
Cross reference- Garbage, trash and weeds, Ch. 8. 
State Law reference- Authority to restrict keeping of inoperative motor vehicles, etc., on residential or commercial property, removal of such vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-11.1. 
Sec. 10-85. - Disposition of inoperative, abandoned vehicles. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, or the provisions of section 46.2-617 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer or part thereof found within the corporate limits of the town which is inoperable and by virtue of this condition is an "inoperable motor vehicle" as defined in section 10-84 of this Code, may be disposed of in the following manner: 
(1)  The town manager shall direct the town police to notify the owners of property zoned for residential or commercial or agricultural purposes, on which there is located an inoperable motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, and the owner of the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, to remove the same therefrom within fifteen (15) days after being given notice in writing to remove the same. 
(2)  If the vehicle has not been moved after fifteen (15) days, the town through its own agents or employees may remove any such inoperative vehicle when the owner of the premises or motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer has failed to do so. 
(3)  In the event that the town through its own agents or employees removes any such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer after having been given such notice, the town may dispose of such motor vehicle after having given additional notice to the owner of the vehicle. 
(4)  The town police shall inform the owner of the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer and the owner of the premises, that the cost of any such removal or disposal shall be chargeable to the owner of the vehicle or premises and may be collected by the town as taxes and levies are collected. 
(5)  Every cost authorized by this section with which the owner of the premises shall have been assessed shall constitute a lien against the property from which the vehicle was removed, the lien to continue until actual payment of such costs have been made to the town. 
(Code 1981, § 9-8.1; Ord. No. 1983-1, 6-7-83) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-11.1(b). 
Sec. 10-86. - Removal and disposition of certain unattended vehicles. 
(a)  Whenever any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is found on the public streets or public grounds unattended by the owner or operator and constitutes a hazard to traffic, or is parked in such manner as to be in violation of the law, or whenever any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is left unattended for more than ten (10) days upon any public property or privately owned property other than the property of the owner of such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer with the town, or is abandoned upon such public property or privately owned property, without the permission of the owner, lessee or occupant thereof, or whenever any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is stalled or rendered immobile as the result of adverse weather conditions or other emergency situations on any public roadway, any such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer may be removed for safekeeping by or under the direction of a police officer to a storage garage or area; however, no such vehicle shall be so removed from privately owned premises without the written request of the owner, lessee or occupant thereof. The person at whose request such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is removed from privately owned property shall indemnify the town against any loss or expense incurred by reason of removal, storage or sale thereof. It shall be presumed that such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer or part thereof is abandoned if: 
(1)  It lacks: 
a.  A current license plate; or 
b.  A current town plate, sticker or decal; or 
c.  A valid state inspection certificate or sticker; and 
(2)  It has been in a specific location for four (4) days without being moved. 
Each removal shall be reported immediately to the chief of police, who shall give notice thereof to the owner of the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer as promptly as possible. 
(b)  The owner of such vehicle, or trailer or semitrailer, before obtaining possession thereof, shall pay to the persons entitled thereto all reasonable costs incidental to the removal, storage and locating of the owner of the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer. Should such owner fail or refuse to pay the cost or should the identity or whereabouts of such owner be unknown and unascertainable after a diligent search has been made, and after notice to him at his last known address and to the holder of any lien of record in the office of the state department of motor vehicles against the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, the chief of police may, after holding the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer thirty (30) days and after due notice of sale, dispose of the same at public sale, and the proceeds from the sale shall be forwarded by the chief of police to the town finance director; provided, that if the value of such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is determined by three (3) disinterested dealers or garagemen to be less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), it may be disposed of by private sale or junked. The finance director shall pay from the proceeds of sale the cost of removal, storage, investigation as to ownership and liens and notice of sale, and the balance of such funds shall be held by him for the owner and paid to the owner upon satisfactory proof of ownership. 
(c)  If no claim has been made by the owner for the proceeds of such sale, the remaining funds may be deposited to the general fund or any special fund of the town. Any such owner shall be entitled to apply to the town within three (3) years from the date of such sale, and if timely application is made therefor, the town shall pay the same to the owner without interest or other charges. No claim shall be made nor shall any suit, action or proceeding be instituted for the recovery of such funds after three (3) years from the date of such sale. 
(d)  Subsections (a)-(c) shall not operate to deprive any person of other remedies available under law to obtain payment from the owner of unattended, abandoned or immobile vehicles for towing, storage or other services rendered. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or part thereof on the private property of any other person without his consent. Upon complaint of the owner of the property on which such motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part thereof, has been left for more than seventy-two (72) hours, such motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or part thereof may be removed by or under the direction of a police officer to a storage garage or area. The owners of private property which is normally open to the public for parking shall post or cause to be posted signs warning that vehicles left on the property for more than seventy-two (72) hours will be towed or removed at the expense of the vehicle owner. The person at whose request the vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part thereof, is so removed shall indemnify the town against any loss or expense incurred by reason of removal, storage or sale thereof. 
(f)  In the case of the removal of a motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or part thereof from private property, when the same cannot be readily sold, such motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or part thereof may be disposed of in such manner as the town council may provide. 
(g)  In all other respects, the provisions of subsections (a)-(d) of this section shall apply to such removals; provided, that disposal of a motor vehicles, trailer or semitrailer may, at the option of the town council, be carried out under either the provisions of subsection (a) of this section or under the provisions of this subsection after a diligent search for the owner, after notice to him at his last known address and to the holder of any lien of record in the office of the state or motor vehicles against such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, and after the motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer has been held at least sixty (60) days. 
(h)  The state department of motor vehicles shall be notified of the disposition of any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer under this section. 
(Code 1981, § 9-9; Ord. No. 1983-1, 6-7-83) 
Sec. 10-87. - Removal or immobilization of motor vehicles having outstanding parking violations. 
(a)  Whenever there is found any motor vehicle parked upon the public streets or public grounds against which there are three (3) or more outstanding unpaid or otherwise unsettled parking violation notices, such vehicle may, by towing or otherwise, be removed or conveyed to a place in the town designated by the chief of police for the temporary storage of such vehicle, or such vehicle may be immobilized in such manner as to prevent its removal or operation except by authorized officers or members of the police department. The removal, conveyance or immobilization of the vehicle shall be by, or under the direction of, an officer or member of the police department. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the officer or member of the police department removing or immobilizing such motor vehicle or under whose direction such vehicle is removed or immobilized, to inform as soon as practicable the owner of the removed or immobilized vehicle of the nature and circumstances of the prior unsettled parking violation notices, for which or on account of which such vehicle was removed or immobilized. In any case involving immobilization of a vehicle pursuant to this section, there shall be placed on such vehicle, in a conspicuous manner, a notice warning that such vehicle has been immobilized and that any attempt to move such vehicle might result in damage thereto. 
(c)  The owner of an immobilized vehicle, or other duly authorized person, shall be allowed twenty-four (24) hours from the time of immobilization to repossess or secure the release of the vehicle. Failure to repossess or secure the release of the vehicle within this time period may result in the removal of such vehicle to a storage area for safekeeping under the direction of a police officer or member of the police department. 
(d)  The owner of such removed or immobilized motor vehicle, or other duly authorized person, shall be permitted to repossess or to secure the release of the vehicle by payment of outstanding parking violation notices for which the vehicle was removed or immobilized and by payment of all reasonable costs incidental to the immobilization, removal and storage of the vehicle, and the efforts to locate the owner of the vehicle. Should such owner fail or refuse to pay such fines and costs; or should the identity or whereabouts of such owner be unknown and unascertainable, such motor vehicle shall be sold in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 10-86(a)-(d). 
(Code 1981, § 9-10) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1216, 46.2-1217. 
Sec. 10-88. - Washing or greasing vehicle on street or sidewalk prohibited. 
    No person shall, for compensation, wash, polish or grease a vehicle upon a street or sidewalk, nor shall the owner of a vehicle permit it to be washed, polished or greased, for compensation, upon a street or sidewalk. 
(Code 1981, §§ 9-10.1, 14-21) 
Sec. 10-89. - Parking in handicapped designated parking spaces. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle not displaying a license plate, decal or special parking permit, issued under Code of Virginia, section 46.2-731, 46.2-739 or 46.2-1238, in a parking space reserved for the handicapped on public property or at privately owned parking areas open to the public. A motor vehicle shall be unlawfully parked if it does not display an appropriate state identification for a handicapped person. Notice of violation for such offense shall be issued by the town police officers pursuant to section 10-81 of this Code. 
(b)  The town manager shall designate handicapped parking spaces and shall cause to be erected appropriate above-grade signs so that an ordinarily observant person will be aware of this section. The signs shall conform to the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the Virginia Department of Highways and Transportation and ordinances of the town. Signs on privately owned parking areas shall be erected at the expense of the owner or lessee of such areas. 
(c)  Any violation of this section shall be a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1984-6.1, 10-9-84) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1237. 
Sec. 10-90. - General parking prohibitions. 
    No person shall park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a law enforcement officer or traffic control devices in the following manner or places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk, or in any manner which blocks travel on, access to, or access from any sidewalk; 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway; 
(3)  Within an intersection; 
(4)  Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant located on private or public property or within a fire lane as defined in section 7-33 of the Code of the Town of Warrenton; 
(5)  On a crosswalk; 
(6)  Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
(7)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by official signs or markings; 
(8)  Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad grade crossing; 
(9)  Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of the entrance when properly signposted; 
(10)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such parking would obstruct traffic; 
(11)  On the roadway side of any vehicle parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
(12)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street or highway or within a tunnel; 
(13)  At any place where official signs prohibit parking; 
(14)  When the vehicle fails to display a current valid decal of the Town of Warrenton or other political jurisdiction. 
(15)  When the vehicle fails to display a valid state inspection sticker and valid state license plate. 
(Ord. No. 1994-18, 12-13-94; Ord. No. 1998-14, 11-10-98) 
Sec. 10-91. - Parking of certain commercial vehicles in residential areas prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall park any truck, trailer or semitrailer, bus or other commercial vehicle on or along roads, highways and streets in any area of the town zoned for residential uses; provided that, during regularly scheduled school hours, school buses may be parked in such residential areas by their drivers for a continuous period not to exceed six (6) hours. 
(b)  This section shall not be applicable to commercial vehicles picking up or discharging passengers or merchandise or temporarily parked for necessary repairs or pursuant to the performance of work or service in residential areas. 
(c)  Areas zoned for residential use includes all areas of the town which have been zoned to a zoning classification which permits one (1) or more residential dwelling units. The zoning boundaries shall be used in the enforcement of the requirements of this subsection. However, in any case in which a highway serves as the boundary between an area zoned for residential use and an area zoned for another use, then the centerline of that highway shall be considered as the boundary between the area zoned for residential use and the area zoned for another use. In such cases, the prohibitions of this subsection shall apply only to the side of the highway that abuts the area zoned for residential use. 
(d)  In any prosecution under this section 10-91, proof that the vehicle described in the complaint, summons or warrant was parked in violation of such rule or regulation, together with proof that the defendant was at the time of such parking the registered owner of the vehicle, as required by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-600, shall constitute in evidence a rebuttable presumption that such registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked the vehicle at the place where and for the time during which such violation occurred. 
(e)  For any purpose of this section, the term "commercial vehicle" shall mean every motor vehicle in excess of twenty (20) feet in length or seven (7) feet in height; other than a passenger car or passenger van, which is clearly designated by visible writing on the vehicle to be a van pool vehicle. The term shall also include any construction equipment, cranes, well digging apparatus and other heavy equipment, except when such equipment is being used for construction activities at sites where building permits are in force. 
(f)  Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) 
(Ord. No. 2000-05, 6-13-2000) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia § 15.2-2001 
Secs. 10-92-10-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING LOTS 

Sec. 10-106. - Municipal parking lots. 
(a)  The municipal parking lots now or hereafter acquired or established by the town shall be under the supervision of the town manager and he is hereby authorized to make and enforce rules and regulations as parking conditions require. 
(b)  When any parking regulation is established pursuant to this section, the town manager shall cause to be erected, appropriate signs or markers so that an ordinarily observant person who may be affected by such regulation will be aware of such regulation. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any municipal parking lot in violation of any ordinance or regulation established pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 1981-3, § 9-35, 3-3-81) 
Sec. 10-107. - Other public parking lots. 
(a)  Any parking lot open to the public and designed to accommodate fifty (50) or more vehicles pursuant to Code of Virginia, section 46.2-1219 shall be subject to the applicable regulations as set forth in title 46.2 and Article 2, Chapter 7 of Title 18.2 of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  The owner or lessee of such public parking lot shall install at his expense the necessary signs and other marking to regulate the flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, parking and speed limits within such parking lots. 
(c)  Any parking regulations, times of operations, signs and markings shall be subject to the designation and approval of the town manager and such signs shall conform to the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the state department of highways and transportation and the town. 
(Ord. No. 1981-3, § 9-36, 3-3-81) 
Secs. 10-108-10-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BICYCLES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-121. - Carrying extra passengers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person riding or operating a bicycle designed to carry only one (1) person, to carry any extra passengers in any business district. 
(Code 1981, § 9-26) 
Sec. 10-122. - Skating, skateboarding and riding of bicycles prohibited on certain sidewalks and crosswalks. 
    The use of roller skates or skateboards and/or the riding of bicycles on any designated sidewalks or crosswalks, located in a commercial or industrial zoning district, including those of any church, school, recreational facility or any business property open to the public where such activity is prohibited by the owner, is hereby prohibited. 
    The town manager shall designate the sidewalks and/or crosswalks where skating, skateboarding and/or bicycle riding shall be prohibited. Signs indicating such prohibition shall be conspicuously posted in the general area where skating, skateboarding and/or bicycle riding is prohibited. 
    A violation of this section shall be punishable by a civil penalty of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) per occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, 10-11-88; Ord. No. 1999-6, 7-13-99) 
State Law reference- Power to regulate, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-904. 
Secs. 10-123-10-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Power of town to require the licensing of bicycles or mopeds, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-133; registration of bicycle serial numbers, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-908. 

Sec. 10-136. - Generally. 
    No person who resides within the limits of the town shall ride or propel a bicycle on any street in the town unless and until the bicycle has been registered and a decal attached thereto as provided in this division. 
(Code 1981, § 9-28) 
Sec. 10-137. - Application and issuance. 
(a)  Applications for registration to operate a bicycle shall be made to the police department upon a form to be approved by the town manager and such application forms shall be secured at police headquarters or other locations designated by the chief of police. 
(b)  Upon presentation of such application in proper form, along with payment of the registration fee, the police department shall provide at the expense of the town a certificate of registration and a decal. 
(Code 1981, § 9-29) 
Sec. 10-138. - Term; display of decal generally. 
    The registration shall be for the life of the bicycle and the decal shall remain displayed on the bicycle for which it was issued during the period such bicycle is operated within the town. 
(Code 1981, § 9-30) 
Sec. 10-139. - Records. 
    A record shall be kept in the police department, which record shall show the name, address and age of the owner of each registered bicycle, the date of registration and sufficient information to identify such bicycle. 
(Code 1981, § 9-31) 
Sec. 10-140. - Reports of sale, etc.; transfers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or transfer ownership of any bicycle without reporting the sale or transfer to the police department within forty-eight (48) hours. The purchaser or transferee of any such bicycle shall apply for a transfer of registration thereof within five (5) days from the time the bicycle is acquired. 
(Code 1981, § 9-32) 
Sec. 10-141. - Fees. 
    The registration fee to be paid for each bicycle registered shall be fixed from time to time by the town council. Once a bicycle has been registered in a given name, the registration thereof may be transferred from one (1) owner to another without payment of an additional fee. 
(Code 1981, § 9-33) 
Sec. 10-142. - Stamping number on frame; destroying, etc., stamped number. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or maliciously to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the number upon the frame of any bicycle registered pursuant to this division. Nothing in this division shall be construed to prohibit the police department from stamping a number on the frame of a bicycle on which no serial number can be found or on which such number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. 
(Code 1981, § 9-34) 
Chapter 11 - OFFENSES-MISCELLANEOUS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Crimes and offenses generally, Code of Virginia, Title 18.2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Advertising; posting notices, etc., on poles, trees, buildings or fences. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to put in any manner any notices or advertising matter on any telegraph, electric light or telephone pole or upon any tree or upon any building or fence in the town, without the consent of the owner of the pole, building, fence or tree in question. If any person shall employ a minor to post notices and advertising matter, he shall be responsible for the acts of such minor and shall be liable to the penalty provided for the violation of the foregoing provisions of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 10-1) 
State Law reference- Employment of persons under fourteen years of age in streets or public places, Code of Virginia, § 40.1-83. 
Sec. 11-2. - Assault and battery. 
    Any person who shall commit a simple assault or assault and battery shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 10-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-57. 
Sec. 11-3. - Attempts. 
    Every person who attempts to commit an offense which is a misdemeanor shall be punishable by the same punishment prescribed for the offense the commission of which was the object of the attempt. 
(Code 1981, § 10-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-27. 
Sec. 11-4. - Bad checks; fee for passing. 
    If any person shall publish or pass any check or draft for the payment of taxes or other sums due the town, which check or draft is subsequently returned for insufficient funds, or because there is no account, or the account has been closed, a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) will be charged to such person for passing such check or draft. 
(Code 1981, § 10-4; Ord. No. 1991-5, 5-14-91) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-29.4. 
Sec. 11-5. - Begging. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to beg upon the streets of the town or to remain on the streets of the town for the purpose of begging; provided, that this shall not be construed to apply to the holder of a permit issued as provided in section 13-5 of this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 10-5) 
State Law reference- Solicitation of contributions, Code of Virginia, § 57-48 et seq. 
Sec. 11-6. - Burial; where permitted. 
    No person shall bury or cause to be buried the remains of any person in any place within the corporate limits of the town, except in a duly authorized and legally established cemetery. 
(Code 1981, § 10-6) 
State Law reference- Authority of municipal corporations to regulate burials, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-860. 
Sec. 11-7. - Coin operated devices; unlawful operation. 
    Any person who shall operate, cause to be operated, or attempt to operate or cause to be operated any coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine that operates on the coin-in-the-slot principle, whether of like kind or not, designed only to receive lawful coin of the United States of America, in connection with the use or enjoyment of telephone or telegraph service, parking privileges or any other service, or the sale of merchandise or other property, by means of a slug, or any false, counterfeit, mutilated, sweated or foreign coin, or by any means, method, trick or device whatsoever, not authorized by the owner, lessee or licensee of such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine; or who shall obtain or receive telephone or telegraph service, parking privileges, merchandise, or any other service or property for any such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machines, designed only to receive lawful coin of the United States of America, without depositing in or surrendering to such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine, or other machine lawful coin of the United States of America to the amount required therefor by the owner, lessee or licensee of such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 10-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-179. 
Sec. 11-8. - Defacing or removing street signs, fire hydrants or monuments. 
    No person without proper authorization shall deface, remove or displace any street signs, fire hydrants or monuments marking the street lines or town boundaries. 
(Code 1981, § 10-8) 
Charter reference- Town boundaries, § 1-2. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Injuring, etc., any property, monument, etc., Code of Virginia, § 18.2-137; injuring road markers, etc., Code of Virginia, § 33.1-345. 
Sec. 11-9. - Disorderly conduct in public places. 
(a)  A person is guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly creating a risk thereof, he: 
(1)  In any street, highway, public building, or while in or on a public conveyance, or public place engages in conduct having a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, such conduct is directed; provided however, such conduct shall not be deemed to include the utterance or display of any words or to include conduct otherwise made punishable under this Code or state laws; or 
(2)  Willfully, or being intoxicated, whether willfully or not, disrupts any meeting of the council or a division or agency of the town, or of any school, literary society or place of religious worship, if such disruption prevents or interferes with the orderly conduct of such meeting or has a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, such disruption is directed; provided, however, such conduct shall not be deemed to include the utterance or display of any words or to include conduct otherwise punishable under this Code or state laws. 
(b)  The person in charge of any such building, place, conveyance or meeting may eject therefrom any person who violates any provision of this section, with the aid, if necessary, of any persons who may be called upon for such purpose. A person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 10-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-415. 
Sec. 11-10. - Possession of open alcoholic beverages container, drinking, or tendering, etc., of alcohol beverages in public place. 
(a)  Possession of open container of alcoholic beverage. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess an open or opened receptacle containing alcoholic beverage in any park, playground or any public street within the town. 
(b)  Drinking or tendering drink of alcoholic beverages. It shall be unlawful for any person to take a drink of alcoholic beverages, or tender a drink to another of alcoholic beverages, whether accepted or not, in any public place within the town. 
(c)  Exceptions. This section shall not prevent any person from possessing an open or opened receptacle containing alcoholic beverages, drinking alcoholic beverages or offering a drink thereof to another: 
(1)  Where such alcoholic beverages were purchased and possessed, drunk, or offered, in the dining room or other designated room, as defined in Code of Virginia, Section 4-25, of a hotel, restaurant, club, boat, dining car, club car, or buffet car of any train, provided such establishment or the person who operates the same, including a concessionaire, is licensed to sell at retail for consumption in such establishment; or 
(2)  Wine, wine coolers, or similar products that qualify as beverages as defined in Section 4-99 [Code of Virginia] and beer only during the performance of a professional sporting exhibition or event in all seating areas, concourses, walkways, concession areas, as well as other additional locations designated by the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Board in coliseums, stadia, or similar facilities, provided such alcoholic beverages and beer is served in a paper, plastic or similar disposal container and where such establishment or the person who operates the same, including a concessionaire, is licensed to sell at retail for consumption such alcoholic beverages in such establishment. 
(3)  In any area approved by the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Board in any local public park at an event for which a banquet license or mixed beverage special events license has been issued. 
(d)  Penalties. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 10-10; Ord. No. 1992-1, 3-10-92) 
State Law reference- Drinking alcoholic beverages or tendering to another, in public place, penalty, Code of Virginia, 1950, § 4-78, as amended; local ordinances or resolutions regulating alcoholic beverages, Code of Virginia, 1950, § 4-96, as amended. 
Sec. 11-11. - Drunkenness; profane swearing. 
    If any person profanely curses or swears or is drunk in public he shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. In any area in which there is located a court-approved detoxification center a law-enforcement officer may authorize the transportation, by police or otherwise, of public inebriates to such detoxification center in lieu of arrest; however, no person shall be involuntarily detained in such center. 
(Code 1981, § 10-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-388. 
Sec. 11-12. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1995-1, adopted January 10, 1995, repealed § 11-12, which pertained to false alarms and derived from Code 1981, § 10-12. Similar provisions may be found in Article III of this Chapter 11. 
Sec. 11-13. - Gambling. 
    Except as provided in section 18.2-334.2 of the Code of Virginia, any person making, placing or receiving any bet or wager in the form of money or other thing of value, made in exchange for a chance to win a prize, stake or other consideration or thing of value, dependent upon the result of any game, contest or any other event the outcome of which is uncertain or a matter of chance, whether such game, contest or event occurs or is to occur inside or outside the town limits, shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 10-13; Ord. No. 1981-9, 12-1-81) 
State Law reference- Gambling, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-325 et seq.; penalty for illegal gambling, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-326; exceptions to gambling offenses, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-333 et seq. 
Secs. 11-14, 11-15. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1997-02, adopted March 11, 1997, repealed §§ 11-14, 11-15 in their entirety. Formerly, said sections pertained to annual permits and reports for bingo and raffles and derived from Ord. No. 1981-9, adopted December 1, 1981. 
Sec. 11-16. - Indecent exposure. 
    Every person who intentionally makes an obscene display or exposure of his person, or the private parts thereof, in any public place, or in any place where others are present, or procures another to so expose himself, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 10-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-387. 
Sec. 11-17. - Loitering-Definitions. 
(a)  "Loitering" shall mean remaining idle in essentially one (1) location and shall include the concept of spending time idly; to be dilatory; to linger; to stay; to saunter; to delay; to stand around and shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around". 
(b)  "Public place" shall mean any place to which the general public has access and a right to resort to business, entertainment or other lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and public grounds, areas or parks. 
(Code 1981, § 10-15) 
Sec. 11-18. - Same-Police order to disperse; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either alone and/or in consort with others in a public place in such manner so as to: 
(1)  Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians; 
(2)  Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress, therein, thereon and thereto. 
(b)  When any such person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in subsection (a) of this section, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(c)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 10-15.1) 
Sec. 11-19. - Noise. 
(a)  The creation and continuation of any loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in the town is hereby prohibited. No person shall cause, make or contribute to create any loud or disturbing noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual, or such noises as disturb the quiet and peace of any citizen of the town. 
(b)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(c)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, annoying and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Blasting horns. The creation by means of any signal device of any loud or harsh noise, and the sounding of such device for any unnecessary or unreasonable period of time; 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, etc. The playing of any television set, radio, phonograph, musical instrument or any music box, juke box or similar device in such manner or with such volume as to annoy or disturb any person, or the playing of such instrument in such manner as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in any dwelling, hotel or other residence; 
(3)  Pets. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity; 
(4)  Vehicles. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or used or repaired in such manner as to create loud or unnecessary noises, particularly grating, grinding, rattling, riveting or other disturbing noises; 
(5)  Whistles. The blowing of any whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of danger; 
(6)  Exhaust discharge. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust from any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motorboat engine except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom; 
(7)  Devices using compressed air. The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air, unless the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced; 
(8)  Building operations. The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair, of any building in a residential or business district other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in cases of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety, and then only with a permit from the proper town officials; 
(9)  Noises near schools, hospitals, churches, etc. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, library, sanitarium, hospital or court, while the same is in session, or adjacent to any church during the church services, which interferes with the work or worship in any such place or institution; provided, that signs must be displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital, church, library, sanitarium or court; 
(10)  Loading and unloading operations. The creation of loud and excessive noises in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or repairing any vehicle or opening and destroying bales, boxes, crates and containers; 
(11)  Bells or gongs. The sounding of any bell or gong attached to any building or premises which disturbs the quiet or repose of any person in the vicinity thereof; 
(12)  Hawking, peddling or soliciting. Shouting, loud talking, crying or soliciting by peddlers, hawkers, taxicab drivers, solicitors and vendors, which disturbs the quiet and peace of the neighborhood or any person therein; 
(13)  Noise to attract attention. The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance or event, show, sale or the display or advertisement of merchandise by the creation of noise; 
(14)  Loudspeakers or amplifiers. The use of any mechanical loudspeaker or amplifier, except by special permission of the town manager when the public will not be unreasonably disturbed thereby; 
(15)  Business noises at night near residences. The operation of any garage, filling station, auto repair business, taxi business, plant, store, factory or other place of business, between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., in such manner as to create loud and disturbing noises of such frequency or such volume as to annoy or disturb the quiet and comfort of any citizen, and particularly the creating of disturbing noises of such frequency and volume as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in any dwelling, hotel, boardinghouse or other type of residence. 
(Code 1981, § 10-16; Ord. No. 1992-25, 10-13-92) 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl, Ch. 3; buildings, Ch. 4; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 10; solicitors, Ch. 13; taxicabs, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference- Power of town to regulate noise from motorcycle mufflers, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-29.12; power of town to regulate or prohibit the use of explosive devices to repel birds, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-29-13; loudspeakers prohibited near polling places, Code of Virginia, § 24.1-96.1. 
Sec. 11-20. - Nuisances, etc.; abatement, etc. 
(a)  Whenever it shall come to the attention of the town manager that a nuisance is being created or maintained within the town or that an unsanitary, unsafe or unhealthful condition exists in the town or that the nuisance or condition in question has been existing for some period of time, the town manager shall cause an immediate inspection of the premises in question to be made and, if a nuisance or unsanitary, unsafe or unhealthful condition is found, he shall cause to be served upon the occupant of the premises or if the premises be not occupied, then upon the owner thereof or his agent, a notice to abate such nuisance or to correct such unsanitary, unsafe or unhealthful condition within a specified time. If such notice is not complied with in the specified time, the recipient thereof shall be summoned to appear before the general district court and show cause why such notice should not be complied with. In the case of a known nonresident, having no agent in the town, such notice shall be mailed to the last known address of the owner or his agent, and fifteen (15) days allowed for a reply. 
(b)  If the nuisance or condition complained of as provided in the first paragraph of this section is such that immediate action is necessary for the protection of the public health and welfare, the town manager shall cause the same to be abated or corrected at once, without notice, and all costs incident thereto shall be assessed against the owner of the premises and collected in the same manner in which taxes or other assessments are collectible by law. 
(Code 1981, § 10-17) 
State Law reference- Power of town to prevent injury or annoyance from anything dangerous, offensive or unhealthy and to cause any nuisance to be abated, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-14(5); nuisances generally, Code of Virginia, Title 48. 
Sec. 11-21. - Odors and fumes; collection and discharge into street, etc., by mechanical means. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make use of mechanical apparatus for the purpose of collecting kitchen and cooking odors, fumes or other offensive odors and to discharge such fumes or odors from the building in question into the streets of the town or upon the property of such person in such manner as to be offensive to the citizens of the town. 
(Code 1981, § 10-18) 
State Law reference- Power of town to prevent injury or annoyance from anything dangerous, offensive or unhealthy and to cause any nuisance to be abated, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-14(5). 
Sec. 11-22. - Poolrooms and bowling alleys; when closing required. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or manager of any poolroom, billiard, bowling alley or tenpin alley to keep open, or to allow, cause or permit to be kept open, the establishment for which he is responsible, between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., except on Sundays, when such establishment shall remain closed until 12:00 noon. 
(Code 1981, § 10-19) 
Sec. 11-23. - Public property-Damaging, destroying, etc. 
    Any person who shall willfully damage or destroy any real or personal property owned, leased or used by the town shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 10-21) 
State Law reference- Injuries to public buildings, etc., Code of Virginia, § 18.2-138. 
Sec. 11-24. - Same-Unlawful use. 
    The town manager shall have the power to promulgate such reasonable rules and regulations, not in conflict with the provisions of this Code, or other ordinances of the town, or the Commonwealth of Virginia for the use of any of the parks, or any other public places or public property or any public easement of any description owned or occupied by the town as shall be necessary for the safe and proper use of the public property, including but not limited to, establishing the hours during which any park or property operated by the town shall be open to the public. Such rules and regulations shall be subject to the approval of the town council. The rules and regulations, including such hours during which the park or property is open to the public, shall be posted prominently at the entrance to the park or public property. 
(a)  Other than employees or agents of the town engaged in the conduct of official business, participants or spectators in any town-sponsored activity or event, or person with a valid permit to conduct an event or activity beyond the posted hours, it shall be unlawful for any person to be present within the park or property at such times not within the posted hours during which the park or public property is open to the public, the violation of which shall constitute trespass, a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Other than what is set out herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any other of such rules and regulations so established, promulgated, approved and posted, the violation of which shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to undertake to occupy or use any of the streets, avenues, parks, bridges or any other public places or public property or any public easement of any description of the town, in a manner not permitted to the general public, without having first legally obtained the consent thereto of the council, the violation of which shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. Such occupancy shall be deemed a nuisance and the court trying the case shall have the power to cause the nuisance to be abated and to commit the offenders engaged in such offenses to jail until such order of the court shall be obeyed. 
(Code 1981, § 10-22; Ord. No. 1990-9, 11-13-90) 
State Law reference- Persons occupying or using streets, etc., contrary to law, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-316. 
Sec. 11-25. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1997-02, adopted March 11, 1997, repealed § 11-25 in its entirety. Formerly, § 11-25 pertained to railroad cars obstructing streets or roads and vehicles standing on railroad tracks, and derived from § 10-23 of the 1981 Code. 
Sec. 11-26. - Resisting or obstructing officers, employees, etc. 
    No person shall resist, abuse, obstruct or hinder any officer or employee of the town in the discharge of his duty, or any contractor or other person in the execution of any work for the town. 
(Code 1981, § 10-24) 
State Law reference- Obstructing justice by threats or force, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-460. 
Sec. 11-27. - Telephones, etc.-Use of profane, threatening or indecent language. 
    If any person shall use obscene, vulgar, profane, lewd, lascivious, or indecent language, or make any suggestion or proposal of an obscene nature, or threaten any illegal or immoral act with the intent to coerce, intimidate, or harass any person, over any telephone or citizens band radio in the town, he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 10-25) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-427 
Sec. 11-28. - Same-Giving certain false information to another. 
    If any person maliciously advises or informs another over any telephone in the town of the death of, accident to, injury to, illness of, or disappearance of some third party, knowing the same to be false, he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 10-26) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-428. 
Sec. 11-29. - Same-Causing to ring with intent to annoy. 
    Any person who, without intent to converse but with intent to annoy any other person, causes any telephone not his own to ring, and any person who permits or condones the use of any telephone under this control for such purpose shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 10-27) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-429. 
Sec. 11-30. - Same-Venue. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of sections 11-27-11-29 may be prosecuted in this county when he called from this county or when the call was received in this county. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-430. 
Sec. 11-31. - Trespass-After having been forbidden to do so; penalties. 
(a)  If any person shall, without authority of law, go upon or remain upon the lands, buildings or premises of another, or any part, portion or area thereof, after having been forbidden to do so, either orally or in writing, by the owner, lessee, custodian or other person lawfully in charge thereof, or after having been forbidden to do so by a sign or signs posted on such lands, buildings, premises or part, portion or area thereof, at a place of places where it or they may be reasonably seen, or if any person, whether he is the owner, tenant or otherwise entitled to the use of such land, building or premises, goes upon, or remains upon such land, building or premises after having been prohibited from doing so by a court of competent jurisdiction by an order issued pursuant to Code of Virginia sections 16.1-253, 16.1-253.1, 16.1-278.2 through 16.1-278.6, 16.1-278.8, 16.1-278.14, 16.1-278.15, 16.1-279.1, 19.2-152.8, 19.2-152.9, 19.2-152.10 or an ex parts order issued pursuant to Code of Virginia section 20-103, and after having been served with such order, he shall be guilty of a class I misdemeanor. This section shall not be construed to affect in any way the provisions of Code of Virginia sections 18.2-132 through 18.2-136. 
(b)  Any owner of real property may, in writing on a form prescribed by the chief of police, designate the police department as a "person lawfully in charge thereof," as those terms are used in subsection (a) of this section, for the purpose of forbidding another to go or remain upon the lands, buildings or premises of such owner. Such designation shall include a description of the land(s), building(s) or premises to which it applies; shall reference the period of time during which it is in effect; and shall be kept on file in the office of the chief of police or in such other location within the police department as the chief of police deems appropriate. 
(Code 1981, § 10-28; Ord. No. 2002-01, 1-8-2002) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-119. 
Sec. 11-32. - Same-Instigating, etc., by others; preventing service to persons not forbidden to trespass. 
    If any person shall solicit, urge, encourage, exhort, instigate or procure another or others to go upon or remain upon the lands, buildings, or premises of another, or any part, portion or area thereof, knowing such other person or persons to have been forbidden, either orally or in writing, to do so by the owner, lessee, custodian or other person lawfully in charge thereof, or knowing such other person or persons to have been forbidden to do so by a sign or signs posted on such lands, buildings, premises or part, portion or area thereof at a place or places where it or they may reasonably be seen; or if any person shall, on such lands, buildings, premises or part, portion or area thereof prevent or seek to prevent the owner, lessee, custodian, person in charge or any of his employees from rendering service to any person or persons not so forbidden, he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 10-29) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-120. 
Sec. 11-33. - Same-At night upon church or school property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of some person authorized to give such consent, to go or enter upon, in the nighttime, the premises or property of any church or upon any school property for any purpose other than to attend a meeting or service held or conducted in such church or school property. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 10-33) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-128. 
Sec. 11-34. - Same-Entering property of another for purpose of damaging it, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the land, dwelling, outhouse or any other building of another for the purpose of damaging such property or any of the contents thereof or in any manner to interfere with the rights of the owner, user or the occupant thereof to use such property free from interference. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 10-31) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-121. 
Sec. 11-35. - Same-Peeping or spying into structure occupied as dwelling. 
    If any person shall enter upon the property of another, in the nighttime, and secretly or furtively peep through or attempt to so peep into or through, or spy through, a window, door or other aperture of any building, structure, or other enclosure of any nature occupied or intended for occupancy as a dwelling, whether or not such building, structure or enclosure be permanently situated or transportable and whether or not such occupancy be permanent or temporary, such person shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 10-32) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-130. 
Secs. 11-36-11-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WEAPONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of municipal corporations to regulate or prohibit the discharge of firearms, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-865; crimes relating to weapons, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-279 et seq.; control of firearms generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-29.15. 

Sec. 11-51. - Discharging air rifles, gravel shooters, bows, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge shots, bullets or similar pellets from any air gun, air rifle or pellet gun or to discharge shot, gravel or similar substance from a gravel shooter, slingshot or similar implement or to discharge arrows, bolts, nails or bullets from a bow or crossbow within one hundred (100) yards of any residence or public street. Each act done in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1981, § 10-34) 
Sec. 11-52. - Discharging firearms. 
    If any person willfully discharges or causes to be discharged any firearm in any street in the town, or in any place of public business or place of public gathering, he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor; provided that this section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer in the performance of his official duties nor to any other person whose willful act is otherwise justifiable or excusable at law in the protection of his life or property, or is otherwise specifically authorized by law. 
(Code 1981, § 10-35) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-280. 
Secs. 11-53, 11-54. - Reserved. 
Sec. 11-55. - Sale, possession of blackjacks, etc. 
    If any person sells or barters, or exhibits for sale or for barter, or gives or furnishes, or causes to be sold, bartered, given or furnished, or has in his possession, or under his control, with the intent of selling, bartering, giving or furnishing, any blackjack, brass or metal knucks, any disc of whatever configuration having at least two (2) points or pointed blades which is designed to be thrown or propelled and which may be known as a throwing star or oriental dart, switchblade knife or like weapons, such person shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. The having in one's possession of any such weapon shall be prima facie evidence, except in the case of a conservator of the peace, of his intent to sell, barter, give or furnish the same. 
(Code 1981, § 10-38) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-311. 
Sec. 11-56. - Furnishing certain weapons to minors. 
    If any person sell, barter, give or furnish, or cause to be sold, bartered, given or furnished to any minor a pistol, dirk, switchblade knife or bowie knife, having good cause to believe him to be a minor, such person shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 1039) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-309. 
Sec. 11-57. - Selling or giving toy firearms. 
(a)  No person shall sell, barter, exchange, furnish, or dispose of by purchase, gift or in any other manner any toy gun, pistol, rifle or other toy firearm, if the same shall, by means of powder or other explosive, discharge blank or ball charges. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. Each sale of any of the articles hereinbefore specified to any person shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as preventing the sale of what are commonly known as cap pistols. 
(Code 1981, § 10-40) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-284. 
ARTICLE III. - ALARM SYSTEMS 
DIVISION 1. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 11-58. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given: 
    Alarm company means any corporation, partnership, business or individual engaged in the for-profit business of the installing, maintenance, alteration, or servicing of alarm systems or which responds to such alarm systems. Such term, however, shall not include alarm systems maintained by governmental agencies or departments, nor shall it include a business which merely sells from a fixed location or manufactures alarm systems unless such business services, installs, monitors or responds to alarm systems at the protected premises. 
    Alarm response means any response to a premise by any law enforcement agency, including but not limited to the Town of Warrenton Police Department, or any fire or rescue company as a result of an alarm signal. Should the law enforcement agency or fire or rescue company discover evidence that the alarm signal was the result of a criminal offense or occurrence for which the alarm system was designed to detect, that event shall not be considered an alarm response for the purposes of this chapter. 
    Alarm signal means the activation of an alarm system resulting in a request for an alarm response regardless of cause. 
    Alarm system means any assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which law enforcement or fire or rescue personnel are expected to respond. 
    Alarm user means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind who or which purchases, leases, contracts for, or otherwise obtains an alarm system, or the servicing, maintenance or monitoring of an alarm system from an alarm company. 
    Automatic dialing device means a device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to a predetermined telephone number and which automatically transmits by recorded voice message or signal the existence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which law enforcement personnel or fire or rescue personnel are expected to respond. 
    Communications coordinator shall mean the communications coordinator for the Warrenton-Fauquier Joint Dispatch Center. 
    Town manager shall mean the town manager of the Town of Warrenton or his designee. 
    Person shall mean any individual, group of persons, firm, partnership, association of any kind, company or corporation. 
    Police department means the Town of Warrenton Police Department. 
    Protected premise shall mean the premises upon which an alarm has been placed for the purpose of detecting a hazard. 
    Fire or rescue company means any fire or rescue company duly recognized in accordance with the terms of the Code for the Town of Warrenton. 
(Ord. No. 1995-1, 1-10-95) 
DIVISION 2. - FIRE AND SECURITY ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 11-59. - Intentional false alarms prohibited. 
    Any person who knowingly and willfully activates either a security alarm to summon law enforcement, fire or rescue personnel, or an automatic dialing device which transmits a prerecorded message or code signal directly to a "911" telephone number, where there is no actual or threatened emergency or criminal activity, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section, which violation shall be punishable by confinement in jail for not more than twelve (12) months and a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), either or both. 
(Ord. No. 1995-4, 4-11-95) 
Sec. 11-60. - Automatic dialing device restrictions. 
    Any alarm company or person who installs, operates or maintains an automatic dialing device which is programmed to transmit a prerecorded message or code signal directly to a "911" telephone number shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section, which violation shall be punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Ord. No. 1995-4, 4-11-95) 
Sec. 11-61. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1995-4, adopted April 11, 1995, repealed § 11-61, which pertained to automatic dialing service restrictions and derived from Ord. No. 1995-1, adopted January 10, 1995. 
Sec. 11-62. - Required equipment. 
(a)  An alarm system operated within the town shall be equipped in such a manner so as to prevent false alarms due to interruptions in electrical power. 
(b)  An alarm system within the town which is equipped with a horn, bell, siren, or other noise device audible beyond the confines of the premise shall be equipped and adjusted in such a manner that it will not sound for longer than fifteen (15) minutes before resetting and silencing itself. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to an alarm system installed prior to January 1, 1995; provided, however, that upon a violation of section 3-6, the alarm system must be brought into compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 1995-4, 4-11-95) 
Sec. 11-63. - Notification of alarm system installation; emergency information. 
(a)  Within thirty (30) days of installing an alarm system, the alarm user shall, on a form provided by the communications coordinator, furnish the communications coordinator with emergency information concerning the protected premise, the alarm user, and the alarm company. 
(b)  If, at any time, there is a change in the status of the protected premise which renders any part of the emergency information form inaccurate, the alarm user shall file an amended emergency information form within thirty (30) days of the change. 
(c)  Alarm users with alarm systems installed prior to January 1, 1995 shall comply with this section prior to April 2, 1995. 
(d)  Any alarm response which results from an alarm signal initiated by an alarm system which is not in compliance with this section shall be deemed to be an excessive alarm response and a violation of section 11-64 of this chapter. 
(e)  Prior to January 1, 1995 the communications coordinator shall make necessary forms for the reporting of emergency information available to alarm companies and the general public. 
(Ord. No. 1995-4, 4-11-95) 
Sec. 11-64. - Excessive alarm responses prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any alarm user in the town to allow an excessive number of false or without just cause alarm responses to occur at a protected premise for which they are responsible. 
(b)  False or without just cause alarm responses to a protected premise in excess of five (5) in any consecutive twelve-month period or three (3) in any consecutive four-month period are deemed to be an excessive number and shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(c)  Town of Warrenton Police Officers assigned to incidents which are determined to be false or without just cause alarm responses shall, whenever possible, leave written notice for the alarm user which provides the following information: 
Date and time of false or without just cause alarm response. 
Officer's name and business telephone number. 
Brief synopsis of the alarm ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1995-4, 4-11-95) 
Sec. 11-65. - Inspection of alarm systems. 
    An alarm user in violation of section 11-64 shall cause their alarm system to be inspected by an alarm company licensed to conduct business in the Town of Warrenton. The inspection shall entail a complete examination of the alarm system including, but not limited to, satisfactory design and installation of the equipment, proper functioning of the equipment and user education in the operation of the equipment. The alarm company shall record the details of the inspection on a form provided by the communications coordinator for this purpose. Notification of the requirements of this section shall be made in writing, within thirty (30) days of the initial notification by the communications coordinator. The completed inspection report shall be returned to the town police by the alarm company within thirty (30) days of the initial notification by the town police. A copy of the completed inspection report shall be provided to the alarm user and communications coordinator by the alarm company upon completion of the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1995-4, 4-11-95) 
Sec. 11-66. - Penalties for noncompliance with inspection. 
    If the communications coordinator does not receive the completed inspection report within thirty (30) days of notification as provided in section 11-68, an administrative service fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be assessed against the alarm user. 
(Ord. No. 1995-4, 4-11-95) 
Sec. 11-67. - Penalties for subsequent violations. 
(a)  If within any one calendar year of the notification, as provided in section 11-65, there is cause for more than two (2) alarm responses to a protected premise, administrative service fees, in accordance with the following fee schedule (section 11-67[b]), shall be assessed against the user for all subsequent alarm responses. 
(b)  Administrative Service Fee Schedule: 
(1)  Third response ..... $ 20.00 
(2)  Fourth response ..... 50.00 
(3)  Fifth response ..... 75.00 
(4)  Sixth response ..... 100.00 
(5)  Seventh response ..... 125.00 
(6)  Responses in excess of seven, each ..... 150.00 
(c)  If no responses to a protected premise are recorded within any twelve (12) month period following notification, action will be initiated to remove the alarm user from the violator file, provided all outstanding administrative fees have been paid. 
(d)  To ensure that the assessed amounts are representative of the costs incurred by the town to provide alarm responses and to administer this chapter, the amounts contained in the administrative service fee schedule shall be evaluated and amended, as necessary, on an annual basis. 
(Ord. No. 1995-4, 4-11-95) 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL HEARING 

Sec. 11-68. - Administrative appeal hearing. 
(a)  In the event an inspection order is issued to an alarm user or service fees are assessed, the alarm user may request an appeal hearing to determine whether there is just cause for such action. 
(b)  The hearing shall be held before a hearing officer who shall have been appointed by the town manager. The hearing shall be held within seventy-two (72) hours after the request is filed with the town police office unless an extension has been agreed upon by both the alarm user and the town police office. 
(c)  The alarm user shall have the right to appear and present witnesses and other evidence, but there shall be no formal rules of procedure required for the conduct of the hearing and the hearing officer shall not have the power to compel the attendance of witnesses or the production of other evidence. 
(d)  The hearing officer shall proceed forthwith to hear the matter and to determine by a preponderance of the evidence whether there is probable cause to believe that the provisions of this division have been applied legally, fairly and impartially. The hearing officer shall have authority, if he/she determines that there is insufficient evidence to fully support imposition of an inspection requirement or administrative service fees, to order that any inspection requirements or fees imposed under this division be waived or rescinded in whole or in part. 
(Ord. No. 1995-4, 4-11-95) 
Sec. 11-69. - Grounds for rescinding, waiving or reducing service fees. 
(a)  Administrative hearing officers shall consider the following factors in reaching a determination as to the modification of a service fee or waiving an inspection order. 
(1)  Evidence of attempts by the alarm user to eliminate the cause of false alarms, such as: 
Installation of new equipment. 
Replacement of defective equipment. 
Inspection and repair of the system by an alarm technician. 
Specific formal training of alarm users. 
(b)  Evidence that the false alarm was caused by electrical storm, hurricane, tornado, blizzard, or other acts of God. 
(c)  Evidence that the false alarm was caused by the disruption of telephone circuits beyond the control of the user or the user's alarm company and the cause of such disruption has been corrected. 
(d)  Written evidence that the alarm system which caused the alarm responses has been disconnected and/or removed from the protected premises. 
    Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require that all appeals which meet any or all of these circumstances will be granted. These are intended as guidelines for the hearing officer and shall not prevent the hearing officer from granting appeals for additional reasons. 
(Ord. No. 1995-4, 4-11-95) 
DIVISION 4. - FIRE AND SECURITY ALARM SYSTEMS COMMISSION 

Sec. 11-70. - Fire and security alarm systems commission. 
(a)  A fire and security alarm systems commission shall be appointed by the town council, as an advisory commission, under authority of Section 15.1-33.2 of the Code of Virginia and shall consist of the following membership of the Joint Communications Center Board of Directors: 
-The chief of police of the Town of Warrenton. 
-The sheriff of Fauquier County. 
-Fire and Rescue Association President. 
-One (1) member of the technical advisory committee. 
(b)  The fire and security alarm systems commission shall periodically review the implementation and effectiveness of the alarm ordinance and make recommendations, as appropriate, to the town council. 
(c)  The fire and security alarm systems commission shall periodically review the decisions of administrative hearing officers for the purpose of monitoring effectiveness of the administrative hearing process. 
(d)  The fire and security alarm systems commission shall develop recommendations for the town council concerning the need for additional local regulation of alarm company operators, as permitted by the Code of Virginia, Section 15.1-28.2, and/or the adoption of statewide standards by the department of housing and community development or other regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 1995-4, 4-11-95) 
ARTICLE IV. - OUTDOOR STORAGE IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES 

Sec. 11-71. - Outdoor storage in residential zones. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of residential outdoor storage regulations is to ensure that adequate opportunity is allowed for the outdoor storage of vehicles and materials in residential zones (R-6, R-10, R-15 and RT Districts) while promoting safe and attractive residential areas and not impacting the character and uses intended for residential zones in Warrenton. The regulation of outdoor storage in residential areas is intended to insure a safe and healthy area free from hazards and the accumulation of materials that could harbor vermin or their breeding. 
(b)  Prohibited. No outdoor storage, as defined in subsection A of this section, shall be allowed on any parcel within a residential zone, except as otherwise authorized by this section. 
A.  Outdoor storage defined. For the purposes of this section, "outdoor storage" means the physical presence of any personal property not fully enclosed within a structure for more than one (1) week. "Outdoor storage" means and includes, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Inoperable and/or unlicensed motor vehicles as more fully defined in section 1-84 of the Warrenton Town Code, and farm, commercial and industrial equipment of all types; 
2.  Inoperable or unlicensed recreation vehicles; 
3.  Junk, imported waste and discarded or salvaged materials; 
4.  Dismantled vehicles and vehicle parts, including but not limited to commercial and industrial farm machinery or parts thereof, such as tires and batteries; 
5.  Scrap metal, including but not limited to salvaged structural steel; 
6.  Salvaged lumber and building materials; 
7.  Salvaged commercial or industrial trade fixtures; 
8.  Construction materials and supplies or any project for which no building permit has been issued or is currently in effect; 
9.  Household furniture or appliances sold and distributed for indoor use; 
10.  Accumulations of bottles, cans and paper and other refuse; 
11.  Boxes, cable spools, pallets and packing crates; and 
12.  All other miscellaneous personal property not excluded by subsection C of this section. 
B.  Exclusions. Outdoor storage as defined in subsection (b)A of this section shall not include the following: 
1.  The parking of operable and licensed motor vehicles, including passenger vehicles, commercial vehicles and recreational vehicles; 
2.  The storage of residential building materials and supplies which are needed to construct a project on the parcel for which a building permit has been issued and is in effect; and/or 
3.  The storage of materials or objects that are clearly incidental and customary to the residential functions or a residential property, including but not limited to the storage of firewood, barbeque grills, and outdoor furniture that is manufactured and sold for outdoor use. 
C.  Regulations regarding outdoor storage. 
1.  The maximum area on any parcel in residential zones shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area or five (5) percent of the lot area, whichever is less. 
2.  Such storage areas shall not be located in the front of the house (between the structure and the street) or in the required side or rear yard setback. 
3.  Outdoor storage areas shall not prevent emergency access to the residence or any outbuilding. 
D.  Violations, notice and penalty. Written notice shall first be sent to the person owning the property upon which a violation of this section has occurred. The owner of the property shall then either comply with the written notice within ten (10) days or respond denying the violation. Once notice has been sent via United States Mail First Class to the address for the property upon which there is a violation, and the violation has not been rectified or a response denying the violation has been returned the matter may then be taken to the Fauquier County District Court as a Class 4 misdemeanor as the penalty for said violation. Each day said violation occurs shall constitute a new violation. 
(Ord. No. 2006-07, 7-11-2006) 
ARTICLE V. - DEFACEMENT OF PROPERTY; GRAFFITI 

Sec. 11-72. - Defacement of property prohibited; criminal penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti upon or to willfully and maliciously deface or damage in any other manner any public buildings, facilities or other property, or any private buildings, facilities or other property. In any case where the defacement is (i) more than twenty (20) feet off the ground, (ii) on a highway overpass, or (iii) committed for the benefit of, at the direction of, or in association with any criminal street gang, as that term is defined by Code of Virginia, § 18.2-46.1, there shall be a mandatory minimum fine of $500.00. Any fine imposed pursuant to conviction of a minor for violations of this section shall be assessed against the minor and such minor's parents or legal guardian. 
(b)  Upon a finding of guilt in a case tried before the court without a jury where the violation constitutes a first offense that results in property damage or loss, the court, without entering a judgment of guilt, upon motion of defendant, may defer further proceedings and place defendant on probation pending completion of a plan of community service work. If the defendant fails or refuses to complete the community service as ordered by the court, the court may make final disposition of the case and proceed as otherwise provided. If the community service work is completed as the court prescribes, the court may discharge the defendant and dismiss the proceedings. Such discharge and dismissal procedure under this section shall be without adjudication of guilt and operates as a conviction only for the purposes of applying this article in subsequent proceedings. 
(c)  Community service work prescribed by the court under subsection (b) shall include, to the extent feasible, the repair, restoration, or replacement of any damage or defacement to property within the town, and may include clean-up, beautification, landscaping or other appropriate community service within the town. 
(d)  Community service work prescribed by the court under subsection (b) shall be performed under the supervision of the town manager or his/her designee, who shall report on such work to the court imposing the community service work requirement at such times and in such manner as the court may direct. 
(e)  At or before the time of sentencing under this section, the court shall receive and consider any plan for making restitution or performing community service submitted by the defendant, as well as the recommendations of the town manager or the manager's designee concerning the plan. 
(f)  As provided in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-908, the court may order any person convicted of unlawfully defacing property to pay full or partial restitution to the town for costs incurred by the town in removing or repairing the defacement. No person convicted of a violation of this article shall be placed on probation or have his/her sentence suspended unless such person shall make at least partial restitution for such property damage or is compelled to perform community services, or both, as is more particularly set forth in Code of Virginia, § 19.2-305.1. The court's order of restitution shall be docketed as provided in Code of Virginia, § 8.01-446 when so ordered by the court upon written request of the town and may be enforced by the town in the same manner as a judgment in a civil action. 
(g)  Upon a final conviction of any charge under this article V herein the penalty shall be a Class 3 misdemeanor for the first conviction, and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any second or subsequent final conviction. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , 5-9-17) 
Sec. 11-73. - Parental liability for cost of repair of damage to public or private property. 
(a)  In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 8.01-44, the town may institute an action and recover from the parents or either of them of any minor living with such parents or either of them for damages suffered by reason of the willful or malicious destruction of, or damage to, public property by such minor. No more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) may be recovered from such parents or either of them as a result of any incident or occurrence on which such action is based. 
(b)  The owner of any property in the town may institute an action and recover from the parents, or either of them, of any minor living with such parents, or either of them, for damages suffered by reason of the willful or malicious destruction of, or damage to, such property by such minor. No more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) may be recovered from such parents, or either of them, as a result of any incident or occurrence on which such action is based. Any recovery from the parent or parents of such minor shall not preclude full recovery from such minor except to the amount of the recovery from such parent or parents. The provisions of this section shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other law imposing upon a parent liability for the acts of his minor child. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , 5-9-17) 
Sec. 11-74. - Definition of "graffiti." 
    Graffiti shall mean the unauthorized application by any means of any writing, painting, drawing, etching, scratching or marking of an inscription, word, mark, figure or design of any type on any public or private building or other real or personal property owned, operated or maintained by a governmental entity or agency or instrumentality thereof or by any private person. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , 5-9-17) 
Sec. 11-75. - Graffiti declared a public nuisance. 
    The existence of graffiti within the town limits in violation of this article is expressly declared a public nuisance, and is subject to the removal and abatement procedures specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , 5-9-17) 
Sec. 11-76. - Removal of graffiti. 
(a)  The town manager or his/her designated representative is authorized to undertake or contract for the removal or repair of the defacement of any public building, wall, fence or other structure, by the application of graffiti. Further the town manager or his/her designated representative may also undertake or contract for the removal or repair of the defacement by graffiti of any private building, wall, fence or other structure where such defacement is visible from any public right-of-way, but only in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Prior to such removal of graffiti from private property, the town manager or his/her designated representative shall send to the property owner, by regular mail sent to the last address listed for the owner in town property assessment records, a notice stating: the street address and legal description of the property; that the property has been determined by the town to constitute a graffiti public nuisance; that the owner must take corrective action to abate the public nuisance created by such graffiti within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice; and that if the graffiti is not removed within the fifteen-day period, the town will begin removal procedures. In the case of unimproved property, the notice shall also state that the cost of such corrective action shall be charged to the property owner. The notice shall further advise the owner of the right to challenge the town's determination and proposed action by requesting a meeting with a town official identified in the notice within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice. The town shall initiate no corrective actions while a request for such a meeting or the outcome of such a meeting is pending. The determination of the designated town official following the requested meeting shall be final. 
(2)  If no corrective action is taken by the property owner within the fifteen-day period provided above and there is no request to challenge the town's determination within that period, the town manager or his/her designee shall send to the property owner by regular mail an additional notice that shall conform to the requirements of the first notice as set forth in subsection (a)(1) above and shall also state the date on which the town will commence corrective action to remove the graffiti on the property, which date shall be no earlier than fifteen (15) days from the date of mailing the second notice. Such additional notice shall also reasonably describe the corrective action contemplated to be taken by the town. Where the property owner fails to abate the public nuisance within fifteen (15) days after issuance of the second notice, the town manager or his/her designated representative is authorized to proceed with removal efforts forthwith. 
(3)  Before entering upon private property for the purpose of graffiti removal, the town shall attempt to obtain the consent of the property owner, occupant or other responsible party. 
(b)  Where a structure defaced by graffiti is owned by a public entity other than the town, the removal of the graffiti by the town is conditioned upon securing the consent of an authorized representative of the public entity having jurisdiction over the structure. 
(c)  If the town manager or his/her designee determines that any graffiti is an immediate danger to public health, safety or welfare and is unable to provide notice by personal service after at least two (2) attempts to do so, then forty-eight (48) hours after the later of (1) mailing notice to the property owner or other responsible party and (2) posting notice in a conspicuous place on the property, the town may remove or cause the graffiti to be removed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , 5-9-17) 
Sec. 11-77. - Assessment of costs against property for removal of graffiti. 
(a)  If the town undertakes corrective action to remove graffiti from private property after complying with the notice provisions of subsection 11-76(a)(1), the actual cost or expenses for such removal and related repairs shall be chargeable to and paid by the property owner, and may be collected as a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates in the manner in which town taxes and levies are collected. 
(b)  Every charge authorized by this section with which the owner of any such property has been assessed and which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property with the same priority as liens for unpaid local taxes and enforceable in the same manner as such liens. The town manager may waive and release such liens in order to facilitate the sale of the property. Such liens may be waived only as to a purchaser who is unrelated by blood or marriage to the owner and who has no business association with the owner. All such liens shall remain a personal obligation of the owner of the property at the time the liens were imposed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06 , 5-9-17) 
Chapter 12 - POLICE DEPARTMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 10; duty of police to keep sidewalks clear, § 14-2; taxicabs containing radios receiving police calls, § 16-17. 
State Law reference- Police and public order, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-131 et seq.; Line of Duty Act, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-136.1 et seq.; general municipal law enforcement powers, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-137 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Composition. 
    The police department of the town shall consist of a chief of police and such other officers and patrolmen as the council, upon recommendation of the town manager, may deem necessary for the protection of the lives and property of the citizens and the enforcement of state laws, town ordinances and resolutions. 
(Code 1981, § 12-1) 
State Law reference- Organization of police forces, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-131.7. 
Sec. 12-2. - Supervision. 
    The police department shall be under the control of the town manager for the purpose of preserving and enforcing peace and order, for the execution of the laws of the state and this Code and other ordinances of the town and the performance of such other duties as the town manager may prescribe. 
(Code 1981, § 12-2) 
Charter reference- Town manager, Art. VI. 
Sec. 12-3. - Oaths of office. 
    Every member of the police department, before entering upon the discharge of his duties as such, shall take the oath of office prescribed by the state. A certificate of such oath shall be filed with the town manager. 
(Code 1981, § 12-3) 
State Law reference- When and how city and town officers qualify, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-38; form of general oath required of officers, Code of Virginia, § 49-1. 
Sec. 12-4. - Filling vacancies. 
    The town manager may appoint policemen to fill such vacancies as may occur. He shall report such appointments to the town council at its next regular meeting. All appointments under this section shall be made subject to physical examinations and examination as to knowledge of the laws, ordinances and regulations. The examination as to laws, ordinances and regulations shall be approved by the town manager and may be either oral or written. The physical examination shall be made by such local physician as the town manager may designate. 
(Code 1981, § 12-4) 
State Law reference- Law enforcement officer training standards, Code of Virginia, § 9-179 et seq.; minimum qualifications of police officers, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-131.8. 
Sec. 12-5. - Auxiliary police force. 
(a)  An auxiliary police force pursuant to section 15.1-159.2 (B) of the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended, the size of which shall not exceed twelve (12) persons, is hereby established. The members of the auxiliary police force shall have all of the power, authority, and all of the immunities provided full-time law enforcement officers of the town. The town council shall approve, by resolution, such rules and regulations for the uniform, organization, and operation of the auxiliary police force, as it deems necessary. 
(b)  The town manager is authorized to appoint four (4) persons, or such greater number as he deems necessary, not to exceed the limitation stated herein, to the auxiliary police force. The persons appointed to the auxiliary police force shall be of good character and their final appointment be subject to their satisfactory completion of all applicable criteria required of full-time police officers of the town, including a physical examination, other general requirements of the town provided in section 15-4 of this Code, and in the police employment policy of the town. The town manager shall promptly report all appointments to the next regular meeting of the town council. 
(c)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to call into service such appointed members of the auxiliary police as have completed all training requirements established by the department of criminal justice services, to aid and assist the regular police officers in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1981, § 12-5; Ord. No. 1992-13, 8-11-92) 
State Law reference- Establishment of auxiliary police forces in counties, cities and towns, authorized powers, authority and immunities generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-159.2, et seq. 
Sec. 12-6. - General powers and duties. 
(a)  Each member of the police force shall devote his whole time and attention to the business of the police department. Although certain hours are allotted to the respective members for the ordinary performance of duty, each member shall at all times respond to the call of the town manager for services in the prosecution of his duties and be prepared to act immediately, on notice that his services are required by the town manager, chief of police or any citizen. 
(b)  A police officer shall have all powers: 
(1)  Of any conservator of the peace; 
(2)  Of a sheriff, in criminal cases; 
(3)  Which, under the laws of the town, may enable him to discharge the duties of his office. 
(c)  Punctual attendance and conformity to the provisions of this article shall be rigidly enforced. The members of the police department shall strictly comply with all rules and regulations which may be prescribed by the chief of police in addition to the rules and regulations set out in this article. 
(Code 1981, §§ 12-6, 12-7) 
State Law reference- Sheriffs and sergeants, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-74 et seq.; general powers police officers, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-131 et seq., 15.1-138; sergeants of towns, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-796; conservators of the peace and special policemen, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-12 et seq. 
Sec. 12-7. - Records of arrests, etc. 
    The chief of the police department and all members of the police department shall, within a reasonable time after making an arrest, enter upon the police blotter in the chief's office the name of the person arrested or summoned, the place of arrest, the offense charged and whether the offender was confined in jail, admitted to bail or recognized for his appearance at court. Any police officer of the town failing to make such entry in the police blotter of any arrest within a reasonable time after such arrest shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 12-8) 
State Law reference- Arrest, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-71 et seq. 
Sec. 12-8. - Off-duty performance. 
    If a patrolman is appealed to when it is not his time for regular duty, he shall, regardless of the time of day, do all the emergency requires. 
(Code 1981, § 12-9) 
State Law reference- Giving false reports to police officers, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-461. 
Sec. 12-9. - Conduct generally. 
    No member of the police department shall drink any kind of intoxicating liquor or beer while on duty or while in uniform off duty or smoke on the streets or enter any house of ill fame, except in the strict performance of his duty. 
(Code 1981, § 12-10) 
Sec. 12-10. - Conduct toward offenders and prisoners. 
    When it becomes necessary to take a person into custody, the policeman shall do so in an easy and quiet manner as possible, using only sufficient force to secure the prisoner; in no instance shall he strike a prisoner, except in self-defense. He shall see that the prisoner is properly dealt with and cared for until he is taken from his custody according to law and any unnecessary deprivations and abuses of prisoners will be met with reproof and punishment. 
(Code 1981, § 12-11) 
State Law reference- Malicious bodily injury to law enforcement officers, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-51.1; obstructing justice by threats or force, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-460. 
Sec. 12-11. - Political activities. 
    No member of the police department shall solicit or be obligated to make contributions, in money or otherwise, on any pretext, to any person, committee or association for any political purpose whatsoever. Every member of the department shall have the right to entertain political or partisan opinions and his right of elective franchise will be deemed sacred and inviolate, but no member of the police department shall take any part in any convention held for the nomination of candidates for political office or take an active part in elections or in the political advancement of any party, clique or individual. 
(Code 1981, § 12-12) 
Sec. 12-12. - Uniforms. 
    All regular policemen, including the chief, shall wear an official uniform furnished by the town, except as authorized by the chief of police. 
(Code 1981, § 12-13; Ord. No. 1997-02, 3-11-97) 
State Law reference- Unlawful wearing of officer's uniform, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-175. 
Sec. 12-13. - Disposal of unclaimed evidence and other property. 
(a)  The chief of police may dispose of unclaimed evidence and other personal property, hereinafter referred to as "property", acquired as part of the enforcement of the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia and the town in the manner provided herein. Any such property may be sold at public auction or retained for use by the police department if it remains unclaimed after notice to its original owner as required herein. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall be applicable to property which has been acquired by the police department pursuant to its duties, which is not needed in any criminal prosecution, which has not been claimed by its rightful owner and which the state treasurer has indicated will be declined if remitted under the Uniform Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act of the Virginia Code. Whenever property coming under this section has no inherent value, is inherently dangerous or may not lawfully be sold or used, the chief of police shall provide for it to be destroyed or discarded in the county landfill or some other safe and appropriate location. 
(c)  The chief of police, or his duly authorized agent, shall make reasonable attempts to notify the rightful owner that their property is no longer necessary for the purposes which it was originally held. Written notice shall be sent to the owner, certified mail, return receipt requested, at their last [known] address, which shall reasonably identify their property and that such property is to be the subject of an auction and the date, place and time of such auction. The notice must inform the owner where the property is to be sold or displayed, if retained for use, must inform them of their right to the property if they claim the same prior to an auction and must notify them that no further notice will be given prior to the disposition of the proceeds or the property. The notice must be mailed, postage prepaid, no later than thirty (30) days prior to the scheduled auction. In addition, the chief of police shall also obtain from the attorney for the commonwealth in writing a statement advising that such property is not needed in any criminal prosecution. 
(d)  Upon compliance with the provisions of subsection (c), the chief of police shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town, once a week for two (2) successive weeks, notice that there will be a public auction and sale of unclaimed property. The notice shall generally describe the property for sale and for retention, the date, time and place of the auction and that the property will be available for public viewing at such time. 
(e)  The auction shall be conducted in any reasonable manner determined by the chief of police as appropriate for the type of unclaimed property to be sold. The proceeds of the auction shall be applied first to the cost of advertisement and notice of sale, then to removal and storage, and then to the cost of investigation of ownership and liens against the property and then to any liens determined to be valid against such property. 
(f)  Any unclaimed property for which no bid is received or which has been designated to be retained for use by the police department shall become property of the town sixty (60) days after the auction. Such property shall become property of the town only if, in the opinion of the chief of police that there is a legitimate use of the property by the police department and that retention of the property is a more economical alternative than purchase of similar or equivalent property. Property which is not retained and for which no bid was made at the auction, may be disposed of by the chief of police in the most economical manner for the town sixty (60) days after the auction. 
(g)  The balance of the funds remaining after expenses and liens for property sold shall be held by the chief of police in an account established by the finance director of the town for the owner and paid to the owner upon satisfactory proof of ownership. 
(h)  If no claim has been made for the property or proceeds of such sale within sixty (60) days of the sale, the remaining funds shall be deposited in the general fund of the town and the retained property may be placed into use by the police department. 
(i)  Any owner notified of the sale or retention of property under this section shall be entitled to apply to the town council within three (3) years from the date of this sale, and, if timely application is made therefor and satisfactory proof of ownership of the funds or property is made, the town shall pay the remaining proceeds of sale or return the retained property to the owner without interest or other charges or compensation. No claim shall be made or any suit, action or proceeding be instituted for the recovery of such funds or property after three (3) years from the date of the sale. 
(Ord. No. 2001-11, 7-10-2001) 
State Law reference- Virginia Code reference: § 15.2-1719 
Secs. 12-14-12-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CHIEF OF POLICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 

Sec. 12-31. - Appointment; term. 
    The town manager shall appoint a chief of police in the same manner as other police officers are appointed. The chief of police shall hold office at the will of the town manager. 
(Code 1981, § 12-14) 
Charter reference- Town manager, Art. VI. 
Sec. 12-32. - Powers and duties generally. 
(a)  The chief of police shall be the chief executive of the police department but he shall always be subject to the orders and regulations of the town manager. He shall be under the control of the town manager for the purpose of preserving and enforcing peace and order and executing the laws of the state and ordinances of the town. It shall be the duty of the police force to respect and obey orders of the chief not in conflict with the rules and regulations. It shall be his duty at all times, day or night: 
(1)  To preserve the public peace. 
(2)  To prevent the commission of crimes, and arrest offenders. 
(3)  To protect the rights of persons and of property. 
(4)  To guard the public health. 
(5)  To report nuisances and obstructions in the streets, alleys and other public places. 
(6)  To provide proper police force at fires. 
(7)  To protect the firemen and property at fires and to discharge such other duties as may be required of him by the town manager. 
(b)  When charges are filed in his office against any member of the police force or when he shall be informed of any gross neglect of duty, he shall immediately transmit such charges to the town manager, together with the names of witnesses to be summoned, so that the charges may be fully investigated by the town manager. 
(c)  He shall be responsible for the good order of the town and for the general good conduct of the members of the police force. 
(d)  He shall pay frequent visits at uncertain times to various portions of the town in order to supervise the conduct of all subordinates. 
(Code 1981, § 12-15) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7. 
Sec. 12-33. - Records and reports. 
    The chief of police shall: 
(1)  Make periodic reports in writing from time to time to the town manager as he may require, showing the condition of the police force, the number of times each policeman has been absent and the cause of such absence, the condition of the jail, the number of arrests and the causes of such arrests and the number of ordinance violations reported. 
(2)  Keep a record compiled by himself of the work of each policeman, showing marks of credit in the performance of duty, and showing demerits and the cause therefor and any and all complaints with reference to any given member of the force. 
(3)  On the first day of each month or as soon thereafter as practicable, furnish the town manager with a consolidated written report of the activities of his department for the previous month. Forms of such reports shall be prepared and furnished by the town manager. 
(4)  Keep duplicate records in his office of the reports made to the town manager in pursuance of the requirements of this section. 
(5)  Keep records showing the name of each member of the police force and the area in which each member is stationed from day to day, the date of appointment and time of removal or suspension and the happening of any vacancies in the department. 
(6)  Communicate to the town manager any information from the daily reports of members of the department or other persons in regard to streets, lights and other matters which will be of use to the town manager in the administration of his office. 
(7)  Comply with the additional requirements of Code of Virginia, section 15.1-135.1. 
(Code 1981, § 12-16) 
State Law reference- Records kept by chiefs of police, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-135.1. 
Sec. 12-34. - Absence from duty. 
    The chief of police shall not leave the town unless he shall first receive permission to do so from the town manager. When such permission is granted, or in case of sickness, he shall designate a member of the force as acting chief of police during his absence. This rule shall not apply when it may become necessary for him to leave the town hurriedly on business directly connected with the police department. 
(Code 1981, § 12-17) 
State Law reference- Police may be sent beyond territorial limits, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-131; powers of police, etc., as to property owned by town beyond its territorial limits, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-131.1. 
Chapter 13 - SOLICITORS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Dealers in precious metals and gems, Ch. 6; licenses, Ch. 9; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 10; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 14; taxation, Ch. 15; noise, § 11-19. 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of certain door-to-door vendors, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-37.3:1, 15.1-37.3:2; solicitation of contributions, Code of Virginia, § 57-48 et seq.; local ordinances relating to charitable solicitations, Code of Virginia, § 57-63; licensing of peddlers and itinerant merchants, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3717 et seq. 

Sec. 13-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Charitable organization: Any person which is or holds itself out to be organized or operated for any charitable purpose, or any person which solicits or obtains contributions solicited from the public. This definition shall not be deemed to include: 
(1)  Any church or convention or association of churches, primarily operated for nonsecular purposes and no part of the net income of which inures to the direct benefit of any individual; 
(2)  Any political party as defined in Code of Virginia, § 24.1-1, or any political campaign committee required by state or federal law to file a report or statement of contributions and expenditures; 
(3)  Any labor union registered under Code of Virginia, § 40.1-76, nor any trade association; 
(4)  Any authorized individual who solicits, by authority of such organization, solely on behalf of a registered or exempt charitable organization or on behalf of an organization excluded from the definition of charitable organization. 
    Charitable purpose: Any charitable, benevolent, humane, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary purpose and the purposes of influencing legislation or influencing the actions of any public official or instigating, prosecuting, or intervening in litigation. 
    Sale, sell and sold: The transfer of any property or the rendition of any service to any person in exchange for consideration, including any purported contribution without which such property would not have been transferred or such services would not have been rendered. 
    Solicit and solicitation: The request or appeal, directly or indirectly, for any contribution on the plea or representation that such contribution will be used for a charitable purpose, including, without limitation, the following methods of requesting such contribution: 
(1)  Any oral or written request; 
(2)  Any announcement to the press, over the radio or television, or by telephone or telegraph concerning an appeal or campaign to which the public is requested to make a contribution for any charitable purpose connected therewith; 
(3)  The distribution, circulation, posting or publishing of any handbill written advertisement or other publication which directly or by implication seeks to obtain public support; 
(4)  The sale of, offer or attempt to sell, any advertisement, advertising space, subscription, ticket, or any service or tangible item in connection with which any appeal is made for any charitable purpose or where the name of any charitable organization is used or referred to in any such appeal as an inducement or reason for making any such sale, or when or where in connection with any such sale, any statement is made that the whole or any part of the proceeds from any such sale will be donated to any charitable purpose. 
    Solicitation , as defined herein, shall be deemed to occur when the request is made, at the place the request is received, whether or not the person making the same actually receives any contribution. 
    Solicitor: A person who goes from door to door visiting multi-family or single-family dwellings for the following purposes: 
(1)  To sell any goods, wares, merchandise or services or accept subscriptions or orders therefor. 
(2)  To accept or request donations for any charitable purpose. 
(Code 1981, §§ 13-1, 13-2; Ord. No. 2017-07 , 5-9-17) 
Sec. 13-2. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any person who visits any residence or apartment at the request or invitation of the owner or occupant thereof. 
(2)  To unpaid members of any civic or charitable organization who have an approved means of identification provided by the organization represented. 
(3)  Persons selling, or soliciting subscriptions to any newspaper for home delivery. 
(4)  Route deliverymen who make deliveries at least once a week to regular customers and whose solicitation is only incidental to their regular deliveries. 
(5)  Persons selling fresh farm products. 
(6)  Persons licensed under the provisions of Code of Virginia, Title 38.2. 
(7)  Charitable organizations that have registered with the state commissioner of agriculture and consumer services or his designee as provided by law, but the names of such organizations' solicitors shall be registered pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 13-7; Ord. No. 2017-07 , 5-9-17) 
State Law reference- Persons exempted from ordinances regulating vendors, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37.3:1; exemption of charitable organizations from ordinance provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-63(d). 
Sec. 13-3. - Registration required. 
    All persons, before entering into or upon residential premises within the town for the purpose of soliciting, shall register with the chief of police and furnish him with the following information: 
(1)  The name, local and permanent addresses, age, race, weight, height, color of hair and eyes and any other distinguishing physical characteristics of the applicant. 
(2)  The nature or purpose for which solicitations will be made and the nature of the goods, wares, merchandise or services offered for sale. 
(3)  The name and permanent address of the employer or organization represented. 
(4)  A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor and, if so, the nature of the offense, when and where convicted and the penalty or punishment assessed therefor. 
(Code 1981, § 13-3; Ord. No. 2017-07 , 5-9-17) 
Sec. 13-4. - Permit-Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in soliciting funds for any charitable, philanthropic, educational or other like purpose, in and upon the streets of the town or in any public place within the town, unless he shall first have obtained a permit therefor from the chief of police. 
(Code 1981, § 13-3.1; Ord. No. 2017-07 , 5-9-17) 
Sec. 13-5. - Same-Issuance; display required. 
    Upon furnishing the information required under section 13-4, the applicant shall be issued a permit, unless the information furnished in compliance with this chapter shows that the applicant has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude. A permit issued under this chapter shall be good for one (1) year from the date of issuance, unless earlier revoked as provided in this article. Every solicitor required by this chapter to obtain a permit shall carry his permit with him at all times while engaged in soliciting, and shall display the same to any person who shall demand to see the same while he is so engaged. 
(Code 1981, § 13-4; Ord. No. 2017-07 , 5-9-17) 
Sec. 13-6. - Same-Fees. 
    A fee fixed from time to time by the town council to cover the costs of investigation of the applicant and processing of the application shall be paid to the chief of police when the application is filed, and shall not be returnable under any circumstances. 
(Code 1981, § 13-5; Ord. No. 2017-07 , 5-9-17) 
State Law reference- Fee may be collected from certain vendors, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37.3:2. 
Sec. 13-7. - Prohibited acts. 
    No person shall: 
(1)  Enter into or upon any residential premises in the town under false pretenses to solicit for any purpose or for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or services. 
(2)  Remain in or on any residential premises after the owner or occupant has requested any such person to leave. 
(3)  Enter upon any residential premises for soliciting, when the owner or occupant has displayed a "no soliciting" sign on such premises. 
(4)  Engage in the practice of soliciting in the town without a permit as provided for in this chapter. 
(5)  Knowingly give false information or fail to provide correct information in obtaining a permit. 
(Code 1981, § 13-6; Ord. No. 2017-07 , 5-9-17) 
State Law reference- Fee may be collected from certain vendors, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37.3:2. 
Sec. 13-8. - Penalties. 
    Any person guilty of violating this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 4 Misdemeanor for a first offense. Any second or subsequent offense shall be guilty of a Class 1 Misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07 , 5-9-17) 
Chapter 14 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Special assessments, § 2-3. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; animals and fowl, Ch. 3; buildings, Ch. 4; cemetery, Ch. 5; garbage, trash, and weeds, Ch. 8; depositing refuse in public places, § 8-2; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 10; permits for parades and processions, § 10-8; defacing street signs, monuments, etc., § 11-8; water and sewers, Ch. 17. 
State Law reference- Municipal streets, walks, alleys and public places, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-14, 15.1-363 et seq., 15.1-888 et seq.; assessment for local improvements, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-239 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Obstructions generally; sidewalk cafes. 
(a)  Permit to obstruct. No person shall obstruct any of the streets or alleys of the town by any article, material or device or by the exhibition or storage of any property or materials thereon unless such person has first obtained a permit therefor from the town manager. Such a permit may be issued where the safety of the public is adequately protected. 
(b)  Displays. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any portion of the public sidewalks in the town for the purpose of displaying, exhibiting or offering for sale any goods, wares, merchandise or other articles; except that merchants dealing in seasonal flower plants, vegetable plants and ornamental shrubbery may display the same on shelves or stands extending not more than eighteen (18) inches in front of the building line of the place of business. Such displays shall be permitted only where the sidewalk is of adequate width, and provided that such displays shall be removed from in front of the place of business each day by or immediately after the close of the business day. 
(c)  Sidewalk cafes. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter and subject to the regulations and specifications contained in this section, sidewalk cafes shall be allowed within the central business district upon issuance of a permit from the town manager. The term "sidewalk cafe" or "cafe" shall mean an outdoor or semi-enclosed dining area directly adjoining and part of a restaurant within the central business district and located on a public sidewalk, alley, or right-of-way, where customers of the restaurant sit and dine. 
(1)  Regulations. 
a.  Every cafe shall be temporary in nature and designed so that the entire cafe structure and its improvements, including chairs, planters, fences, railings, etc., can be removed during periods of non-use. 
b.  No portion of a sidewalk cafe may be used for any purpose other than dining or circulation. 
c.  Cafes shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations, and shall be inspected and approved by the zoning administrator prior to beginning actual operation. 
d.  Each cafe shall be adjacent to its adjoining restaurant facility. 
e.  The operation of sidewalk cafes shall be exempt from any additional off-street parking requirements as set forth in the zoning ordinance. 
f.  No cafe shall begin operations until the town manager has reviewed and approved a certificate of insurance indicating that the business operator has general liability insurance coverage for personal injury and property damage in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) aggregate, with the town named as an additional insured. Such certificate shall further indicate that such coverage shall not be modified or canceled for any reason without the insurer providing the town with at least thirty (30) days' prior notice of such change(s). 
(2)  Specifications. 
a.  Sidewalk cafe operations shall be confined to a physical area approved by the town manager. No equipment or facilities of a cafe shall project beyond the designated perimeter of the cafe as approved. A cafe may not cover or extend beyond the frontage face of its adjoining restaurant facility. The size, scale, proportion, and overall design of the cafe shall be reviewed and approved by the town manager to ensure that the cafe is compatible with the public right-of-travel, adjoining buildings, streetscape, and character of the zoning district. The approved size of the cafe will be based partly on the width of the sidewalk upon which it is located and the space available for pedestrian passage. 
b.  The cafe operator shall be responsible at all times for the maintenance of an attractive, clean, and safe cafe area and for any necessary maintenance of the cafe area. All movable objects or equipment (e.g., tables, chairs, furnishings and fixtures) required to operate the cafe shall be removed from the cafe area and stored out of public view during the winter months and during nonbusiness hours. 
c.  Only the existing sidewalk surface is to be used for placement of removable cafe furnishings. 
d.  Not more than one (1) well-marked entrance shall be permitted for each sidewalk cafe. 
e.  The exterior furnishings of the cafe shall consist of temporary fixtures and decorative accessories. No permanent fixtures or improvements to town sidewalks shall be permitted. 
f.  The furnishings of the cafe shall be placed under an awning attached to the building facade and with a minimum clearance of at least four (4) feet between the furnishings and the edge of the sidewalk or appropriate cover. 
(3)  Applications. 
a.  Any person or entity seeking to operate a sidewalk cafe shall file an application with the town manager. The application shall be on a form supplied by the town. 
b.  The application shall include three (3) copies of the applicant's sidewalk cafe plan/drawing, depicting the proposed cafe area boundary, placement of tables, chairs, signs, awnings and other equipment or furnishings, and any other information deemed necessary by the town manager. 
c.  The town manager shall review and recommend approval, modification or denial of a sidewalk cafe permit ("permit"). If the application requires ARB approval for structural alterations, the town manager shall make such recommendation pending ARB action. 
(4)  Permits. 
a.  Prior to final approval of a permit by the town manager, the applicant shall certify that approval has been received from all relevant governmental authorities to begin operating, including the health department and the alcoholic beverage control board of the commonwealth. 
b.  The town manager shall have sole discretion to issue a permit to the owner of a restaurant/cafe business. The permit shall contain such terms and conditions as the town manager determines are necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
c.  The permit, as issued and signed by the town manager, shall contain a statement, executed by the permittee, that they agree to indemnify and hold harmless the town, its agents, and employees from any and all losses, damages, expenses, and claims arising out of the permittee's design, construction, operation, and maintenance of the sidewalk cafe. 
d.  The initial permit issued by the town manager shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance. 
e.  The town manager may reissue permits for periods up to three (3) years, with such modifications as the manager deems appropriate. If any application for renewal involves exterior alterations to the restaurant building, the applicant shall submit an application to the architectural review board. 
(5)  Enforcement. 
a.  The town manager, or his designee, shall have the authority to inspect sidewalk cafes at any time and to take all necessary steps to enforce the provisions of this section. In the event that the town manager suspects that a sidewalk cafe operator has failed to comply with any provision of this section, any provision of its permit, or any other provision of law, the town manager shall provide the operator with a written notice of violation, detailing the violations and giving the permittee a minimum of forty-eight (48) hours to remedy such violations(s). 
b.  If a cafe operator fails to correct any violation specified in a notice of violation within the time period set forth herein, the town manager shall have the right to revoke the operator's permit for cause upon an administrative hearing held with at least two (2) weeks prior written notice. The town manager's decision following such hearing shall be final. 
c.  The town manager shall have the right to terminate any permit for the convenience of the town upon ninety (90) days' prior written notice to the operator. 
d.  The town manager shall have the authority to require the permittee to suspend or limit cafe operations or to relocate or alter all or part of the cafe structure or improvements, either temporarily or permanently, in order to facilitate or allow town operations upon public property. 
e.  In the event of an emergency, the town manager shall have the authority to require the immediate suspension of operations of a sidewalk cafe and/or the removal of all physical improvements constituting the cafe structure. 
(Code 1981, § 14-8; Ord. No. 1998-15, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 14-2. - Use of sidewalks when receiving deliveries. 
    Merchants and other persons, while receiving goods or articles, may place the same on the outer margin of the sidewalk, using only as much thereof as may be necessary; provided, that the public shall not be deprived thereby of the free, easy and comfortable use of the sidewalk. Such occupation of the sidewalk shall be for only such time as may be necessary for such reception or delivery. It shall be the duty of the police to see that the sidewalks are not obstructed so as to deprive the public of the use of them as described in this section. They are empowered to require that goods and other articles obstructing the sidewalk be moved at once. 
(Code 1981, § 14-9) 
Cross reference- Police department, Ch.12. 
Sec. 14-3. - Building operations abutting streets or sidewalks. 
(a)  When any work is being done on structures abutting on any street or sidewalk, which work may endanger persons passing along such street or sidewalk, barriers shall be placed across the way so as to prevent and warn persons against the danger and shall have sufficient lanterns or lights hung thereon at night. No bricks, slate or any other thing or substance shall be thrown off, from or out of such structure or any part thereof into the street or sidewalk, except within the space enclosed by such barriers. Any person failing to comply with the provisions of this section shall, in addition to the penalty for such noncompliance, be responsible for all damages resulting therefrom. 
(b)  The town manager may grant a permit for the use of half of the street between curb lines opposite a lot upon which any building or wall is being erected, for use laying timber and other building materials during such reasonable time as may be necessary for such erection, but no longer. Should there be buildings in course of construction on the opposite side of the street at the same time, then each may occupy one-fourth (1/4) of such street. When such building or wall is being erected, the sidewalk in front thereof shall not be obstructed, but, for the protection of persons passing, a shed or platform shall be erected over the sidewalk which shall be at least seven and one-half (71/2) feet high, five (5) feet wide or as wide as the existing sidewalk and as long as the building or wall which is being constructed, under which persons may safely walk. Any damage done to the street or sidewalk by such building or contractor shall be repaired by him. 
(Code 1981, § 14-10) 
Cross reference- Buildings, Ch. 4. 
Sec. 14-4. - Barriers required for ditches, etc., abutting streets or sidewalks. 
    When any ditch is dug or excavation is made in or abutting a street or sidewalk, sufficient barriers shall be placed around and over such ditch or excavation to prevent persons or animals from falling therein. During every night while such excavation or opening is uncovered or unenclosed, sufficient lanterns or other noticeable lights shall be conspicuously placed so as to cast their light upon such excavation or opening. The person failing to comply with the provisions of this section shall, in addition to the penalty for violation of this section, be responsible for all damages resulting therefrom. 
(Code 1981, § 14-11) 
Sec. 14-5. - Disposition of snow, ice, etc. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the occupant of any house and lot which abuts upon a paved sidewalk or a footway of stone, brick or wood to have all snow removed from such sidewalk or footway within six (6) hours after the same shall have ceased falling, unless such snow shall have fallen during the night or on a Sunday, in which case it shall be removed by 12:00 noon of the day following. The same requirements shall exist with respect to ice or sleet on sidewalks or footways; except, that ice or sleet, when it cannot be removed without injury to the sidewalk or footway, shall be covered, within the period of time as above specified, with sand, ashes or some other substance which will render it safe for travel on foot. Whenever any house or lot is unoccupied, it shall be the duty of the owner, or of the agent of the owner, to have the snow or ice removed from his sidewalk or footway in the same manner as set forth above for occupants of properties. Each violation of this subsection shall be a class 4 misdemeanor, and every six (6) hours that such snow or ice is allowed to remain in violation of this subsection shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person removing ice or snow from his premises to place or deposit such ice or snow upon any street or sidewalk. 
(Code 1981, § 14-12) 
Sec. 14-6. - Retaining walls for earth embankments. 
    Whenever earth embankments abut on any paved street or sidewalk, it shall be the duty of the owner of such property to erect suitable barriers or retaining walls to prevent loose earth or mud from falling upon such street or sidewalk. 
(Code 1981, § 14-13) 
Sec. 14-7. - Snowbreaks on buildings on street lines. 
    Buildings which are located on the line of any street shall be provided with suitable snowbreaks or guards on the side next to such street. 
(Code 1981, § 14-15) 
Sec. 14-8. - Planting shade trees. 
    No person shall plant any shade trees in the streets or sidewalks of the town without the prior consent of the town manager, who shall designate the proper line for such trees. 
(Code 1981, § 14-16) 
State Law reference- Landscape studies for urban highway construction projects, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-47.1. 
Sec. 14-9. - Barbed wire fencing along streets, etc. 
    No person shall erect along or on any street, alley or sidewalk of the town what is known as barbed wire fencing. 
(Code 1981, § 14-17) 
Sec. 14-10. - Holes, depressions, etc., below grade of street. 
    Upon private lots, all holes, depressions, excavations or other dangerous places below the grade of the adjoining street, shall be properly enclosed with fences or walls or filled up by the owners or occupants of such lots so as to prevent persons or animals from falling therein. It shall be the duty of the chief of police and town manager to notify the owners or occupants of premises on which such dangerous places exist and require that fences or walls be built around them or that they be filled up within such period as they shall deem that the exigencies of the case may require. In case of failure to comply with such notification, the owners or occupants shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section, and the town manager may cause such fencing or filling to be done at the expense of the town and the sum so expended, plus twenty (20) percent thereof added as a penalty, shall be collected from the owner or occupant in addition to the penalty provided under section 1-7. 
(Code 1981, § 14-18) 
Sec. 14-11. - Use of streets as bus terminal. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating any motor vehicle as a carrier of passengers in intrastate or interstate commerce to use, or cause to be used, the streets in the town as a terminal or station for the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers. 
(Code 1981, § 14-19) 
Sec. 14-12. - Sales by book agents to pedestrians. 
    Book agents selling directly to customers, licensed as provided in chapter 9, shall not sell or offer to sell to persons walking along the sidewalks and streets of the town. 
(Code 1981, § 14-20) 
Sec. 14-13. - Keeping sidewalks clear of dirt, filth, etc. 
    Every person owning or occupying property abutting on a paved sidewalk shall cause such sidewalk to be kept clear of dirt or filth or dangerous or obnoxious matter and substance. Failure to keep such sidewalk clear shall constitute a violation of this section unless such dirt or filth has been deposited on the sidewalk by the city or a public service corporation over which the person owning or occupying the abutting property can have no control. 
(Code 1981, § 14-22) 
Sec. 14-14. - Placing, etc., glass, etc., on street. 
(a)  No person shall throw or deposit or cause to be deposited upon any street or highway any glass bottle, glass, nail, tack, wire, can or any other substance likely to injure any person or animal, or damage any vehicle upon such street or highway, nor shall any person throw or deposit or cause to be deposited upon any street or highway any soil, sand, mud, gravel or other substances so as to create a hazard to the traveling public. 
(b)  Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any street or highway any destructive, hazardous or injurious material shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed. 
(c)  Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street or highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the street or highway from such vehicle. 
(Code 1981, § 14-23) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-324. 
Sec. 14-15. - Paving, relaying, etc.-Sidewalk construction by citizen or property owner. 
    Whenever any citizen or property owner desires to lay a sidewalk for himself in a town street, he shall make application to the town manager in writing. The town manager shall grant such permission upon the condition that the applicant shall make such improvement at his own expense and shall do the work under the supervision of the town manager. 
(Code 1981, § 14-25) 
Sec. 14-16. - Same-Procedure when changing grade. 
(a)  Whenever the paving, grading or making of sidewalks or streets anywhere in the town is ordered by the town council, it shall be the duty of the town manager, when in his opinion such street or sidewalk should be so graded as to raise or lower the same materially with reference to the property of abutting lot owners, to make his plans of such improvement, showing accurately in feet and tenths the elevation or lowering of the street with reference to such adjacent property. 
(b)  Before proceeding with the work under this section the town manager shall obtain from the owners of the property to be affected by such change of grade, a written waiver of all damages. If such property owners refuse to sign such waiver the town manager shall report the situation to the town council and receive authority from that body before proceeding with work. 
(Code 1981, § 14-26) 
Sec. 14-17. - Same-Exposure of water pipes. 
    When, in repairing or grading or otherwise disturbing a street, any water pipe is left uncovered or exposed, it shall be the duty of the person in charge of such work to forthwith notify the town manager of such exposure. 
(Code 1981, § 14-27) 
Sec. 14-18. - Removal of warning signs, barriers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to remove, injure, disturb or interfere with any barriers, barricades or lights placed under this chapter as a warning of danger or for the protection of persons or property. 
(Code 1981, § 14-37) 
Sec. 14-19. - Repaving, relaying, repairing, reconstructing, or altering sidewalks; assessments of cost upon owners. 
    The owners of property abutting on any sidewalk in the town which shall be hereafter repaved, relaid, repaired, reconstructed or altered shall not be required to pay for said improvement. Should the owners of property abutting on any sidewalk in the town desire that the same be repaved, relaid, repaired, reconstructed or altered in any other substance other than what is existing, said abutting property owner shall be charged or taxed for the additional cost for any other substance other than what is existing. 
(Ord. No. 1987-4, 1-5-88) 
Secs. 14-20-14-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ENCROACHMENTS; PROJECTIONS 

Sec. 14-36. - Removal may be required. 
    In every case of an encroachment upon a street by a building, wall, fence or other structure, the town manager may require the owner or maintainer thereof to remove the same. For failure to make such removal in the time ordered, the general district court may impose a penalty as provided in section 1-7, and may cause such encroachment to be removed at the risk and cost of the party in default. 
(Code 1981, § 14-1) 
State Law reference- Parts of structures overhanging streets, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-376. 
Sec. 14-37. - Gutters on eaves. 
    All buildings, the eaves of which project over the sidewalk, shall be provided with gutters so that there shall be no dripping from the eaves upon the sidewalk. All gutters, the waters from which empty upon a street or sidewalk, shall be so constructed as to discharge such water only at or below the surface of the ground. The owner or occupant of any house not complying with the requirements of this section shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 14-2) 
State Law reference- Gutters overhanging streets, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-376. 
Sec. 14-38. - Drainage from lots, gutters or spouts. 
    No water from any lot, gutter or spout shall be permitted to flow across the footway of any street, except in a covered drain, the cover of which shall not be above the surface of such footway. such drain shall be of sufficient capacity to convey the water to be discharged by it and shall be built and kept open and in good repair by the owner or occupant of the premises from which it proceeds. In case of failure to comply with the order of the town manager or chief of police to abate such condition within five (5) days, the town manager may cause the construction to be made at the cost of the town and the cost thereof, plus twenty (20) percent additional as a fine, shall be collected of the party in default in like manner as fines and assessments are collected. 
(Code 1981, § 14-14) 
Sec. 14-39. - Gates and doors on street lines. 
    Every gate or door built or constructed in any fence or wall standing on the line of any street, except doors to public buildings which are required to be hung so as to open outward, shall be hung so as to open inward. 
(Code 1981, § 14-3) 
State Law reference- Virginia Public Building Safety Law, Code of Virginia, § 27-63 et seq. 
Sec. 14-40. - Shrubs or hedges. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property within the town to allow any shrub or hedge to project over into the street beyond the property line abutting on such street. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant or set out any shrub or hedge nearer than two (2) feet from the line of the property abutting on any such street. All persons having such shrubs or hedges shall upon notice, trim the same back to the line of the property. 
(Code 1981, § 14-4) 
Sec. 14-41. - Trees. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any lot adjacent to any sidewalk within the town shall not permit thereon any trees which extend across the line of the sidewalk or street next to the lot in such manner as to interfere with the use of the sidewalk or street by pedestrians or vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate this section after due notice from the town manager. 
(b)  For the purpose of preventing damage from the root system of the trees in question, shade trees planted on private premises shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the street line. 
(Code 1981, § 14-5) 
Sec. 14-42. - Entrances over sidewalks or drainage ditches. 
    Whenever in order to provide for an entrance to any property it is necessary to cross a sidewalk, curb or drainage ditch, it shall be the duty of the owner of the property at his own expense to provide an entrance approved by the town manager. The person making such entrance shall comply with the following, where applicable: 
(1)  For the crossing of any drainage ditch, the owner shall provide a pipe or conduit of such size and length as may be specified by the own manager. Such pipe or conduit shall be placed or installed by the town. 
(2)  For the crossing of any sidewalk or curb which has been previously constructed, the owner shall remove and replace so much of the sidewalk or curb as may be necessary to provide a suitable entrance, subject to the supervision and inspection of the town manager. No such entrance shall be constructed until a written permit has been obtained from the town manager. 
(Code 1981, § 14-6) 
Sec. 14-43. - Flower boxes on or overhanging sidewalks. 
    Any person conducting an establishment in the business section of the town may erect and maintain boxes or containers for growing plants or flowers in front of his establishment; provided, that such boxes or containers do not overhang the sidewalk more than ten (10) inches from the building line or occupy a space more than fifteen (15) inches in diameter when placed on such sidewalk adjacent to the building line. The permission hereby granted shall, in individual cases or as a whole, be revocable at the pleasure of the town council. 
(Code 1981, § 14-7) 
Sec. 14-44. - Permitting mud or other debris to be tracked, deposited or caused to flow from private property onto streets, sidewalks, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of real property within the town, his agents, contractors or employees to permit any form of obstruction, whether it be mud, dirt, rubbish, trash, rock or any other form of debris, to flow or be tracked from such real property onto any street, sidewalk or any other town right-of-way and to allow the same to remain thereon. 
(b)  The owner, his agents, contractors or employees shall forthwith remove the obstruction should same occur. 
(c)  Any person, after being notified by the town, having failed to remove said obstruction within the time given when notified, shall be deemed in violation of this section and shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to pay all expenses incurred by the town for the removal of the obstruction. 
(Ord. No. 1988-2, 5-3-88; Ord. No. 1995-9, 6-13-95) 
State Law reference- Obstructions or encroachments, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-893. 
Secs. 14-45-14-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPENINGS IN SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 14-61. - Entrances to cellars or areaways. 
    No entrances in sidewalks to cellars or areaways shall be constructed. Every cellar or areaway which opens in a sidewalk shall have such opening covered with substantial metal grating, rough surface metal or metal and glass which shall be flush with the pavement. No such opening to any existing cellar or areaway shall be recovered nor shall the covering thereof be repaired or renewed, except with such material and in such manner as above required. The entrance to every cellar which opens in a sidewalk shall be covered with two (2) doors of equal width, without joints and so constructed when closed that they shall be flush with the pavement, and when open shall each stand upright and at right angles to the pavement and be held in such position by connecting bars or chains at the end of the doors nearest the curb line. No cellar door shall be allowed to fall back or lie flat upon the street or sidewalk, nor to remain open any longer than necessary and while in actual use. The owner or occupant of any house, the cellar or areaway to which does not conform to the requirements of this section, who shall, after notification by the town manager, fail or refuse to comply with its provisions, shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 14-28) 
Sec. 14-62. - Fuel holes. 
(a)  No opening in a street or sidewalk for a fuel hole shall exceed six (6) inches in diameter. Such opening shall be covered with a substantial metal cover with a rough surface placed flush with the surface of the sidewalk. Such fuel hole shall be constructed in accordance with plans first approved by the town manager and shall not be constructed until a written permit shall have been obtained from the town manager. 
(b)  The owner or occupant of any building, the fuel hole to which does not conform to this section, or the owner, user or lessor of any such fuel hole, who shall, after notification by the town manager, fail or refuse to comply with its provisions, shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 14-29; Ord. No. 1997-02, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 14-63. - Defective covers. 
    Whenever the owner or occupant of any building to which is attached any areaway, cellar, vault, fuel or coal hole opening in the sidewalk shall be notified by the town manager that the covering thereof is insecure or dangerous, it shall be his duty at once to repair the same. Failure to do so within five (5) days shall constitute a violation of this section. In case of failure to repair within five (5) days, the town manager may cause such repairs to be made at the cost of the town, and the cost thereof plus twenty (20) percent as a fine shall be collected of the party in default in like manner as fines and assessments are collected. The owner and occupant of such building shall be responsible for the damages to persons or property caused by such defective covers. 
(Code 1981, § 14-30) 
Sec. 14-64. - Keeping closed; liability for damages. 
    Every cellar, vault, fuel or coal hole opening in the sidewalk shall be kept closed and the cover thereof securely fastened, except when the same shall be actually in use by some person immediately attending the same. The owner or occupant of the building shall be responsible for any damage to persons or property caused by any cellar, vault or coal hole opening. 
(Code 1981, § 14-31) 
Sec. 14-65. - Maliciously opening. 
    If any person willfully or maliciously opens or causes to be opened any cellar, vault or coal hole opening in a sidewalk whereby safety of users of the sidewalk is endangered, he shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-7, and shall also be liable for damage or injury resulting from such acts. 
(Code 1981, § 14-32) 
Secs. 14-66-14-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 14-81. - Removing dirt, sod, etc. 
    No person shall remove dirt or sod from or dig in any street or alley of the town without permission from the town manager. 
(Code 1981, § 14-33) 
Sec. 14-82. - Permits. 
(a)  No person, unless specially authorized by the town council, shall take up or remove any portion of the sidewalk or street or excavate in any public street or alley of the town without written permission of the town manager. The town manager shall not refuse permission to any applicant except for cause. In case of refusal, the applicant may appeal to the town council. 
(b)  Before a permit is granted under this article, the town manager may require a deposit sufficient to pay for resurfacing the street to be disturbed, the amount of such deposit to be determined by the town manager. The town manager may, in addition thereto, also require a surety bond or public liability insurance policy in such sum as he may deem sufficient to protect the interest of the town. Every person who shall make application for a permit under this article shall be deemed to have assented thereby to all the provisions and terms of this article, including the right of the town to collect the actual cost of replacing the pavement, sidewalk or street surface in the manner directed in this article. 
(Code 1981, § 14-34) 
Sec. 14-83. - Completion of work without delay; notice of completion. 
    It shall be the duty of every person to whom a permit, as required in this article shall have been granted, to institute at once and prosecute without delay the work for which such permit was obtained and promptly on its completion give written notice thereof to the town manager. 
(Code 1981, § 14-35) 
Sec. 14-84. - Stopping travel on affected streets. 
    The town manager shall have the right to stop travel on any street when the same is being repaved or improved, if he deems it necessary. 
(Code 1981, § 14-36) 
Sec. 14-85. - Lights and barricades. 
    Any person to whom a permit is granted under this article shall place guards or barriers around such excavation and shall protect it by warning lights at night, and shall be responsible for damages to persons or property caused by such excavations until taken in charge by the town manager. 
(Code 1981, § 14-37) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 10. 
Sec. 14-86. - Resurfacing. 
    No pavement, sidewalk or street surface shall be replaced, after being taken up pursuant to this article, by any person, except under the direction of the town manager. If the person to whom a permit is granted under this article fails to promptly resurface the disturbed street in a manner approved by the town manager, the town manager is authorized to cause such work to be done at the expense of such person. 
(Code 1981, § 14-38) 
Sec. 14-87. - Work performed by town. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to work done by town forces under the supervision of the town manager, but the town manager may prescribe regulations for work done on town streets by town forces. 
(Code 1981, § 14-39) 
Secs. 14-88-14-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROPERTY AND BUILDING NUMBERS AND STREET NAMES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings, Ch. 4. 

Sec. 14-91. - Numbering of properties and buildings. 
    A uniform system of numbering properties and principal buildings, as shown on the map identified by the title "House Numbering Plan" which is filed in the department of planning and community development is hereby established. This plan and all explanatory matters thereon is hereby adopted and made a part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1993-8, 8-10-93) 
Sec. 14-92. - Maintenance of numbering system. 
    The director of planning and community development or his/her designee shall be responsible for maintaining the numbering system, being guided by the provisions of section 14-93. 
(Ord. No. 1993-8, 8-10-93) 
Sec. 14-93. - Numbering of buildings and lots. 
(a)  Numerals indicating the official numbers for each principal building or each front entrance to such building shall be posted in a manner as to be visible and distinguishable from the street on which the property is located. The use of written street numbers is prohibited. All numbers must be at least three (3) inches high and shall be made of clearly visible material. Numbers shall be located at least four (4) feet above the door threshold facing the street and shall be aligned horizontally and read left to right on numbered buildings. When a building is located far enough away from the street so that the numbers are not distinguishable, the numbers may be placed on a gate post or other appropriate place so as to be easily read from the street or sidewalk. 
(b)  Each principal building shall bear the number assigned to the frontage on which the front entrance is located. In case a principal building is occupied by more than one (1) business or family dwelling unit, each separate front entrance of such principal building shall bear a separate number. 
(c)  Townhouse residents are encouraged to post their designated street number at the rear entrance as well as their front entrance. 
(d)  Any person who owns or manages any property or parcel of land within the limits of the town shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of subsections (a), (b), and (c) of this section. 
(e)  Numbers will be assigned according to the house numbering plan adopted July 1965 at intervals determined by the director of planning and community development. Direction of streets will be determined by the director of planning and community development according to the system upon the house numbering plan. 
(f)  The planning director shall have the authority to waive any of the requirements of subsection (a) when different locations or alignment of numerals would provide greater visibility on a particular building. 
(Ord. No. 1993-8, 8-10-93) 
Sec. 14-94. - Enforcement of numbering system. 
(a)  Whenever the director of planning and community development has reason to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of section 14-93(a), (b), or (c), he may give notice of such violation to the person failing to comply with any such provision and order said person to take such corrective measures as are necessary within thirty (30) days from the date of notification. 
(b)  Such notice and order shall be served on the property owner. 
(c)  If such person fails to comply with the order issued pursuant to this section, the director of planning and community development may initiate such actions as are necessary to terminate the violation, including applying to courts of competent jurisdiction for injunctive relief, or any other appropriate action. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, no violation of the numbering system which occurs within six (6) months of the effective date of this section shall be prosecuted as provided in subsection (c) of this section or section 14-95. The director of planning and community development may, during such six-month period, issue advisory notices to persons failing to comply with section 14-93. 
(Ord. No. 1993-8, 8-10-93) 
Sec. 14-95. - Penalties and injunctions. 
(a)  Any person convicted of a violation of section 14-93(a) or (b) shall be punished by a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Each violation and each day's continuance thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalty imposed in subsection (a), the town may enjoin the continuing violation of the aforementioned subsections by proceedings for an injunction brought in any court in the town having jurisdiction to grant injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 1993-8, 8-10-93) 
Sec. 14-96. - Numbers to be assigned to each lot. 
    Numbers will be assigned to each lot or tract on the town's copies of final subdivision plats by the department of planning and community development. 
(Ord. No. 1993-8, 8-10-93) 
Sec. 14-97. - Procurement of number prerequisite to issuance of building permit and final approval of buildings under construction or repair. 
    No building permit shall be issued for any structure until the owner or developer has procured from the director of planning and community development the official number of the premises. Final approval of any structure erected or repaired after the effective date of this section shall be withheld until permanent and proper numbers have been affixed to such structure in accordance with the requirements of section 14-93. 
(Ord. No. 1993-8, 8-10-93) 
Sec. 14-98. - Records of all assigned numbers. 
    The department of planning and community development shall keep a record of all numbers assigned under section 14-93. 
(Ord. No. 1993-8, 8-10-93) 
Sec. 14-99. - Street names. 
    Street names as shown on the plan identified by the title Town of Warrenton House Numbering Plan are hereby declared the official names of such streets unless officially changed by subsequent action of the town council after referral to the department of planning and community development. 
(Ord. No. 1993-8, 8-10-93) 
Sec. 14-100. - New street names. 
    New street names shall not duplicate or closely approximate street names already assigned. 
(Ord. No. 1993-8, 8-10-93) 
Chapter 15 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Financial powers of town generally, § 2-2. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; dealers in precious metals and gems, Ch. 6; licenses, Ch. 9; solicitors, Ch. 13; taxicabs, Ch. 16. 
State constitution reference- Vote required to impose tax, Art. VII, § 7. 
State Law reference- Vote required to levy tax, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-826; municipal taxes and assessments, purposes, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-841; taxation generally, Code of Virginia, Title 56.1, local taxes, Code of Virginia, Title 58.1, Ch. 30 et seq.; levy of taxes of towns, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3005 et seq.; real property tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3200 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Annual adoption of rate. 
    No later than the fourteenth day of May of each calendar year, the town council, after due public notice and public hearing, as is provided for in the Code of Virginia, shall adopt a tax rate for all real estate and for tangible personal property then situated within the town. 
(Code 1981, § 16-1; Ord. No. 1998-2, 4-14-98) 
State Law reference- Notice prior to increase of local tax levy, hearing, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3007. 
Sec. 15-2. - Returns for personal property taxes. 
(a)  Every person owning tangible personal property subject to taxation shall file a return with the county commissioner of the revenue declaring such property on or before the fifteenth day in March in the year in which such property is subject to taxation by the town, with the exception of motor vehicles and trailers that acquired a situs within the town or are transferred to a new owner in the town after January 15, for which the deadline for filing a return shall be sixty (60) days following the date of such transfer or acquisition of situs in the town. For failure to file timely such a return, the county commissioner of the revenue shall assess a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax otherwise assessed or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater. Such penalty for late filing shall be due and payable at the time the tax assessed is due and payable. If such penalty is not paid at that time, an additional penalty of ten (10) percent shall be imposed. An extension of time for filing such returns may be granted upon written request required by the taxpayer to the county commissioner of the revenue at his discretion. 
(b)  If any person shall refuse to exhibit to the county commissioner of the revenue any property listed or information required to be listed in order that a fair valuation thereof be assessed, he shall be fined not less than twenty dollars ($20.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(c)  Penalty for failure to file a return or pay a tax levied under section 15-6 shall not be imposed if such failure was not the fault of the taxpayer. The finance director shall make such determinations of fault relating exclusively to failure to pay a tax and the county commissioner of the revenue shall make such determinations relating exclusively to failure to file a return. 
(Code 1981, § 16-2; Ord. No. 1992-28, 11-10-92; Ord. No. 1995-14, 9-12-95) 
State Law reference- Taxpayers to file returns, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3518; authority of town to fix amount of penalties for failure to file return, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. 
Sec. 15-3. - Payment of real estate taxes; penalty and interest. 
(a)  Installment payments. Taxes on real estate within the territorial boundaries of the town shall be subject to taxation by the town under the constitution and laws of the commonwealth shall be due and payable, to the town, in two (2) equal installments, the first installment to be paid not later than June 15 of each year and the second installment to be paid not later than December 15 of each year. If the first installment of such real estate tax is not paid on or before June 15, the amount of such installment shall be past due as of that date and, if the second installment is not paid on or before December 15, the amount of such second installment shall be past due as of that date. Any payment of real estate taxes made after a penalty has been assessed on the fist installment shall be applied first to the payment of such first installment including any accrued penalty and interest. 
(b)  Penalty and interest payments. Any person failing to pay any legally assessed town tax or levy on or before the due date established in subsection (a) shall incur a penalty thereon of ten (10) percent or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater, up to the amount of tax due, which shall be added to the amount of the tax or levy due from such taxpayer. In addition to such penalty, interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum shall be due on such taxes, commencing not earlier than the first day following the day such taxes are due, until paid. For the second and subsequent years of delinquency, interest shall be imposed at a rate of ten (10) percent per annum or the underpayment interest rate established pursuant to Section 6621 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, whichever rate is greater. 
(c)  Attorney and collection fees. When any delinquent real estate tax is collected by an action at law or suit in equity the cost of reasonable attorney's fees or collection agency fees not exceeding twenty (20) percent of the delinquent tax bill shall be imposed by the court and recovered from the delinquent taxpayer. 
(Code 1981, § 16-3; Ord. No. 1991-3, 5-14-91; Ord. No. 1996-16, 9-10-96) 
State Law reference- Authority of town to fix penalties and interest on unpaid taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. 
Sec. 15-4. - Lists of delinquent taxpayers. 
    Promptly after the thirtieth day of June of the year next following the assessment year, the finance director shall advertise once in a newspaper published in the town, a list of all delinquent taxpayers and the amounts due by each and shall thereupon file with the clerk of the circuit court of the county a list of delinquent real estate taxes as provided in the Code of Virginia. 
(Code 1981, § 16-4) 
State Law reference- Lists of uncollectible taxes and delinquents, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3921 et seq.; publication of lists, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3924; recordation of lists of delinquent town taxes, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3937, 58.1-3938. 
Sec. 15-5. - Court costs. 
    Pursuant to Section 14.1-133.2 of the Code of Virginia, there is hereby imposed a fee of two dollars ($2.00) to be taxed of costs in each criminal or traffic case in the District Court. 
    The Clerk of the General District Court for the Town of Warrenton is directed to collect the assessment and remit it to the finance director for the Town of Warrenton, to be held subject to disbursements pursuant to the purposes directed by Section 14.1-133.2 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 1990-4, 10-9-90) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1990-4, adopted Oct. 9, 1990, amended Ch. 15 by the addition of provisions which have been included herein at the discretion of the editor as § 15-5. 
State Law reference- Assessment for courthouse construction, renovation or maintenance as part of fees incident to criminal or traffic cases, Code of Virginia, § 14.1-133.2. 
Sec. 15-6. - Proration of personal property tax. 
(a)  Tax levied and prorated on monthly basis. Tangible personal property tax shall be levied and collected on motor vehicles and trailers which have acquired a situs within the town after January 1 of any tax year for the remaining portion of the tax year. When any person acquired a motor vehicle or trailer with situs in the town after January 1 and situs remains in the town after such acquisition, the tax shall be assessed against the new owner for the remainder of the tax year. Such tax shall be prorated on a monthly basis. For purposes of proration, a period of more than one-half of a month shall be counted as a full month and a period of less than one-half of a month shall not be counted. 
(b)  Relief or refund. When any motor vehicle or trailer loses its situs within the town after January 1 or after the day on which it acquires a situs within the town (hereafter "situs day"), the tax shall be relieved, prorated on a monthly basis, and the appropriate amount of tax refunded if such tax has already been paid, upon notification provided by the owner to the county commissioner of the revenue and the Commonwealth of Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles. No refund shall be made if the motor vehicle or trailer acquires a situs within the Commonwealth in a nonprorating locality. 
(c)  Relief, refund or credit on sale. When any person sells or otherwise transfers title to a motor vehicle or trailer with a situs in the town after January 1 or situs day, the tax shall be relieved, prorated on a monthly basis, upon notification provided by the owner to the county commissioner of revenue and the Commonwealth of Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles, and the appropriate amount of tax already paid refunded or credited by the finance director, at the option of the taxpayer, against the tax due on any motor vehicle or trailer owned by the taxpayer during the same tax year. 
(d)  Time limitation for refund; minimum refund. Any refund required shall be made within thirty (30) days of the date such tax is relieved. No refund of less than five dollars ($5.00) shall be issued to a taxpayer, unless specifically requested by the taxpayer. 
(e)  Conditions for certain tax credits. Any person who moves from a nonprorating locality to the town in a single tax year shall be entitled to a property tax credit in the town if (i) the person was liable for personal property taxes on a motor vehicle and has paid those taxes to a nonprorating locality; and (ii) the owners replaces for any reason the original vehicle upon which taxes are due to the nonprorating locality for the same tax year. The town shall provide a credit against the total tax due on the replacement vehicle in an amount equal to the tax paid to the nonprorating locality for the period of time commencing with the disposition of the original vehicle and continuing through the close of the tax year in which the owner incurred tax liability to the nonprorating locality for the original vehicle. 
(f)  Exemptions of property for which tax has been paid to another jurisdiction. Tangible personal property which was legally assessed by another jurisdiction in the commonwealth and on which the tax has been paid is exempt from taxation under this section for the tax year or portion thereof during which such property was legally assessed by the other jurisdiction and taxes were paid to that jurisdiction and not refunded in whole or part. 
(g)  Filing of returns. Filing procedures shall be in compliance with section 15-2. 
(h)  Billing for less than full year. Notwithstanding any other date for billing and payment of personal property taxes, the town may bill all personal property taxes assessed for a portion of the tax year on or after December 15 of each year. 
(i)  Due date of taxes; penalty and interest. The taxes shall be due not less than thirty (30) days after the date of the tax bill or due date on the tax bill, whichever is later. If the tax is not paid when due, the penalty and the interest otherwise provided for by section 15-3 shall be imposed based on the established due date. 
(Ord. No. 1995-14, 9-12-95) 
Secs. 15-7-15-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BANK FRANCHISE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Virginia Bank Franchise Tax Act, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1200 et seq.; town tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1209. 

Sec. 15-26. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Bank. As defined in Code of Virginia, section 58.1-1201. 
    Net capital. A bank's net capital computed pursuant to Code of Virginia, section 58.1-1205. 
(Code 1981, § 16-5) 
Sec. 15-27. - Penalty for failure to comply. 
    Any bank which fails to file a return or pay the state tax required by this article or fails to comply with any other provision of this article shall be subject to a penalty of five (5) percent of the tax due. If the commissioner of the revenue is satisfied that such failure is due to providential or other good cause, such return and payment of tax shall be accepted exclusive of such penalty, but with interest determined in accordance with Code of Virginia, section 58.1-15. 
(Code 1981, § 16-6.2) 
State Law reference- Penalty upon bank for failure to comply with law, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1216. 
Sec. 15-28. - Imposed. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 12 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia, there is hereby imposed upon each bank located within the boundaries of this town a tax on net capital equalling eighty (80) percent of the state rate of franchise tax set forth in Code of Virginia, section 58.1-1204. 
(b)  In the event that any bank located within the boundaries of this town has offices located in two (2) or more political subdivisions, the tax shall be apportioned as provided by Code of Virginia, section 58.1-1211. 
(Code 1981, § 16-6) 
State Law reference- Authority of town to impose bank franchise tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1209. 
Sec. 15-29. - Filing of return and payment of tax. 
(a)  On or after the first day of January of each year, but no later than March first of any such year, all banks whose principal offices are located within this town shall prepare and file with the commissioner of the revenue of the county a return as provided by Code of Virginia, section 58.1-1207 in duplicate which shall set forth the tax on net capital computed pursuant to Chapter 12 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia. The commissioner of the revenue shall certify a copy of the bank's return and schedules and shall forthwith transmit such certified copy to the state department of taxation. 
(b)  In the event that the principal office of a bank is located outside the corporate boundaries of this town and such bank has branch offices located within this town, in addition to the filing requirements set forth in this section, any bank conducting such branch business shall file with the commissioner of the revenue of this county a copy of the real estate deduction schedules, apportionment and other items which are required by Code of Virginia, sections 58.1-1207, 58.1-211 and 58.1-1212. 
(c)  Each bank, on or before the first day of June of each year, shall pay into the finance director's office of this town all taxes imposed pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1981, § 16-6.1; Ord. No. 1995-4, 4-11-95) 
Secs. 15-30-15-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONSUMER UTILITY TAXES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2000-13, adopted Oct. 10, 2000, amended, restated and readopted Art. III, Consumer utility taxes, §§ 15-46-15-51 in its entirety. Formerly, such sections pertained to similar subject matter and derived form Code 1981, §§ 16-7-16-12; Ord. No. 1995-3, adopted Mar. 14, 1995; Ord. No. 1995-13, adopted Sept. 12, 1995. 
State Law reference- State tax on public service corporations, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-2600 et seq.; local consumer utility taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3812 et seq. 

Sec. 15-46. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Affiliated group. Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in subdivision C 10 of section 58.1-3703, except, for purposes of this article, the word "entity" shall be substituted for the word "corporation" whenever it is used in that section. 
    CCF The volume of gas at standard pressure and temperature in units of one hundred (100) cubic feet. 
    Consumer. Every person who, individually or through agents, employees, officers, representatives or permittees, makes a taxable purchase of local telecommunication services, electricity or natural gas services in this jurisdiction. 
    Commercial or industrial user. The owner or tenant of property used for commercial or industrial purposes. 
    Enhanced services. Services that employ computer-processing applications to act on the format, code, or protocol or similar aspects of the information transmitted; provide additional, different, or restructured information; or involve interaction with stored information. 
    Gas utility. A public utility authorized to furnish natural gas service in Virginia. 
    Gross charges. Subject to the exclusions of this section, the amount charged or paid for the taxable purchase of local telecommunication services. However, "gross charges" shall not include the following: 
(1)  Charges or amounts paid that vary based on the distance and/or elapsed transmission time of the communication that are separately stated on the consumer's bill or invoice. 
(2)  Charges or amounts paid for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, if such charges or amounts paid are separately identifiable from other amounts charged or paid for the provision of local telecommunication services on the service provider's books and records. 
(3)  Charges or amounts paid for administrative services, including, without limitation, service connection and reconnection, late payments, and roamer daily surcharges. 
(4)  Charges or amounts paid for special features that are not subject to taxation under section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
(5)  Charges or amounts paid that are (i) the tax imposed by section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or (ii) any other tax or surcharge imposed by statute, ordinance or regulatory authority. 
(6)  Bad debts. 
    Kilowatt-hours ("kWh"). One thousand (1000) watts of electricity delivered in a one-hour period by an electric provider to an actual consumer, except that in the case of eligible customer-generators (sometimes called co-generators) as defined in Code of Virginia § 56-594, it means kWh supplied from the electric grid to such customer-generators, minus the kWh generated and fed back to the electric grid by such customer-generators. Local telecommunication service. Subject to the exclusions stated in this section, includes, without limitation, the two-way local transmission of messages through use of switched local telephone services; telegraph services; teletypewriter; local cellular mobile radio telecommunication services; specialized mobile radio; stationary two-way radio; or any other form of two-way mobile and portable communications. 
    Local telephone service. Subject to the exclusions stated in this section, includes any service subject to federal taxation as local telephone service as that term is defined in section 4252 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or any successor statute. 
    Mobile local telecommunication service. Any two-way mobile or portable local telecommunication service, including cellular mobile radio telecommunication service and specialized mobile radio. 
    Person. Individuals, firms, partnerships, associations, corporations and combinations of individuals of whatever form and character. 
    Pipeline distribution company. A person, other than a pipeline transmission company which transmits, by means of a pipeline, natural gas, manufactured gas or crude petroleum and the products or byproducts thereof to a purchaser for purposes of furnishing heat or light. 
    Public safety agencies. Any functional division of a public agency which provides fire-fighting, police, medical or other emergency services or a private entity which provides such services on a voluntary basis. 
    Purchaser. Every person who purchases a utility service, with the exception of public safety agencies. 
    Residential consumer. The owner or tenant of property used primarily for residential purposes, including but not limited to, apartment houses and other multiple-family dwellings. 
    Service provider. A person who delivers electricity to a consumer or a gas utility or pipeline distribution company which delivers natural gas to a consumer or any person engaged in the business of selling local telecommunication services to consumers. 
    Taxable purchase. The acquisition of telecommunication services for consumption or use; however, taxable purchase does not include (i) the provision of telecommunication among members of an affiliated group of entities by a member of the group for their own exclusive use and consumption and (ii) the purchase of telecommunication for resale in the subsequent provision of telecommunication, including, without limitation, carrier access charges, right of access charges, and charges for use of intercompany facilities; however, the acquisition of telecommunication by a provider of enhanced services is not the purchase of telecommunication for resale, even when the cost of the telecommunication is separately stated to the purchaser of the enhanced services, as long as the primary object of the purchase of the telecommunication by the provider is for the provision of enhanced services and not telecommunication. A person may make tax-free purchases of telecommunication for resale if the person provides to the service provider a sworn affidavit indicating that the person's purchases are nontaxable sales for resale. 
    Used primarily. Relates to the larger portion of the use for which electric or natural gas utility service is furnished. 
(Ord. No. 2000-13, 10-10-2000) 
State Law reference- Tax on telegraph and telephone companies, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3812; tax on water or heat, light and power companies, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814. 
Sec. 15-47. - Local telecommunication service; tax levied; computation and collection generally. 
(a)  Local telecommunication services. There is hereby imposed and levied by the town upon each and every taxable purchase of a local telecommunication service, except mobile local telecommunication service, by a consumer whose service address is located within the town a tax in the amount of twenty (20) percent of the monthly gross charge, exclusive of any federal tax thereon, made by the service provider against the consumer with respect to such telecommunication service, which tax in every case shall be collected by the service provider for the use of the town at the time the purchase price or such charge shall become due and payable under the agreement between the consumer and service provider; provided, that in case any monthly bill submitted by a service provider for local telecommunication service shall exceed fifteen dollars ($15.00) for a residential user, there shall be no tax computed on so much of such bill as shall exceed fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(b)  Mobile local telecommunication service. There is hereby imposed and levied by the town upon each and every taxable purchase of a mobile local telecommunication service by a consumer whose service address is located within the town, a tax in the amount of ten (10) percent of the monthly gross charge, exclusive of any federal tax thereon, made by the service provider against the consumer with respect to the mobile local telecommunication service which tax in every case shall be paid by the consumer unto the service provider for the use of the town at the time the purchase price or such charge shall become due and payable under the agreement between the consumer and the service provider; provided, that in case any monthly bills submitted by any service provider for mobile local telecommunication service shall exceed thirty dollars ($30.00) for a mobile local telecommunication consumer, there shall be no tax computed on so much of said bill as shall exceed thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(c)  Computation. In all cases where the service provider collects the price for local telecommunication service periodically, the tax hereby imposed and levied may be computed on the aggregate amount of taxable purchases during such period; provided that the amount of tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed. 
(d)  Exemptions from payment. The United States of America, the Commonwealth of Virginia and the political subdivisions, boards, commissions and authorities thereof are hereby exempted from the payment of the tax imposed and levied by this article with respect to the purchase of local telecommunication services used by such governmental agencies. 
(e)  Application to telephone service. The tax hereby imposed and levied on purchasers with respect to telephone service shall apply to all charges made for local exchange telephone service, except messages which are paid for by inserting coins in coin operated telephones. 
(Ord. No. 2000-13, 10-10-2000) 
State Law reference- Tax on telegraph and telephone companies, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3812. 
Sec. 15-48. - Electric utility consumer tax. 
(a)  Imposition of tax. In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, effective January 1, 2001, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of electricity delivered to consumers by a service provider, classified as determined by such provider, as follows: 
(1)  Residential consumers: Such tax shall be twenty (20) percent of the minimum monthly charge imposed by the service provider plus the rate of $0.0158865 on each kilowatt-hour delivered monthly to residential consumers by a service provider not to exceed three dollars ($3.00) monthly. 
(2)  Nonresidential consumers: Such tax on nonresidential consumers shall be at the rates per month for the classes of nonresidential consumers as set forth below: 
a.  Commercial consumers. Such tax shall be twenty (20) percent of the minimum monthly charge imposed by the service provider plus the rate of $0.015009 on each kilowatt-hour delivered monthly to commercial consumers, not to exceed twenty dollars ($20.00) monthly. 
b.  Industrial consumers. Such tax shall be twenty (20) percent of the minimum monthly charge imposed by the service provider plus the rate of $0.015009 on each kilowatt-hour delivered monthly to industrial consumers, not to exceed twenty dollars ($20.00) monthly. 
(3)  The conversion of tax pursuant to this article to monthly kWh delivered shall not be effective before the first meter reading after December 31, 2000, prior to which time the tax previously imposed by this jurisdiction shall be in effect. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following consumers of electricity are exempt from the tax imposed by this section. 
(1)  Any public safety agency as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3813. 
(2)  The United States of America, the commonwealth and the political subdivisions thereof, including this jurisdiction. 
(c)  Billing, collection and remittance of tax. The service provider shall bill the electricity consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers electricity and shall remit the same to this jurisdiction on a monthly basis. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to this jurisdiction in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, paragraphs F. and G., and Code of Virginia, § 58.1-2901. If any consumer receives and pays for electricity but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify this jurisdiction of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for electric service and the tax and remit the tax portion to this jurisdiction. Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to this jurisdiction. 
(d)  Computation of bills not on monthly basis. Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this article if submitted twelve (12) times per year of approximately one (1) month each. Accordingly, the tax for a bimonthly bill (approximately sixty (60) days) shall be determined as follows: (i) the kWh will be divided by two (2); (ii) a monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth above; (iii) the tax determined by (ii) shall be multiplied by two (2); (iv) the tax in (iii) may not exceed twice the monthly "maximum tax". 
(Ord. No. 2000-13, 10-10-2000) 
State Law reference- Tax on water or heat, light and power companies, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814. 
Sec. 15-49. - Local natural gas utility consumer tax. 
(a)  Imposition of tax. In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of natural gas delivered to consumers by pipeline distribution companies and gas utilities classified by "class of consumers" as such term is defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814 J., as follows: 
(1)  Residential consumers: Such tax on residential consumers of natural gas shall be twenty (20) percent of the minimum monthly charge imposed by the service provider plus the rate of $0.186 on CCF delivered monthly to residential consumers, not to exceed three dollars ($3.00) per month. 
(2)  Nonresidential consumers: Such tax on nonresidential consumers shall be at the rates per month shown for each CCF delivered by a pipeline distribution company or a gas utility for the classes as set forth below: 
a.  Commercial consumers. Such tax shall be twenty (20) percent of the minimum monthly charge imposed by the service provider plus the rate of $0.15566 on each CCF delivered monthly to commercial consumers, not to exceed twenty dollars ($20.00) monthly. 
b.  Industrial consumers. Such tax shall be twenty (20) percent of the minimum monthly charge imposed by the service provider plus the rate of $0.15566 on each CCF delivered monthly to industrial consumers, not to exceed twenty dollars ($20.00) monthly. 
(3)  The conversion of tax pursuant to this article to monthly CCF delivered shall not be effective before the first meter reading after December 31, 2000, prior to which time the tax previously imposed by this jurisdiction shall be in effect. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following consumers of natural gas shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section 15-49: 
(1)  Any public safety agency as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3813. 
(2)  The United States of America, the commonwealth and the political subdivisions thereof, including this jurisdiction. 
(c)  Billing, collection and remittance of tax. The service provider shall bill the natural gas consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers natural gas and shall remit the same to this jurisdiction on a monthly basis. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to this jurisdiction in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, paragraphs H. and I., and Code of Virginia, § 58.1-2901. If any consumer receives and pays for natural gas billed but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify this jurisdiction of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for electric service and the tax and remit the tax portion to this jurisdiction. Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to this jurisdiction. 
(d)  Computation of bills not on monthly basis. Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this article if submitted twelve (12) times per year of approximately one (1) month each. Accordingly, the tax for a bimonthly bill (approximately sixty (60) days) shall be determined as follows: (i) the CCF will be divided by two (2); (ii) a monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth above; (iii) the tax determined by (ii) shall be multiplied by two (2); (iv) the tax in (iii) may not exceed twice the monthly "maximum tax". 
(Ord. No. 2000-13, 10-10-2000) 
Sec. 15-50. - Duties of service providers generally. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every service provider in acting as the tax collecting medium or agency for the town to collect from the consumer for the use of the town the tax hereby imposed and levied at the time of collecting the purchase price charged therefore and the tax collected during each calendar month shall be reported by each service provider to the finance director and each service provider shall remit the amount of tax shown by such report to have been collected to the finance director on or before the last day of the calendar month thereafter, together with the name and address of any purchaser who has refused to pay his tax. The required reports shall be on the form prescribed by the finance director. 
(b)  Each and every service provider shall keep complete records showing all purchases in the town, which records shall show the price charged against each consumer with respect to each taxable purchase, the date thereof and the date of payment and the amount of tax imposed hereunder. Such record shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the town during regular business hours and the duly authorized agents of the town shall have the right, power and authority to make such transcripts thereof during such time. 
(Ord. No. 2000-13, 10-10-2000) 
Secs. 15-51, 15-52. - Reserved. 
Sec. 15-53. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any consumer of local telecommunication services, electricity or natural gas failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the tax imposed and levied under this article, and any officer, agent or employee of any service provider violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment in jail for not more than thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such failure, refusal, neglect or violation shall constitute a separate offense. Such conviction shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection and remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2000-13, 10-10-2000) 
Secs. 15-54-15-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REAL ESTATE TAX RELIEF FOR THE ELDERLY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Real estate tax exemptions for elderly and handicapped, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3210 et seq. 

Sec. 15-66. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Net combined worth. All assets of the owners of the dwelling and the spouse of any owner who resides therein, including equitable interests but excluding the value of the dwelling and the land in an amount not to exceed one (1) acre upon which it is situated. 
    Permanently and totally disabled. Any person unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment o deformity which can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for the duration of such person's life. 
    Total combined income. Gross income from all sources, of the owners of the dwelling residing therein and of any relatives of the owner who reside in the dwelling. 
(Code 1981, § 16-13) 
State Law reference- "Permanently and totally disabled" defined, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3217. 
Sec. 15-67. - Eligibility for exemption. 
    Any person sixty-five (65) years of age or older on December 31 of the year immediately preceding the taxable year who owns or partially owns a dwelling as the sole dwelling of that person, or who is sixty-five (65) years of age and resides in a hospital, nursing home, convalescent home or other facility for physical or mental care for extended periods of time, provided such residence is not used or leased to others for consideration or who is determined to be permanently and totally disabled as defined herein, shall be eligible for and may apply for an exemption of real estate taxes on such dwelling and land, in an amount not to exceed one (1) acre on which it is situated; provided that: 
(1)  The total combined income during the immediately preceding calendar year from all sources of the owners of the dwelling living therein and of the owners' relatives living in the dwelling does not exceed fifty-eight thousand dollars ($58,000.00), the first ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) of the income of each relative, other than spouse, of the owner or owners, who is living in the dwelling shall not be included in such total. 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, if a person has already qualified for an exemption or deferral under this article, and if the person can prove by clear and convincing evidence that after so qualifying the person's physical or mental health has been deteriorated to the point that the only alternative to permanently residing in a hospital, nursing home, convalescent home or other facility for physical or mental care is to have a relative move in and provide care for the person, and if relative does move in for that purpose, then none of the relative's income shall be counted towards the income limit. 
(3)  The net combined financial worth, as hereinabove defined, as of December 31 of the immediately preceding year, cannot exceed four hundred forty thousand dollars ($440,000.00). 
(Code 1981, § 16-14; Ord. No. 1989-2, 5-2-89; Ord. No. 1992-17, 8-11-92; Ord. No. 1997-07, 6-10-97; Ord. No. 2017-01 , 2-14-17) 
State Law reference- Restrictions and exemptions, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3211, 58.1-3213; absence from residence, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3214. 
Sec. 15-68. - Application for exemption. 
    First-time applicants for the exemption provided for herein shall make application with the county commissioner of the revenue, on a form prescribed by the commissioner, between January 1 and June 30 of that year for which exemption is sought. In lieu of the filing of an annual application, once a taxpayer is determined to be eligible, an application may be filed on a three-year cycle with an annual certification by the taxpayer that no information contained on the last preceding application filed has changed to violate the limitations and conditions provided in this section. Such annual certification, on a form prescribed by the commissioner, shall be filed no later than March 5 of the taxable year. 
    The application shall be accompanied by an affidavit, setting forth the names of all persons occupying such dwelling and stating that the total combined income, and the net combined financial worth, do not exceed the limitations set forth in section 15-67. The commissioner of the revenue may require an applicant to answer questions under oath as to his requirements under this article or to produce for inspection certified federal income tax returns for the preceding three (3) years to establish the total combined income or net combined financial worth as hereinbefore defined. If such person is under sixty-five (65) years of age, such form shall have attached thereto a certification by the social security administration, the department of veteran's affairs, or the railroad retirement board, or, if such person is not eligible for certification by any of these agencies, a sworn affidavit by two (2) medical doctors licensed to practice medicine in the commonwealth, or who are military officers on active duty who practice medicine with the United States Armed Forces to the effect that the person is permanently and totally disabled as defined in section 15-66. The affidavit of at least one (1) of the doctors shall be based on a physical examination of the person by such doctor. The affidavit of one (1) of the doctors may be based upon medical information contained in the records of the civil service commission which is relevant to the standards for determining permanent and total disability as defined in section 15-66. The commissioner of the revenue shall determine that a person meets the test as to being permanently and totally disabled as prescribed in Section 58.1-3217 of the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended. 
(Code 1981, § 16-15; Ord. No. 1992-18, 8-11-92; Ord. No. 1998-11, 8-11-98) 
State Law reference- Application for exemption, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3213. 
Sec. 15-69. - Change in status. 
    Any change in respect to total combined income, net combined financial worth, ownership of the dwelling exempted, or other factors, which occur during the taxable year for which the affidavit is filed, and which has the effect of exceeding or violating the limitations and conditions of this article, receive the exemption or deferral for the portion of the year during which he or she qualifies and lose the exemption or deferral only for the remainder of the year, and the taxable year immediately following. However, change in ownership to a spouse due to the death of the qualified individual will result in a prorated exemption for the then eligible year. Such prorated portion shall be determined by multiplying the amount of the exemption or deferral by a fraction, wherein the number of complete months of the year such property was properly eligible for such exemption or deferral is the numerator and the number of twelve (12) is the denominator. 
(Code 1981, § 16-16; Ord. No. 1992-19, 8-11-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3215. 
Sec. 15-70. - Amount of exemption; proration. 
(a)  Real estate described in section 15-67 shall be exempt from real estate taxes under the provision of this article for any year in which proper application is made; provided, that if the ownership of the property for which application for exemption is made is not held solely by the applicant, or jointly with the applicant's spouse, then the amount of the tax exemption hereunder shall be in proportion to the applicant's ownership interest in the subject real property, as that ownership interest may appear. 
(b)  A change in ownership to a spouse, when such change results solely from the death of the qualifying individual, or a sale of such property, shall result in a prorated exemption for the then current taxable year. The proceeds of the sale which would result in the prorated exemption or deferral shall not be included in the computation of net worth or income as provided in section 15-67. Such prorated portion shall be determined by multiplying the amount of the exemption or deferral by a fraction wherein the number of complete months of the year such property was properly eligible for such exemption or deferral is the numerator and the number of twelve (12) is the denominator. 
(Code 1981, § 16-17; Ord. No. 1992-20, 8-11-92) 
Sec. 15-71. - Notification to finance director of eligible persons. 
    The county commissioner of the revenue shall annually certify to the town finance director those persons who qualify under this article for an exemption and the amount thereof. The finance director shall deduct the amount of exemption from the applicant's real estate tax bill for that year. 
(Code 1981, § 16-18) 
Secs. 15-72-15-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TAX ON MEALS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2000-04, adopted June 13, 2000, repealed the former Art. V. §§ 15-86-15-92 and enacted a new Art. V., §§ 15-86-15-92 as set out herein. The former Art. V. pertained to similar subject matter ad derived form Ord. of 6-12-86, §§ 16-20-16-24, 16-32, 16-34; Ord. No. 1991-1, adopted May 14, 1991; Ord. No. 1993-23, adopted January 11, 1994. 

Sec. 15-86. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have, for the purposes of this article, the following respective meanings except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cater. The furnishing of food, beverages, or both on the premises of another, for compensation. 
    Collector. The finance director or designee. 
    Director. The finance director and any dully designated deputies, assistants, inspector or other employees. 
    Food. All food, beverages or both, including alcoholic beverages, purchased in or from a food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not, wand without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
    Food establishment. Any place in or from which food or food products are prepared, packaged, sold or distributed in the town, including but not limited to, any restaurant, dining room, grill, coffee shop, cafeteria, cafe, snack bar, lunch counter, convenience store, movie theater, delicatessen, confectionery, bakery, eating house, eatery, drugstore, ice cream/yogurt shops, lunch wagon or truck, pushcart or other mobile facility from which food is sold, public or private club, resort, bar, lounge, or other similar establishment, public or private, and shall include private property outside of and contiguous to a building or structure operated as a food establishment at which food or food products are sold for immediate consumption. 
    Meal. Meal shall mean any prepared food or drink offered or held out for sale by a food establishment for the purpose of being consumed by any person to satisfy the appetite and is ready for immediate consumption. All such food and beverage, unless otherwise specifically exempted or excluded herein shall be included, whether intended to be consumed on the seller's premises or elsewhere, whether designated as breakfast, lunch, snack, dinner, supper or by some other name, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
(Ord. No. 2000-04, 6-13-2000) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840 
Sec. 15-87. - Levy. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied by the town on each person a tax at the rate of four (4) percent on the amount paid for meals purchased from any food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not. 
(Ord. No. 2000-04, 6-13-2000) 
Sec. 15-88. - Collection of tax by seller. 
    Every person receiving any payment for food with respect to which a tax is levied hereunder shall collect and remit the amount of the tax imposed by this article from the person on whom the same is levied or from the person paying for such food at the time payment for such food is made; provided, however, no blind person operating a vending stand or other business enterprise under the jurisdiction of the department for the visually handicapped and located on property acquired and used by the United States for any military or naval purpose shall be required to collect or remit such taxes. All tax collections shall be deemed to be held in trust for the town. 
(Ord. No. 2000-04, 6-13-2000) 
Sec. 15-89. - Exemptions; limits on application. 
(a)  The tax imposed under this article shall not be levied on factory prepackaged candy, gum, nuts and other items of essentially the same nature served for on or off premises consumption. 
(b)  The tax imposed under this article shall not be levied on the following items when served exclusively for off-premises consumption: 
(1)  Donuts, ice cream, crackers, nabs, chips, cookies and factory prepackaged items of essentially the same nature; 
(2)  Food sold in bulk. For the purposes of this provision, a bulk sale shall mean the sale of any item that would exceed the normal, customary and usual portion sold for on-premises consumption (e.g. a whole cake, a gallon of ice cream); a bulk sale shall not include any food or beverage that is catered or delivered by a food establishment for off-premises consumption. 
(3)  Alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages sold in factory sealed containers. 
(4)  Any food or food product purchased with food coupons issued by the United States Department of Agriculture under the Food Stamp Program or drafts issued through the Virginia Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children. 
(5)  Any food or food product purchased for home consumption as defined in the Federal Food Stamp Act of 1977, 7 U.S.C. Section 2012, as amended except hot food or hot food products ready for immediate consumption. For the purposes of administering the tax levied hereunder, the following items whether or not purchased for immediate consumption are excluded from the said definition of food in the Federal Food Stamp Act: sandwiches, salad bar items sold from a salad bar, prepackaged single serving salads consisting primarily of an assortment of vegetables, and nonfactory sealed beverages. This subsection shall not affect provisions set forth in subparagraphs (d) (3), (4) and (5) herein below. 
(c)  A grocery store, supermarket or convenience store shall not be subject to the tax excerpt for any portion or section therein designated as a delicatessen or designated for the sale of prepared food and beverages. 
(d)  The tax imposed hereunder shall not be levied on the following purchases of food and beverages: 
(1)  Food and beverages furnished by food establishments to employees as part of their compensation when no charge is made to the employee. 
(2)  Food and beverages sold by day care centers, public or private elementary or secondary schools or food sold by any college or university to its students or employees. 
(3)  Food and beverages for use or consumption and which are paid for directly by the Commonwealth, and political subdivision of the Commonwealth or the United States. 
(4)  Food and beverages furnished by a hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home, nursing home, home for the aged, infirm, handicapped, battered women, narcotic addicts or alcoholics, or other extended care facility to patients or residents thereof and the spouses and children of such persons. 
(5)  Food and beverages furnished by a public or private nonprofit charitable organization or establishment or a private establishment that contracts with the appropriate agency of the Commonwealth to offer meals at concession prices to elderly, infirm, blind, handicapped or needy persons in their homes or at central locations. 
(6)  Food and beverages sold on an occasional basis, by a nonprofit educational, charitable or benevolent organization, church, or religious body as a fundraising activity, the gross proceeds of which are to be used by such organization exclusively for nonprofit educational, charitable, benevolent or religious purposes. 
(7)  Food and beverages sold through vending machines. 
(Ord. No. 2000-04, 6-13-2000) 
Sec. 15-90. - Gratuities and service charges. 
    Where a purchaser provides a gratuity for an employee of a seller, and the amount of the gratuity is wholly in the discretion of the purchaser, the gratuity is not subject to the tax imposed by this article, whether paid in cash to the employee or added to the bill and charged to the purchaser's account, provided in the latter case, the full amount of the gratuity is turned over to the employee by the seller. 
    An amount or percent, whether designated as a gratuity, tip or service charge, that is added to the price of the food and beverages by the seller, and required to be paid by the purchaser, as a part of the selling price of the food and beverages and is subject to the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2000-04, 6-13-2000) 
Sec. 15-91. - Report of taxes collected; remittance; preservation of records. 
    It shall be the duty of every person required by this article to pay to the town the taxes imposed by this article to make a report thereof setting forth such information as the director may prescribe and require, including all purchases taxable under this article, the amount charged the purchaser for each such purchase, the date thereof, the taxes collected thereon and the amount of tax required to be collected by this article. Such records shall be kept and preserved for a period of five (5) years. The director or his duly authorized agents shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business of such person, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article, and to make transcripts of all or any parts thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2000-04, 6-13-2000) 
Sec. 15-92. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person willfully failing or refusing to file a return as required under this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor except that any person failing to file such a return shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor if the amount of tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less. Any person violating or failing to comply with any other provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) above, any corporate or partnership officer, as defined in Virginia Code Section 58.1-3906, or any other person required to collect, account for, for pay over the meals tax imposed under this article, who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account for or pay over such tax, or who willfully evades or attempts to evade such tax or payment thereof, shall, in addition to any other penalties imposed by law, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Each violation of or failure to comply with this article shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction of any such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2000-04, 6-13-2000) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia § 58.1-3916.1. 
Sec. 15-93. - Reports and remittances. 
(a)  Registration: The finance director may require all prospective sellers of meals licensed to do business in the town to register for collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Reports: Every seller of meals shall prepare and sign a report to the town upon such forms and setting forth such information as the finance director may prescribe, including the showing of the amount of charges collected for meals and the amount of tax required to be collected for the reporting period. 
(c)  Reporting period: The report and the payment of the tax required to be collected shall be made on a monthly basis unless it appears to the finance director that the estimated amount of tax required to be collected will not exceed an average of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month, and in which event, the finance director may authorize the filing of the report and the payment of the taxes required by this section on a quarterly calendar basis. If, however, at any time thereafter, it appears to the finance director based upon the reports filed, or such other information as he deems pertinent, that the tax required to be collected by the person exceeds an average of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month, he shall thereafter require such person to file such reports, and pay the taxes required to be collected, on a monthly basis. 
(d)  Due dates: The signed reports required by this section shall be delivered to the finance director on or before the twentieth day of the calendar month following the period being reported. Each report shall be accompanied by a remittance made payable to the town of the amount of tax due for the reporting period. 
(Ord. of 6-12-86, § 16-24; Ord. No. 1993-23, 1-11-94) 
State Law reference- Counties, cities and towns may provide dates for filing returns, set penalties, interest, etc., Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. 
Sec. 15-94. - Discount. 
    For the purpose of compensating those responsible for the collection of the tax imposed by this article, every such person shall be allowed three (3) percent of the amount of the tax due and accounted for in the form of a deduction on his or her monthly return; provided, the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. of 6-12-86, § 16-25; Ord. No. 1993-24, 1-11-94) 
Sec. 15-95. - Penalty and interest. 
    If any person whose duty it is to do so shall fail or refuse to make the report or remit the tax required by this article within the time and in the amount required, there shall be added to the tax by the finance director a penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent of the tax, or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater, up to the amount of tax due, and interest on the tax at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum, which shall be computed from the first day following the date it is due and payable. For the second and subsequent years of delinquency, interest shall be imposed at the rate established pursuant to section 6621 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended. 
(Ord. of 6-12-86, § 16-26) 
Sec. 15-96. - Procedure when tax not reported or collected. 
    If any person whose duty it is to do so shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed under this article and make timely report and remittance thereof, the finance director shall proceed in such manner as is practicable to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the finance director has procured whatever facts and information may be obtainable, upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any person who has failed to collect, report or remit such tax, the finance director shall proceed to determine and assess against such person the tax, penalty and interest provided in this article, and shall notify the person by certified mail sent to his last known address of the amount of such tax, penalty and interest. The total amount thereof shall be payable ten (10) days after the date such notice is sent. 
(Ord. of 6-12-86, § 16-27) 
Sec. 15-97. - Preservation of records. 
    It shall be the duty of every person liable for collection and remittance of the taxes imposed by this article to preserve for a period of two (2) years records showing the total daily purchases under this article, the date thereof, the taxes collected thereon and the amount of tax required to be collected by this article. The finance director shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business of such person, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article, and to make transcripts of all or any parts thereof. 
(Ord. of 6-12-86, § 16-28) 
Sec. 15-98. - Advertising payment or absorption of tax prohibited. 
    No seller shall advertise or hold out to the public in any manner, directly or indirectly, that all or any part of a tax imposed under this article will be paid or absorbed by the seller or by anyone else, or that the seller or anyone else will relieve any purchaser of the payment of all or any part of the tax. 
(Ord. of 6-12-86, § 16-30) 
Sec. 15-99. - Tips and service charges. 
(a)  Where a purchaser provides a tip for an employee of a seller, and the amount of the tip is wholly in the discretion of the purchaser, the tip is not subject to the tax imposed by this article, whether paid in cash to the employee or added to the bill and charged to the purchaser's account, provided, in the latter case, the full amount of the tip is turned over to the employee by the seller. 
(b)  An amount or percentage, whether designated as a tip or a service charge, that is added to the price of a meal by the seller, and required to be paid by the purchaser, is a part of the selling price of the meal and is subject to the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. of 6-12-86, § 16-31) 
Sec. 15-100. - Enforcement. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the finance director to ascertain the name of every seller in the city, liable for the collection of the tax imposed by this article, who fails, refuses or neglects to collect such tax or to make the reports and remittances required by this article. The finance director may have issued a summons for such person, and the summons may be served upon such person by any town police officer, or sheriff's deputy in the manner provided by law and the finance director may seek a conviction or other civil remedy, including injunction, against such person. 
(b)  In the event the purchaser of any meal refuses to pay the tax imposed by this article, the seller may call upon the police department for assistance; and the investigating officer may, when probable cause exists, issue the purchaser a summons returnable to the general district court as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 6-12-86, § 16-33) 
State Law reference- Issuance of summons, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-73; penalties for failure to appear, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-128. 
Secs. 15-101-15-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TAX ON TRANSIENTS OBTAINING LODGING[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of town to levy tax on transient room rentals, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840. 

Sec. 15-121. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Finance director: The finance director of the town and any of his duly authorized deputies and agents. 
    Hotel: Any public or private hotel, inn, hostelry, tourist home or house, tourist camp, tourist cabin, camping grounds, motel, rooming house or other lodging place within the town offering lodging, for compensation, to any transient. 
    Lodging: Any room or rooms, lodging or space furnished to any transient. 
    Transient: Any person, who, for any period of not more than ninety (90) consecutive days, either at his own expense or at the expense of another, obtains lodging at any hotel. 
(Ord. of 6-12-86, § 16-38) 
Sec. 15-122. - Violations. 
    Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. Convictions shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection, or remittance of the tax as provided in this article. Each violation or failure shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 6-12-86, § 16-50) 
Sec. 15-123. - Exemptions. 
    No tax shall be payable under this article in any of the following instances: 
(1)  On charges for lodging paid by any agencies of federal, state, or local governments for their officers or employees thereof while on official business. 
(2)  On charges for lodging paid to any hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home or home for aged people. 
(Ord. of 6-12-86, § 16-48) 
Sec. 15-124. - Regulations. 
    The finance director may issue regulations for the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-12-86, § 16-51) 
Sec. 15-125. - Levied; amount. 
    There is hereby levied and imposed on each transient a tax equivalent to four (4) percent of the total amount paid for lodging, by or for any such transient, to any hotel. 
(Ord. of 6-12-86, § 16-39) 
Sec. 15-126. - Collection. 
    Every person receiving any payment for lodging with respect to which a tax is levied under this article shall collect the amount of such tax so imposed from the transient on whom such tax is levied, or from the person paying for such lodging, at the time that the payment for such lodging is made. The taxes required to be collected under this section shall be deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect such taxes until remitted as required in this article. 
(Ord. of 6-12-86, § 16-40) 
Sec. 15-127. - Reports and remittances generally. 
(a)  Reports: Each person required to collect any tax as provided in section 15-125 of this article shall prepare and sign a report upon such forms and setting forth such information as the finance director may prescribe, including the showing of the amount of lodging charges collected and the tax required to be collected for the reporting period. 
(b)  Reporting period: The report and the payment of the tax required to be collected shall be made on a monthly basis unless it appears to the finance director that the estimated amount of tax required to be collected will not exceed an average of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month, in which event, the finance director may authorize the filing of the report and the payment of the taxes required by this section on a quarterly calendar basis. If, however, at any time thereafter, it appears to the finance director based upon the reports filed, or such other information as he deems pertinent, that the tax required to be collected by the person exceeds an average of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month, he shall require such person to file such reports and pay the taxes required to be collected on a monthly basis. 
(c)  Due date: The reports required by this section shall be delivered to the finance director on or before the twentieth day of the calendar month following the period being reported. Each report shall be accompanied by a remittance made payable to the town of the amount of tax for the report period. 
(Ord. of 6-12-86, § 16-41; Ord. No. 1993-21, 1-11-94) 
State Law reference- Counties, cities and towns may provide dates for filing returns, set penalties, interest, etc., Code of Virginia § 58.1-3916. 
Sec. 15-128. - Discount. 
    For the purpose of compensating those responsible for the collection of the tax imposed by this article, every such person shall be allowed three (3) percent of the amount of the tax due and accounted for in the form of a deduction on his return; provided, the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. of 6-12-86, § 16-42; Ord. No. 1993-22, 1-11-94) 
Sec. 15-129. - Penalty and interest. 
    If any person whose duty it is to do so shall fail or refuse to make the report or remit the tax required by this article within the time and in the amount required, there shall be added to the tax by the finance director a penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent of the tax, or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater, up to the amount of tax due, and interest on the tax at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum, which shall be computed from the first day following the date it is due and payable. For the second and subsequent years of delinquency, interest shall be imposed at the rate established pursuant to section 6621 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended. 
(Ord. of 6-12-86, § 16-43) 
Sec. 15-130. - Procedure when tax not reported or collected. 
    If any person whose duty it is to do so shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed under this article and make timely report and remittance thereof, the finance director shall proceed in such manner as is practicable to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the finance director has procured whatever facts and information may be obtainable, upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any person who has failed to collect, report or remit such tax, the finance director shall proceed to determine and assess against such person the tax, penalty and interest provided in this article, and shall notify the person by certified mail sent to his last known address, of the amount of such tax, penalty and interest. The total amount thereof shall be payable ten (10) days after the date such notice is sent. 
(Ord. of 6-12-86, § 16-44) 
Sec. 15-131. - Preservation of records. 
    It shall be the duty of every person liable for collection and remittance of the taxes imposed by this article to preserve for a period of two (2) years records showing the total daily purchase, the date thereof, the taxes collected thereon and the amount of tax required to be collected by this article. The finance director shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business of such person, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article and to make transcripts of all or any parts thereof. 
(Ord. of 6-12-86, § 16-45) 
Sec. 15-132. - Duty of person going out of business. 
    Whenever any person required to collect and remit to the town any tax imposed by this article shall cease to operate or otherwise dispose of the business, the tax shall immediately become due and payable, and the person shall immediately make a report to the finance director with a check made payable to the finance director. 
(Ord. of 6-12-86, § 16-46) 
Sec. 15-133. - Advertising payment or absorption tax prohibited. 
    No person shall advertise or hold out to the public in any manner, directly or indirectly, that all or any part of a tax imposed under this article will be paid or absorbed by that person or by anyone else, or that the person or anyone else will relieve any transient of the payment of all or any part of the tax. 
(Ord. of 6-12-86, § 16-47) 
Sec. 15-134. - Enforcement. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the finance director to ascertain the name of every person in the town liable for the collection of the tax imposed by this article, who fails, refuses or neglects to collect such tax or to make the reports and remittances required by this article. The finance director may have issued a summons for such person, and the summons may be served upon such person by any town police officer or sheriff's deputy, in the manner provided by law and the finance director may seek a conviction or other civil remedy, including injunction, against such person. 
(b)  In the event that any transient refuses to pay the tax imposed by this article, the person may call upon the police department for assistance; and the investigating officer may, when probable cause exists, issue the transient a summons returnable to the general district court as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 6-12-86, § 16-49) 
State Law reference- Issuance of summons, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-73; execution and return of summons, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-76; penalties for failure to appear, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-128. 
ARTICLE VII. - CIGARETTE TAX[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2009-04, adopted Nov. 10, 2009, amended Art. VII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VII, §§ 15-135-15-143, pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference- Licenses generally, Ch. 9. 

Sec. 15-135. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Board or NVCTB shall mean the Northern Virginia Cigarette Tax Board. 
(b)  Carton shall mean any container, regardless of material used in its construction, in which packages of cigarettes are placed. 
(c)  Cigarette shall mean and include any roll of any size or shape for smoking, whether filtered or unfiltered, with or without a mouthpiece, made wholly or partly of cut, shredded or crimped tobacco or other plant or substitute for tobacco, whether the same is flavored, adulterated or mixed with another ingredient, if the wrapper or cover is made of any material other than leaf tobacco or homogenized leaf tobacco, regardless of whether the roll is labeled or sold as a cigarette or by any other name. 
(d)  Town shall mean the Town of Warrenton, Virginia. 
(e)  Cigarette machine operator shall mean any individual, partnership or corporation engaged in the sale of packages of cigarettes from vending machines. 
(f)  Dealer shall mean and include every manufacturer's representative, wholesaler, retailer, cigarette machine operator, public warehouseman or other person who shall sell, receive, store, possess, distribute or transport cigarettes within or into the town. 
(g)  Package shall mean and include any container, regardless of the material used in its construction in which separate cigarettes are placed without such cigarettes being placed into any container within the package. Packages are those containers of cigarettes from which they are consumed by their ultimate user. Ordinarily a package contains twenty (20) cigarettes; however, "package" includes those containers in which fewer or more than twenty (20) cigarettes are placed. 
(h)  Person shall mean and include any individual, firm, unincorporated association, company, corporation, joint stock company, group, agency, syndicate, trust or trustee, receiver, fiduciary, partnership and conservator. The word "person" as applied to a partnership, unincorporated association or other joint venture means the partners or members thereof, and as applied to a corporation, includes all the officers and directors thereof. 
(i)  Place of business shall mean and include any place where cigarettes are sold, placed, stored, offered for sale or displayed for sale or where cigarettes are brought or kept for the purpose of sale, consumption or distribution, including vending machines, by a dealer within the town. 
(j)  Registered agent shall mean and include every dealer and other person who shall be required to report and collect the tax on cigarettes under the provisions of this article. 
(k)  Retail dealer shall mean and include every person who, in the usual course of business, purchases or receives cigarettes from any source whatsoever for the purpose of sale within the town to the ultimate consumer; or any person who, in the usual course of business, owns, leases or otherwise operates within his own place of business, one (1) or more cigarette vending machines for the purpose of sale of cigarettes within the town to the ultimate consumer; or any person who, in any manner, buys, sells, stores, transfers or deals in cigarettes for the purpose of sale within the town to the ultimate consumer, who is not licensed as a wholesaler or vending machine operator. 
(l)  Sale or sell shall mean and include every act or transaction, regardless of the method or means employed, including barter, exchange or the use of vending machines or other mechanical devices or a criminal or tortious act whereby either ownership or possession, or both, of any cigarettes shall be transferred within the town from a dealer as herein defined to any other person for a consideration. 
(m)  Stamp shall mean a small gummed piece of paper or decal used to evidence provision for payment of the tax as authorized by the Northern Virginia Cigarette Tax Board, required to be affixed to every package of cigarettes sold, distributed, or used within the town. 
(n)  Store or storage shall mean and include the keeping or retention of cigarettes in this town for any purpose except sale in the regular course of business. 
(o)  Use shall mean and include the exercise of any right or power over any cigarettes or packages of cigarettes incident to the ownership or possession of those cigarettes or packages of cigarettes including any transaction where possession is given or received or otherwise transferred, other than a sale. 
(p)  User shall mean any person who exercises any right or power over any cigarettes or packages of cigarettes subject to the provisions of this article incident to the ownership or possession of those cigarettes or packages of cigarettes or any transaction where possession is given or received or otherwise transferred, other than a sale. 
(q)  Wholesale dealers mean any individual, partnership or corporation engaged in the sale of cigarettes for resale into or within the town. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 11-10-09) 
Sec. 15-136. - Levy and rate. 
    In addition to all other taxes of every kind now or hereafter imposed by law, there is hereby levied and imposed by the town upon every person who sells or uses cigarettes within the town from and after the effective date of this article an excise tax equivalent to twenty cents ($0.20) for each package containing twenty (20) cigarettes sold or used within the town. The tax shall be paid and collected in the manner and at the time hereinafter prescribed; provided, that the tax payable for each cigarette or cigarette package sold or used within the town shall be paid but once. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 11-10-09; Ord. No. 2018-03 , 6-12-18) 
Sec. 15-137. - Delegation of administration. 
(a)  The town manager is authorized to enter into a written contract on behalf of the Town of Warrenton delegating the administrative and enforcement authority under this article to the Northern Virginia Cigarette Tax Board or any other agency or authority which qualifies pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia (1950), § 15.1-21, as amended. 
(b)  The agency or authority so delegated is authorized to promulgate such rules and regulations, as it deems appropriate, governing: 
(1)  The display of cigarette stamps in vending machines; 
(2)  The placement of tax liens against property of taxpayers hereunder; 
(3)  The extending of varying discount rates; 
(4)  The establishment of different classes of taxpayers or those required to collect and remit the tax; 
(5)  The requirements concerning keeping and production of records; 
(6)  The administrative and jeopardy assessment of tax where reasonably justified; 
(7)  The required notice to authorities of sale of taxpayer's business; 
(8)  The audit requirements and authority; 
(9)  The criteria for authority of distributors and others to possess untaxed cigarettes; and 
(10)  Any and all powers granted by the provisions of Code of Virginia (1950), § 58.1-382 (9), as amended, or necessarily implied therefrom. 
(c)  Any agency or authority so delegated by the town manager on behalf of the Town of Warrenton pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (a) of this section immediately hereinabove, is authorized to: 
(1)  Issue a common revenue stamp; 
(2)  Employ legal counsel; 
(3)  Bring appropriate court action in its own name where necessary to enforce payment of the cigarette taxes or penalties; 
(4)  Provide cigarette tax agents and the necessary enforcement supplies and equipment needed to effectively enforce the Cigarette Tax Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 11-10-09) 
Sec. 15-138. - Methods of collection. 
(a)  The tax imposed by this article shall be evidenced by the use of a tax stamp and shall be paid by each dealer or other person liable for the tax under a reporting method deemed by the board to carry out the provisions of this article. The stamps shall be affixed in such a manner that their removal will require continued application of water or steam. Each dealer or other person liable for the tax is hereby required, and it shall be his duty, to collect, pay the tax and report all packages of cigarettes on forms prescribed for this purpose by the board: 
(1)  The quantity of NVCTB-stamped cigarettes sold or delivered to: 
a.  Each registered agent appointed by the board for which no tax was collected; 
b.  Each manufacturer's representative; and 
c.  Each separate person and place of business within during the preceding calendar or fiscal month; and 
(2)  The quantity of NVCTB stamps on hand, both affixed and unaffixed on the first day and the last day of the preceding calendar or fiscal month and the quantity of NVCTB stamps or NVCTB stamped cigarettes received during the preceding calendar or fiscal month; and 
(3)  The quantity of cigarettes on hand to which the NVCTB stamp had not been affixed on the first and last day of the preceding calendar or fiscal month and the quantity of cigarettes received during the preceding calendar or fiscal month to which the NVCTB stamp had not been affixed; and 
(4)  Such further information as the administrator for the board may require for the proper administration and enforcement of this article for the determination of the exact number of cigarettes in the possession of each dealer or user. 
(b)  Each dealer or other person liable for the tax shall file such reports with the board and pay the tax due to the board prior to the due date, and shall furnish copies of all cigarette tax reports submitted to the Virginia Department of Taxation. 
(c)  When, upon examination and audit of any invoices, records, books, cancelled checks or other memoranda touching on the purchase, sale, receipt, storage or possession of tobacco products taxed herein, any dealer or other person liable for the tax is unable to furnish evidence to the board of sufficient tax payments and stamp purchases to cover cigarettes which were sold, used, stored, received, purchased or possessed by him, the prima facie presumption shall arise that such cigarettes were received, sold, used, stored, purchased or possessed by him without the proper tax having been paid. The board shall, from the results of such examination and audit based upon such direct or indirect information available, assess the tax due and impose a penalty of ten (10) percent and may impose interest of three-quarters (3/4) percent per month of the gross tax due. 
(d)  When any dealer or other person liable for the tax files a false or fraudulent report or fails to file a report or fails to perform any act or performs any act to evade payment of the tax, the board shall administratively assess the tax due and impose a penalty not to exceed fifty (50) percent of the tax due and interest of three-quarters (3/4) per cent per month of the gross tax due. 
(e)  The dealer or other person liable for the tax shall be notified by certified mail of such deficiency and such tax, penalty and interest assessed shall be due and payable within ten (10) days after notice of such deficiency has been issued. Every dealer or other person liable for the tax shall examine each package of cigarettes to insure that the NVCTB stamp has been affixed thereto prior to offering them for sale. 
(f)  Any dealer or other person liable for the tax who shall receive cigarettes not bearing the NVCTB stamp shall, within one (1) hour of receipt of such cigarettes, commence and with all reasonable diligence continue to affix the NVCTB stamp to each and every package of cigarettes until all unstamped packages of cigarettes have been stamped and before offering such cigarettes for sale. Any dealer or other person liable for the tax who has notified the board that he is engaged in interstate or intrastate business shall be permitted to set aside such part of his stock as may be legally kept for the conduct of such interstate or intrastate business (that is, cigarettes held for sale outside the jurisdiction of the board) without affixing the stamps required by this article. Any such interstate or intrastate stock shall be kept entirely separate and apart from the NVCTB-stamped stock, in such a manner as to prevent the commingling of the interstate or intrastate stock with the NVCTB stock. Any dealer or other person liable for the tax found to have had untaxed cigarettes which have been lost, whether by negligence, theft or any other unaccountable loss, shall be liable for and shall pay the tax due thereon. 
(g)  It shall also be the duty of each dealer or other person liable for the tax to maintain and keep for a period of three (3) years, not including the current calendar year, records of all cigarettes received, sold, stored, possessed, transferred or handled by him in any manner whatsoever, whether the same were stamped or unstamped, and to make all such records available for audit, inspection and examination at all reasonable times, as well as provide the means, facilities and opportunity for making such audit, inspection or examination upon demand by the board. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 11-10-09) 
Sec. 15-139. - Registered agents. 
(a)  Any dealer or other person liable for the tax who shall sell, use, store, possess, distribute or transport cigarettes within or into the town shall first make application to the board to qualify as a registered agent. Such application blank, which shall be supplied upon request, shall require such information relative to the nature of the business engaged in by said applicant, as the board deems necessary for the administration and enforcement of this article. There is a yearly registration fee for all wholesale dealers and for all cigarette machine operators. Applicant shall provide a surety bond to the board of one hundred fifty (150) percent of his average monthly tax liability with a surety company authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Virginia. Such bond shall be so written that, on timely payment of the premium thereon, it shall continue in force from year to year. Any applicant whose place of business is outside the town shall automatically, by filing his application, submit himself to the board's legal jurisdiction and appoint the administrator for the board as his agent for any service of lawful process. 
    Upon receipt of the properly completed required application forms, and the required surety bond executed, the board shall determine whether the said applicant qualifies to be a registered agent. The board will issue to said qualified applicant a yearly registered agent permit to qualify him to purchase, sell, use, store, possess, distribute or transport within or into the town, NVCTB-stamped cigarettes. 
(b)  Registered agents shall agree to the reporting and payment requirements placed upon him by this article and the rules and regulations as from time to time may be promulgated by the board. When any registered agent's monthly report and payment of the tax is not received within the dates prescribed, the board shall impose a late reporting penalty of ten (10) percent of the gross tax due or ten dollars ($10.00) whichever is greater, but in no event more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The board may also require such registered agent to provide proof that he has complied with all applicable laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia to legally conduct such business and to file financial statements showing all assets and liabilities. The board may revoke or suspend any registered agent's permit due to failure to file tax reports in a timely manner, nonpayment of taxes due or if the cigarette tax surety bond should become impaired for any reason. 
(c)  All money collected as cigarette taxes under this ordinance shall be deemed to be held in trust by the dealer collecting the same until remitted to the board. 
(d)  Registered agents must account for all NVCTB authorized tax stamps purchased. Periodic audits may be conducted to determine any unaccounted variance between the number of stamps purchased and the number of stamps reported and an assessment will be made for all unaccounted for stamps. Any assessment of registered agents located outside the jurisdictions of the board will be based upon the average sales of packages of cigarettes by jurisdiction during the audit period. For registered agents located within the jurisdictions of the board, any assessment will be based upon the tax rate of the jurisdiction in which they are located. In addition, there will be a penalty for nonreporting of ten (10) percent of the gross tax due. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 11-10-09) 
Sec. 15-140. - Requirements for retail dealers. 
(a)  Retail dealers who shall sell, offer for sale, store, possess, distribute, purchase, receive or transport cigarettes for the purpose of sale within the town, shall purchase cigarettes only from registered agents giving or supplying the business trade name and business address of the location where the cigarettes will be placed for sale to the public. Cigarettes purchased for personal use cannot be brought into a business for resale. Only properly registered and licensed retail stores may sell cigarettes to the public. To be properly registered and licensed, a retail store must first have a valid Virginia State Sales and Use Tax Certificate and valid retail business license. Cigarettes must be purchased and stored separately for each business location. All copies of cigarette purchase invoices/receipts must be retained by the retailer for a period of three (3) years and shall be made available to agents of the NVCTB upon request for use in conducting audits and investigations. All copies of cigarette purchase invoices/receipts must be stored at the business retail location for a period of one (1) year from date of purchase. Failure to provide cigarette invoices/receipts may result in confiscation of cigarettes until receipts can be reviewed by the board to verify the proper tax has been paid. It is the responsibility of each retail location to insure that all cigarettes placed for sale or stored at that location be properly taxed and stamped. Cigarettes found without the NVCTB stamp or the proper jurisdictional tax paid will be seized by the agents of the board. 
(b)  Retail dealers must make their place of business available for inspection by tobacco revenue agents to insure that all cigarettes are properly tax-stamped and all cigarettes taxes are properly paid. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 11-10-09) 
Sec. 15-141. - Presumption of illegality; seizure of contraband goods, sealing/seizing of machines. 
(a)  If any cigarette machine operator or other person liable for the tax imposed by this article is found to possess any cigarettes without the jurisdictional tax paid or the proper tax stamp affixed, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that any such operator or other person shall be in possession of untaxed cigarettes in violation of this section. 
(b)  If any cigarettes are placed in any vending machines within the town, then there shall be a rebuttable presumption that such cigarettes were placed in that machine for sale within the town. If any vending machine located within the town contains cigarettes upon which the NVCTB tax stamp has not been affixed or on which the jurisdictional tax has not been paid or containing cigarettes placed so as to not allow visual inspection of the NVCTB tax stamp through the viewing area as provided for by the vending machine manufacturer, then there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the machine contains untaxed cigarettes in violation of this article. 
(c)  Any cigarettes, vending machines, cigarette tax stamps or other property found in violation of this article shall be declared contraband goods and may be seized by the board. In addition to any tax due, the dealer or other person liable for the tax possessing such untaxed cigarettes or tax stamps shall be subject to civil and criminal penalties herein provided. 
(d)  In lieu of seizure, the board may seal such vending machines to prevent continued illegal sale or removal of such cigarettes. The removal of such seal from a vending machine by any unauthorized person shall be a violation of this article. Nothing in this article shall prevent the seizure of any vending machine at any time after it is sealed. 
(e)  All cigarette vending machines shall be plainly marked with the name, address and telephone number of owner of said machine. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 11-10-09) 
Sec. 15-142. - Illegal acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of the article for any dealer or other person liable for the tax: 
(1)  To perform any act or fail to perform any act for the purpose of evading the payment of any tax imposed by this article or of any part thereof, or to fail or refuse to perform any of the duties imposed upon him under the provisions of this article or to fail or refuse to obey any lawful order which may be issued under this article; or 
(2)  To falsely or fraudulently make, or cause to be made, any invoices or reports, or to falsely or fraudulently forge, alter or counterfeit any stamp, or to procure or cause to be made, forged, altered or counterfeited any such stamp, or knowingly and willfully to alter, publish, pass or tender as true any false, altered, forged or counterfeited stamp or stamps; or 
(3)  To sell, offer for sale, or distribute any cigarettes upon which the NVCTB tax stamp has not been affixed or upon which the jurisdictional tax has not been paid; or 
(4)  To possess, store, use, authorize or approve the possession, storage or use of any cigarette packages upon which the NVCTB tax stamp has not been affixed or upon which the jurisdictional tax has not been paid; or 
(5)  To transport, authorize or approve the transportation of any cigarette packages in quantities of more than sixty (60) packages into or within the town upon which the NVCTB tax stamp has not been affixed or upon which the jurisdictional tax has not been paid, if they are: 
a.  Not accompanied by a receipt/bill of lading or other document indicating the true name and address of the consignor or seller and the consignee or purchaser and the brands and quantity of cigarettes transported; or 
b.  Accompanied by a receipt/bill of lading or other document which is false or fraudulent in whole or part; or 
c.  Accompanied by a receipt/bill of lading or other document indicating: 
1.  A consignee or purchaser in another state or the District of Columbia who is not authorized by the law of such other jurisdiction to receive or possess such tobacco products on which the taxes imposed by such other jurisdiction have not been paid unless the tax on the jurisdiction of destination has been paid and said cigarettes bear the tax stamps of that jurisdiction; or 
2.  A consignee or purchaser in the Commonwealth of Virginia but outside the taxing jurisdiction who does not possess a Virginia Sales and Use Tax Certificate and, where applicable, any licenses issued by the Commonwealth of Virginia or local jurisdiction of destination; or 
(6)  To reuse or refill with cigarettes any package from which cigarettes have been removed, for which the tax imposed has been theretofore paid; or 
(7)  To remove from any package any stamp with intent to use or cause the same to be used after same has already been used or to buy, sell, or offer for sale or give away any used, removed, altered or restored stamps to any person, or to reuse any stamp which had theretofore been used for evidence of the payment of any tax prescribed by this article or to sell, or offer to sell, any stamp provided for herein; or 
(8)  To sell, offer for sale or distribute any loose or single cigarettes. 
(9)  To perform any act that violates the resolutions promulgated by the board. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person or individual to transport, possess, store, use, authorize or approve the possession, storage or use of any cigarettes in quantities of more than sixty (60) packages upon which the NVCTB tax stamp has not been affixed or upon which the jurisdictional tax has not been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 11-10-09) 
Sec. 15-143. - Powers of the Northern Virginia Cigarette Tax Board. 
    The board may delegate any of its powers to its administrator or employees and may adopt regulations regarding the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(a)  The board shall be granted the following powers: 
(1)  To assess, collect and disburse the cigarette tax for each participating jurisdiction; 
(2)  To audit sales of cigarettes for each participating jurisdiction; 
(3)  To provide information to Commonwealth's attorneys, county, city or town attorneys for each participating jurisdiction; 
(4)  To designate an administrator; 
(5)  To manage the Northern Virginia Cigarette Tax Board Funds; 
(6)  To retain a certified public accountant to audit its books; 
(7)  To designate a depository bank or banks; 
(8)  To contract with member jurisdictions for administrative services; 
(9)  To hold and convey real and personal property; 
(10)  To enter into contracts; 
(11)  To hire, supervise and discharge its own employees; 
(12)  To sue and be sued in its own name; 
(13)  To prescribe the design of a stamp(s) and to issue and sell said stamps to authorized dealers; 
(14)  To establish different classes of taxpayers; 
(15)  To promulgate resolutions for the assessment and collection of cigarette taxes and the enforcement of this article; and 
(16)  To conduct inspections of any place of business in order to enforce the provisions of this article and all resolutions of the board. 
(b)  The board may employ legal counsel, bring appropriate court action in its own name to enforce payment of the cigarette tax or penalties owed and file tax liens against property of taxpayers hereunder. 
(c)  The board is authorized to enter into an agreement with the Virginia Department of Taxation under which a registered agent with the NVCTB who is also qualified to purchase Virginia Revenue Stamps, may qualify to purchase dual Virginia-NVCTB stamps from the Virginia Department of Taxation. Authority to purchase dual Virginia-NVCTB stamps is granted solely by the board and may be revoked or suspended for violations of this article or resolutions adopted by the board. 
(d)  The board may appoint certain employees as tobacco revenue agents, who shall be required to carry proper identification while performing their duties. Tobacco revenue agents are further authorized to conduct inspections of any place of business and shall have the power to seize or seal any vending machines, seize any cigarettes, counterfeit stamps or other property found in violation of this article and shall have the power of arrest upon reasonable and probable cause that a violation of this article has been committed. The board is authorized to provide its tobacco revenue agents with (1) firearms for their protection; (2) emergency equipped vehicles while on duty; and (3) other equipment deemed necessary and proper. 
(e)  The board may exchange information relative to the sale, use, transportation or shipment of cigarettes with an official of any other jurisdiction entrusted with the enforcement of the cigarette tax laws of said other jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 11-10-09) 
Sec. 15-144. - Jeopardy assessment. 
    If the administrator for the board determines that the collection of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid under this article will be jeopardized by delay, he shall make an assessment of the tax or amount of tax required to be collected and shall mail or issue a notice of such assessment to the taxpayer together with a demand for immediate payment of the tax or of the deficiency in tax declared to be in jeopardy including penalties and interest. In the case of a current period, for which the tax is in jeopardy, the administrator may declare the taxable period of the taxpayer immediately terminated and shall cause notice of such finding and declaration to be mailed or issued to the taxpayer together with a demand for immediate payment of the tax based on the period declared terminated and such tax shall be immediately due and payable, whether or not the terms otherwise allowed by this article for filing a return and paying the tax has expired. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 11-10-09) 
Sec. 15-145. - Erroneous assessment: notices and hearings in event of sealing of vending machines or seizure of contraband property. 
(a)  Any person assessed by the board with a cigarettes tax, penalties and interest or any person whose cigarettes, vending machines and other property have been sealed or seized under processes of this article, who has been aggrieved by such assessment, seizure or sealing may file a request for a hearing before the administrator for the board for a correction of such assessment and the return of such property seized or sealed. 
(b)  Where holders of property interest in cigarettes, vending machines or other property are known at time of seizure or sealing, notice of seizure or sealing shall be sent to them by certified mail within twenty-four (24) hours. Where such holders of property interests are unknown at time of seizure or sealing, it shall be sufficient notice to such unknown interest holders to post such notice to a door or wall of the room or building which contained such seized or sealed property. Any such notice of seizure or sealing shall include procedures for an administrative hearing for return of such property seized or sealed as well as affirmative defenses set forth in this section which may be asserted. 
(c)  Such hearing shall be requested within ten (10) days of the notice of such assessment, seizure or sealing and shall set forth the reasons why said tax, penalties and interest and cigarettes, vending machines or other property should be returned or released. Within five (5) days after receipt of such hearing request the administrator shall notify the petitioner by certified mail of a date and time for the informal presentation of evidence at a hearing to be held within fifteen (15) days of the date notification is mailed. Any such request for hearing shall be denied if the assessed tax, penalties and interest has not been paid as required or if the request is received more than ten (10) days from first notice to the petitioner of such seizure or sealing. Within five (5) days after the hearing, the administrator shall notify the petitioner, by registered mail, whether his request for a correction has been granted or refused. 
(d)  Appropriate relief shall be given by the administrator if he is convinced by the preponderance of the evidence that said seized cigarettes were in the possession of a person other than the petitioner without the petitioner's consent at the time said cigarettes, vending machines or other property were seized or sealed or that petitioner was authorized to possess such untaxed cigarettes. If the administrator is satisfied that the tax was erroneously assessed, he shall refund the amount erroneously assessed together with any interest and penalties paid thereon and shall return any cigarettes, vending machines or other property seized or sealed to the petitioner. Any petitioner who is dissatisfied with the written decision of the board may within thirty (30) days of the date of such decision, appeal such decision to the appropriate court in the jurisdiction where the seizure or sealing occurred. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 11-10-09) 
Sec. 15-146. - Disposal of seized property. 
    Any seized and confiscated cigarettes, vending machines or other property used in the furtherance of any illegal evasion of the tax may be disposed of by sale or other method deemed appropriate by the board after any petitioner has exhausted all administrative appeal procedures. No credit from any sale of cigarettes, vending machines or other property seized shall be allowed toward any tax and penalties assessed. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 11-10-09) 
Sec. 15-147. - Extensions. 
    The administrator, upon a finding of good cause may grant an extension of time to file a tax report upon written application for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days. Except as hereinafter provided, no interest or penalty shall be charged, assessed or collected by reason of the granting of such an extension. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 11-10-09) 
Sec. 15-148. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or imprisonment for not more than twelve (12) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such fine and/or imprisonment shall not relieve any such person from the payment of any tax, penalty or interest imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 11-10-09) 
Sec. 15-149. - Each violation a separate offense. 
    The sale of any quantity, the use, possession, storage or transportation of more than sixty (60) packages of cigarettes upon which the NVCTB tax stamp has not been affixed or the proper jurisdictional tax has not been paid shall be and constitute a separate violation. Each continuing day of violation shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 11-10-09) 
Sec. 15-150. - Severability. 
    If any section, phrase or part of this article should for any reason be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the remainder of the article; and every remaining section, clause, phrase or part thereof shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 11-10-09) 
Secs. 15-151-15-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - BUSINESS ZONES-TAX INCENTIVES[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-01, adopted Jan. 12, 2016, amended the Code by adding Art. VIII, §§ 15-100, 15-101, 15-115-15-128. In order to avoid conflicts in section numbering the editor has renumbered the provision added by Ord. No. 2016-01 as herein set out. 

DIVISION 1. - TECHNOLOGY ZONES 

Sec. 15-171. - Technology zones. 
    In accordance with Code of Virginia § 58.1-3850, the Town of Warrenton is hereby established as a technology zone, as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01, 1-12-16 ) 
Sec. 15-172. - Qualifying businesses. 
(a)  A new or expanded qualified technology business located within a designated technology zone shall be eligible for the economic incentives set forth hereafter in section 15-174. 
An existing business located in a technology zone may apply for a determination that it is a qualified technology business if it is expanding its operations. 
(b)  A qualified technology business is one whose primary purpose is the design, research, development, utilization or production of technology services, software or products. The following businesses are deemed qualified technology businesses: 
(1)  Design, or research and development of computer hardware or software, computer network protocols, information systems, internet software, internet data applications, and data centers; 
(2)  Production of multimedia products, training in the use of computer hardware or software or computerized mapping systems; 
(3)  Development of technology related to health, security, national defense, telecommunications, data warehousing, desktop publishing, wireless technologies or virtual technologies; 
(4)  Provision of internet services and business to business exchanges; 
(5)  Research, design and manufacture and development of biotechnology, pharmaceutical or medical technologies or products; 
(6)  Research, design and manufacture and development of electronics for lease, sale or license, including flexible printed circuits, custom integrated circuits, electronic assemblies, medical electronic displays; 
(7)  Research, design, manufacture and development of electric automobiles, buses and other transportation devices that do not use internal combustion engines as the primary means of propulsion; 
(8)  Research, design, manufacture and development of alternate energy technology or the energy production from such sources; to including wind turbines, photovoltaic cells, fuel cells; 
(9)  Research and development related to computer and electronic systems, computer software, applied sciences, physical sciences. 
(c)  Mere use of computers or technology in the course of business activity is insufficient to cause a business to be a qualified technology business. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01, 1-12-16 ) 
Sec. 15-173. - Application. 
    Application for designation as a qualifying technology business shall be made to the manager of the office of economic development. The application shall include the following information: 
(1)  Investment:;ol0; 
a.  New business investment. A capital investment of a minimum of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) in land, building and/or machinery shall be required to qualify for designation unless otherwise authorized by resolution of the town council. 
b.  Existing business investment. A capital investment of a minimum of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) in land, building and/or machinery shall be required to qualify for designation unless otherwise authorized by resolution of the town council. 
(2)  Employment: 
a.  New business investment. Ten (10) new full-time jobs having salaries at least ten (10) percent above the average county wage level as listed by the Virginia Employment Commission for the prior calendar year shall be created within the first calendar year of operation unless otherwise authorized by resolution of the town council. 
b.  Existing business investment. Three (3) new full-time jobs having salaries at least ten (10) percent above the average county wage level as listed by the Virginia Employment Commission for the prior calendar year shall be created within the first calendar year of operation unless otherwise authorized by resolution of the town council. 
The economic development manager, the town attorney and the commissioner of revenue shall perform the initial review of the project to determine whether the project meets the required criteria for a qualified technology business and is consistent with the town's policy for the consideration of technology zone incentives. If the initial review indicates that the project has merit, the manager shall forward the request and recommendation to the town manager for consideration by the town council. The council shall review the proposed project and accompanying request. The council shall evaluate the request and make a decision based upon the project's positive impact on the town. The council retains the sole authority to designate incentives for the implementation of economic development projects. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01, 1-12-16 ) 
Sec. 15-174. - Incentives. 
    Incentives shall apply for three (3) years from the later of the: (i) date a business is determined to be a qualified technology business; (ii) the date the business commences operation; or (iii) the date that an existing business completes a qualifying expansion. Rebates shall be made at the end of each tax year on an annual basis. Only those taxes and fees which have actually been paid to the town shall be rebated. No interest shall be paid on any funds rebated. Incentives to qualifying firms are as follows: 
(1)  Tax rebates. 
a.  One hundred (100) percent rebate on business, professional and occupational license tax imposed by the town pursuant to Chapter 12 of the Town Code, section 12-13; and 
b.  One hundred (100) percent rebate on tangible business personal property and machinery and tools tax imposed by the town pursuant to Chapter 8 Article X of the Town Code. 
(2)  Permit fee rebates or waivers. Town fees for site plan, building, and zoning permits. 
(3)  Tax rebates-Existing businesses. For those qualified technology businesses that are existing technology businesses, rebates shall only be applicable to taxes assessed on the portion of gross receipts or acquired tangible business personal property, machinery and tools directly attributable to the expansion of the business. The amount of each tax rebate shall be a percentage of that portion of taxes paid by the qualified technology business each year of the incentive period that is directly attributable to the expansion of the business. 
(4)  Targeted industry status. Qualified technology businesses shall be placed in the town's accelerated review program. Nothing herein shall be construed as limiting the council's power to grant additional incentives as may be permitted by law to technology businesses on a case-by case basis including, but not limited to, incentives granted pursuant to performance agreements and individualized arrangements with or without the involvement of the Fauquier County Economic Development Authority. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01, 1-12-16 ) 
Sec. 15-175. - Administration. 
(a)  After a technology business has been certified as a qualified technology business, it shall annually submit a technology zone program annual review application to the commissioner of revenue on or before March 1st of each year of the incentive period, indicating the number of full-time employees employed by the qualified technology business, an official Virginia Employment Commission report for wage verification, the amount of business personal property and/or machinery and tool taxes paid by the qualified technology business during the incentive period, and any other information as requested by the commissioner of revenue or the office of economic development for purposes of administering the technology zone. Applications must be signed by an official representative of the qualified technology business authorized to sign on its behalf. Applications received after March 1st will not be eligible to receive technology zone incentives for that year. 
(b)  An existing technology business shall not qualify for technology zone incentives by reorganizing or changing its form in a manner that does not alter the basis of the technology business assets or result in a taxable event. 
(c)  If a qualified technology business fails to pay in full the taxes imposed by the town and county by the due date, this will result in the forfeiture of the technology zone incentives for that year. 
(d)  If a qualified technology business files for bankruptcy during the three-year incentive period, this will result in disqualification and the business will be ineligible to receive technology zone incentives for the remainder of the incentive period. 
(e)  In the event that the technology business ceases to be a qualified technology business, ceases to meet the minimum employment and capital investment criteria, or removes itself from operation from the town during any year within any three-year incentive period, it shall be required to repay the total amount of technology zone incentives received. A technology business must sign an agreement to this effect prior to receiving technology zone incentives. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01, 1-12-16 ) 
Secs. 15-176-15-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TOURISM ZONES 

Sec. 15-191. - Tourism zones. 
    In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3851, the Town of Warrenton is hereby established as a tourism zone, as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01, 1-12-16 ) 
Sec. 15-192. - Qualifying businesses. 
(a)  A new or expanded qualified tourism business located within a designated tourism zone shall be eligible for the economic incentives set forth hereafter in section 15-194. 
An existing business located in a tourism zone may apply for a determination that it is a qualified tourism business if it is expanding its operations. 
(b)  A qualified tourism business means a business whose primary purpose is to establish a desirable destination to attract tourists from outside and within the community and create an environment for those visitors that will deliver a memorable experience or promote educational opportunities while increasing travel-related revenue. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01, 1-12-16 ) 
Sec. 15-193. - Application. 
    Application for designation as a qualifying tourism business shall be made to the manager of the office of economic development. The application shall include the following information: 
(1)  Investment. 
a.  New business investment. A capital investment of a minimum of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) in land, building and/or machinery shall be required to qualify for designation unless otherwise authorized by resolution of the town council. 
b.  Existing business investment. A capital investment of a minimum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) in land, building and/or machinery shall be required to qualify for designation unless otherwise authorized by resolution of the town council. 
(2)  Employment. 
a.  New business investment. Five (5) new full-time jobs shall be created within the first calendar year of operation unless otherwise authorized by resolution of the town council. 
b.  Existing business investment. Two (2) new full-time jobs shall be created within the first calendar year of operation unless otherwise authorized by resolution of the town council. 
The economic development manager, the town attorney and the commissioner of revenue shall perform the initial review of the project to determine whether the project meets the required criteria for a qualified tourism business and is consistent with the town's policy for the consideration of tourism zone incentives. If the initial review indicates that the project has merit, the manager shall forward the request and recommendation to the town manager for consideration by the town council. The council shall review the proposed project and accompanying request. The council shall evaluate the request and make a decision based upon the project's positive impact on the town. The council retains the sole authority to designate incentives for the implementation of economic development projects. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01, 1-12-16 ) 
Sec. 15-194. - Incentives. 
    Incentives shall apply for three (3) years from the later of the: (i) date a business is determined to be a qualified tourism business; (ii) the date the business commences operation; or (iii) the date that an existing business completes a qualifying expansion. Rebates shall be made at the end of each tax year on an annual basis. Only those taxes and fees which have actually been paid to the town shall be rebated. No interest shall be paid on any funds rebated. Incentives to qualifying firms are as follows: 
(1)  Tax rebates. 
a.  One hundred (100) percent rebate on business, professional and occupational license tax imposed by the town pursuant to Chapter 12 of the Town Code, section 12-13; and 
b.  One hundred (100) percent rebate on tangible business personal property and machinery and tools tax imposed by the town pursuant to Chapter 8 Article X of the Town Code. 
(2)  Permit fee rebates or waivers. Town fees for site plan, building and zoning permits. 
(3)  Tax rebates-Existing businesses. For those qualified tourism businesses that are existing tourism businesses, rebates shall only be applicable to taxes assessed on the portion of gross receipts or acquired tangible business personal property, machinery and tools directly attributable to the expansion of the business. The amount of each tax rebate shall be a percentage of that portion of taxes paid by the qualified tourism business each year of the incentive period that is directly attributable to the expansion of the business. 
(4)  Targeted industry status. Qualified tourism businesses shall be placed in the town's accelerated review program. Nothing herein shall be construed as limiting the council's power to grant additional incentives as may be permitted by law to tourism businesses on a case-by case basis including, but not limited to, incentives granted pursuant to performance agreements and individualized arrangements with or without the involvement of the Fauquier County Economic Development Authority. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01, 1-12-16 ) 
Sec. 15-195. - Administration. 
(a)  After a tourism business has been certified as a qualified tourism business, it shall annually submit a tourism zone program annual review application to the commissioner of Revenue on or before March 1st of each year of the incentive period, indicating the number of full-time employees employed by the qualified tourism business, an official Virginia Employment Commission report for wage verification, the amount of business personal property and/or machinery and tool taxes paid by the qualified tourism business during the incentive period, and any other information as requested by the commissioner of revenue or the office of economic development for purposes of administering the tourism zone. Applications must be signed by an official representative of the qualified tourism business authorized to sign on its behalf. Applications received after March 1st will not be eligible to receive tourism zone incentives for that year. 
(b)  An existing tourism business shall not qualify for tourism zone incentives by reorganizing or changing its form in a manner that does not alter the basis of the tourism business assets or result in a taxable event. 
(c)  If a qualified tourism business fails to pay in full the taxes imposed by the town and Fauquier County by the due date, this will result in the forfeiture of the tourism zone incentives for that year. 
(d)  If a qualified tourism business files for bankruptcy during the three-year incentive period, this will result in disqualification and the business will be ineligible to receive tourism zone incentives for the remainder of the incentive period. 
(e)  In the event that the tourism business ceases to be a qualified tourism business, ceases to meet the minimum employment and capital investment criteria, or removes itself from operation from the town during any year within any three-year incentive period, it shall be required to repay the total amount of tourism zone incentives received. A tourism business must sign an agreement to this effect prior to receiving tourism zone incentives. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01, 1-12-16 ) 
Secs. 15-196-15-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEFENSE PRODUCTION INCENTIVE ZONES 

Sec. 15-211. - Defense production incentive zones. 
    In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3853, the Town of Warrenton is hereby established as a defense production incentive zone, as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01, 1-12-16 ) 
Sec. 15-212. - Qualifying businesses. 
(a)  A new or expanded defense production business or defense contractor as defined herein located within a designated defense production incentive zone shall be eligible for the economic incentives set forth hereafter in section 15-215. 
(b)  An existing business located in a defense production incentive zone may apply for a determination that it is a qualified defense production business or defense contractor if it is expanding its operations. 
(c)  An eligible business which relocates to another site or sites within the town shall remain eligible for the incentives provided for herein. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01, 1-12-16 ) 
Sec. 15-213. - Definitions. 
    Defense contractor means a business, other than a defense production business, that is primarily engaged in providing services in support of national defense, including but not limited to logistics and technical support. 
    Defense production business means a business engaged in the design, development, or production of materials, components, or equipment required to meet the needs of national defense, including any business that performs functions ancillary to or in support of the design, development, or production of such materials, components or equipment. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01, 1-12-16 ) 
Sec. 15-214. - Application. 
    Application for designation as a qualifying defense production business or a defense contractor shall be made to the manager of the department of economic development. The application shall include the following information: 
(1)  Investment: 
a.  New business investment. A capital investment of a minimum of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) in land, building and/or machinery shall be required to qualify for designation unless otherwise authorized by resolution of the town council. 
b.  Existing business investment. A capital investment of a minimum of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) in land, building and/or machinery shall be required to qualify for designation unless otherwise authorized by resolution of the town council. 
(2)  Employment: 
a.  New business investment. Ten (10) new full-time jobs having salaries at least ten (10) percent above the average county wage level as listed by the Virginia Employment Commission for the prior calendar year shall be created within the first calendar year of operation unless otherwise authorized by resolution of the town council. 
b.  Existing business investment. Three (3) new full-time jobs having salaries at least ten (10) percent above the average county wage level as listed by the Virginia Employment Commission for the prior calendar year shall be created within the first calendar year of operation unless otherwise authorized by resolution of the town council. 
The manager, the town attorney, and the commissioner of revenue shall perform the initial review of the project to determine whether the project meets the required criteria for a qualified defense business and is consistent with the town's policy for the consideration of defense production zone incentives. If the initial review indicates that the project is eligible for incentives, the manager shall have the authority, with the concurrence of the town manager, to grant accelerated permit review and authorize permit rebates. The manager shall forward the request with a recommendation of such other incentives as are appropriate to the town manager for consideration by the town council. The council shall review the proposed project and accompanying request. The council shall evaluate the request and make a decision based upon the project's positive impact on the town. The council retains the sole authority to designate incentives for the implementation of economic development projects. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01, 1-12-16 ) 
Sec. 15-215. - Incentives. 
    Incentives shall apply for three (3) years from the later of the: (i) date a business is determined to be a qualified defense business; (ii) the date the business commences operation; or (iii) the date that an existing business completes a qualifying expansion. Rebates shall be made at the end of each tax year on an annual basis. Only those taxes and fees which have actually been paid to the town shall be rebated. No interest shall be paid on any funds rebated. Incentives to qualifying firms are as follows: 
(1)  Tax rebates-New businesses. 
a.  One hundred (100) percent rebate on business, professional and occupational license tax imposed by the town pursuant to Chapter 12 of the Town Code, section 12-13; and 
b.  One hundred (100) percent rebate on tangible business personal property and machinery and tools tax imposed by the town pursuant to Chapter 8 Article X of the Town Code. 
(2)  Permit fee rebates or waivers. Town fees for site plan, building and zoning permits. 
(3)  Tax rebates-Existing businesses. For those qualified defense businesses that are existing defense businesses, rebates shall only be applicable to taxes assessed on the portion of gross receipts or acquired tangible business personal property, machinery and tools directly attributable to the expansion of the business. The amount of each tax rebate shall be a percentage of that portion of taxes paid by the qualified defense business each year of the incentive period that is directly attributable to the expansion of the business. 
(4)  Additional incentives for substantial job creation or substantial investment. For businesses which are deemed by the council to create the potential for substantial job creation or substantial investment, the council in its discretion may, pursuant to a performance agreement authorized by the council, grant additional full or partial tax rebates for any tax authorized by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3853 and the Virginia Constitution for up to twenty (20) years, and may grant any such other incentives as are authorized therein. In granting such additional incentives the Council may consider such factors as the number and quality of jobs to be created, the level of investment and envisioned impact on the local economy, and prospects for growth of the business within the town. 
(5)  Targeted industry status. Qualified defense businesses shall be placed in the town's accelerated review program. Nothing herein shall be construed as limiting the council's power to grant additional incentives as may be permitted by law to defense businesses on a case-by case basis including, but not limited to, incentives granted pursuant to performance agreements and individualized arrangements with or without the involvement of the Fauquier County Economic Development Authority. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01, 1-12-16 ) 
Sec. 15-216. - Administration. 
(a)  After a defense business has been certified as a qualified defense business, it shall annually submit a defense zone program annual review application to the commissioner of revenue on or before March 1st of each year of the incentive period, indicating the number of full-time employees employed by the qualified defense business, an official Virginia Employment Commission report for wage verification, the amount of business personal property and/or machinery and tool taxes paid by the qualified defense business during the incentive period, and any other information as requested by the commissioner of revenue or the office of economic development for purposes of administering the defense zone. Applications must be signed by an official representative of the qualified defense business authorized to sign on its behalf. Applications received after March 1st will not be eligible to receive defense zone incentives for that year. 
(b)  An existing defense business shall not qualify for defense zone incentives by reorganizing or changing its form in a manner that does not alter the basis of the defense business assets or result in a taxable event. 
(c)  If a qualified defense business fails to pay in full the taxes imposed by the town and county by the due date, this will result in the forfeiture of the defense zone incentives for that year. 
(d)  If a qualified defense business files for bankruptcy during the three-year incentive period, this will result in disqualification and the business will be ineligible to receive defense zone incentives for the remainder of the incentive period. 
(e)  In the event that the defense business ceases to be a qualified defense business, ceases to meet the minimum employment and capital investment criteria, or removes itself from operation from the town during any year within any three-year incentive period or such longer period as may be authorized herein, it shall be required to repay the total amount of defense zone incentives received. A defense business must sign an agreement to this effect prior to receiving defense zone incentives. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01, 1-12-16 ) 
Chapter 16 - TAXICABS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, Ch. 9; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 10; noise, § 11-19; taxation, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference- License plates for taxicabs and other vehicles for hire, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-711; registration fees for passenger vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-694; local regulation for-hire passenger vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-310; vehicles for hire excluded from certain motor vehicle carrier requirements, when insurance filed, Code of Virginia, § 56-274; taxicabs generally, Code of Virginia, § 56-291.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Certificate: The certificate of public convenience and necessity granted by the town council to persons in the business of operating taxicabs. 
    Driver: Any person in charge of or driving any taxicab. 
    Owner: Any person having control of the operation or maintenance of taxicabs, including any person having control of the collection of revenue derived from the operation of taxicabs and including the purchaser of any taxicab under conditional sales contract or other title reserving agreement. 
    Taxicab: Any motor-driven vehicle used for the transportation for hire or reward of passengers upon the streets of the town, except buses being operated under franchise or by the town and over fixed routes between fixed termini. 
(Code 1981, § 17-1) 
Sec. 16-2. - Violations. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor for the first offense and a class 3 misdemeanor for each subsequent offense. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 56-291.3:5. 
Sec. 16-3. - Liability insurance or bond. 
(a)  Every owner of any taxicab operated in the town shall file with the town manager and keep in execution at all times a policy of insurance in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Virginia, section 56-300; or, in the event that no policy of insurance has been so filed, the owner of any taxicab operating in the town shall provide a surety bond approved by the town attorney with solvent surety in the amount herein specified, conditioned on such owner responding in damages, or provide a cash bond in the amount herein specified, covering damages for any liability incurred on account of any injury to persons or damage to property resulting from the operation of such taxicabs in the following amounts: 
(1)  For injury or death to one (1) person in any one (1) accident, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00); 
(2)  For injury to two (2) or more persons in any one (1) accident, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00); 
(3)  For property damage in any one (1) accident, fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
(b)  Surety or cash bonds shall be for or in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each taxicab, for which a certificate is issued hereunder. 
(c)  If any such policy of insurance is cancelled as hereinafter provided, the owner shall not operate or cause to be operated, any vehicle covered by such policy until other insurance is obtained or surety or cash bond given. 
(d)  Each such policy of insurance so filed shall contain a clause to the effect that the insurance carrier may cancel the policy upon thirty (30) days' written notice to the town manager, as well as such other notice as may be required by law to be given the owner. 
(e)  If judgment is rendered against the owner or driver or both in any court of competent jurisdiction by reason of any accident for which the insurance policy or surety or cash bond is herein provided, the owner shall, within twenty-four (24) hours after the rendition of such judgment, whether appealed from or not, increase the total amount of insurance or the amount of the surety or cash bond, so that there shall be kept in effect in the manner contemplated by law and by this chapter not less than the minimum required insurance or bond upon which there has been no recovery. 
(Code 1981, § 17-2) 
State Law reference- Taxicab service operators to file insurance or be self-insurer, Code of Virginia, § 56-274(2); surety bonds, insurance and securities for motor carriers, Code of Virginia, § 56-299 et seq. 
Sec. 16-4. - Promulgation, etc., of additional rules and regulations. 
    The council may, from time to time, by resolution, promulgate such rules and regulations applicable to the safe and efficient operation of taxicabs on the streets of the town as in their discretion are necessary for the public safety and convenience, which shall be in addition to the provisions of this chapter relating to the same. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with such regulations. 
(Code 1981, § 17-3) 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of taxicab service generally, Code of Virginia, § 56-291.3:1. 
Sec. 16-5. - Stands. 
(a)  The town manager may, upon written application, designate and assign stands for taxicabs at such places within the town as will best serve the convenience and necessity of the general public, such stands to be plainly marked. Such application shall state the location of the desired stand, the number of spaces which the applicant desires to occupy and shall contain the written consent of the owner of the property abutting the stand, unless such property is owned or controlled by the town. 
(b)  One (1) stand not exceeding twenty-two (22) feet in length, abutting the curb, may be furnished each owner, for his exclusive use, without charge, other than hereinafter provided, which stand is to be located on a street where it will not interfere with normal use of such street by the general public, and such stand shall be approved by the town manager. Any owner may make application to the town manager for additional stands for additional vehicles, as hereinabove provided, and the town manager shall have the power to grant additional stands for additional taxicabs to the owner at such locations as will serve the needs of the general public at an annual fee, fixed from time to time by the town council, for each additional stand so reserved, which fee or rental shall be payable in advance by the owner when the application is submitted. If such additional stand or space is not granted, such fee shall be returned to the applicant. The right is reserved by the town and the town manager to cancel any initial stand or any additional stand or space allotted to any owner at any time, when or if it becomes necessary for the town to utilize such stand for facilitating the movements of traffic over the street upon which such stand is located. 
(Code 1981, § 17-4) 
Sec. 16-6. - Accident reports. 
    Every accident, however slight, in which any taxicab is involved shall be immediately reported to the police department. Such report shall not be used against the owner or driver making it in any criminal proceeding. Such report shall be available to any person injured in such accident or by reason thereof or to any such person's attorney. 
(Code 1981, § 17-5) 
State Law reference- Extent to which statutory accident reports may be used as evidence, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-378; certain statutory accident reports open to inspection by certain persons, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-380; accident reports required by ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-381. 
Sec. 16-7. - Records of calls. 
    Every owner shall keep a clear, neat record of the origin and destination of all calls and it shall be the duty of all drivers and employees of the owner to report such calls. Such records shall be open at all times to inspection by any member of the police department and shall be preserved for a period of not less than six (6) months. No person shall knowingly make a record of a fictitious call or use any fictitious name in reporting a bona fide call, nor shall a fictitious or false address of the point of origin or destination be knowingly reported. 
(Code 1981, § 17-6) 
Sec. 16-8. - Nonpaying passengers. 
    No nonpaying passenger shall be transported in a taxicab with a paying passenger, except bona fide officers or employees of the owner or a police officer engaged in the performance of his duty and unable to obtain other adequate means of transportation. 
(Code 1981, § 17-7) 
Sec. 16-9. - Carrying more than one passenger at a time. 
    Not more than one (1) passenger shall be transported at one (1) time in a taxicab without the consent of the person first engaging the vehicle. 
(Code 1981, § 17-8) 
Sec. 16-10. - Duty of drivers to attend vehicles. 
    Every taxicab, while in operation for the solicitation or transportation of passengers, shall be attended by the driver at all times, except when such driver is actually engaged in loading and unloading. 
(Code 1981, § 17-9) 
Sec. 16-11. - Completion of accepted calls. 
    No taxicab driver shall fail or refuse to complete accepted calls as promptly as possible. 
(Code 1981, § 17-10) 
Sec. 16-12. - Seeking patronage. 
(a)  Taxicabs shall not be permitted to cruise for the purpose of seeking employment. 
(b)  No person shall solicit patronage for any taxicab by word, signal or otherwise on any public street or public property in the town other than at such stands as may be designated and assigned under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 17-11) 
Sec. 16-13. - Vehicles-Type. 
    Every taxicab shall be of the enclosed or sedan type with four (4) doors, at least two (2) seats and of not less than five (5) passenger capacity. 
(Code 1981, § 17-12) 
Sec. 16-14. - Same-Condition. 
    Every taxicab shall be at all times in good order and repair when in operation. 
(Code 1981, § 17-13) 
Sec. 16-15. - Same-Inspection; correction of defects. 
    Each taxicab within the town shall be inspected by the chief of police, or some member of the police department designated by him, on the first Monday in January and June of each year. If any such vehicle shall be found to be unsafe, unfit or in an unclean condition, the owner thereof shall be notified at once that such vehicle shall not be operated thereafter until such defective or unclean condition has been remedied. 
(Code 1981, § 17-14) 
Sec. 16-16. - Same-Display of information. 
    Every taxicab shall bear on the outside and on at least two (2) sides, the name of the owner in letters not less than two (2) inches high and plainly visible at a distance of one hundred (100) feet. On two (2) sides and the back, the owner's telephone number shall be in letters three (3) inches high and shall be plainly visible at a distance of one hundred (100) feet. However, operators shall be permitted, if they so desire, to maintain one (1) unmarked cab for each four (4) marked cabs, which unmarked cab shall be used for private charter trips. 
(Code 1981, § 17-15) 
Sec. 16-17. - Same-Containing radios receiving police calls. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate any taxicab along the streets of the town in which a radio is installed which is capable of receiving police calls. It shall be unlawful for such taxicabs to be equipped with a radio capable of receiving only a standard broadcast. 
(Code 1981, § 17-16) 
Cross reference- Police department, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 16-18. - Transporting soiled objects. 
    Owners of taxicabs are prohibited from transporting or permitting to be transported objects or materials within their vehicles which might leave dirt, stains, dust or otherwise soil or leave unclean the taxicabs or taxicab drivers in such a way that the presence of these conditions might be damaging or objectionable to other persons using the taxicabs or lead to an unclean condition therein. 
(Code 1981, § 17-17) 
Sec. 16-19. - License prerequisite to operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to be operated, within the town any taxicab unless a license therefor has been issued to the owner thereof in accordance with chapter 9. 
(Code 1981, § 17-18) 
Sec. 16-20. - Application of and compliance with chapter. 
    The operation of taxicabs in the town shall be subject to the conditions, regulations and restrictions set forth in this chapter and it shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated within the city any taxicab unless the conditions, regulations and restrictions herein set forth and prescribed have been complied with by such owner. 
(Code 1981, § 17-19) 
Secs. 16-21-16-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY 

Sec. 16-36. - Prerequisite to license or operation on streets. 
    No license for the operation of a taxicab shall be issued by the finance director, nor shall any taxicab be operated on the streets of the town unless and until the council has issued a certificate to the owner thereof. 
(Code 1981, § 17-20) 
Sec. 16-37. - Application-Contents; filing. 
(a)  Application for a certificate, as required in this article, shall be made by the owner or proposed owner to the council and filed with the town manager upon forms provided therefor by the town and shall furnish the following information under oath of the applicant: 
(1)  The full name and the home and business address of the applicant. 
(2)  The trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to do business. 
(3)  The financial status and responsibility of the applicant. 
(4)  The name and address of any person lending money or furnishing capital to applicant where the operation or proposed operation is to be financed wholly or in part by means of borrowed money or capital in any form furnished by any person other than the owner. 
(5)  The number and kind of vehicle, showing seating capacity, design and color scheme of each. 
(6)  The character and location of the depots and terminals to be used, if any. 
(7)  Each conviction or plea of guilty for the violation of any criminal law, whether such violation was of a town ordinance, state law or federal laws. 
(8)  The specific experience of applicant in the transportation of passengers for hire. 
(9)  All facts or circumstances upon which applicant bases his belief that public convenience and necessity require the granting of his application. 
(b)  Such application shall be filed with the town manager at least seven (7) days prior to the regular council meeting at which the application is to be acted upon. 
(Code 1981, § 17-21) 
Sec. 16-38. - Same-Copy furnished to police chief. 
    Upon the filing of an application, as provided in section 16-37, with the town manager, the chief of police shall be furnished with a copy immediately. 
(Code 1981, § 17-22) 
Sec. 16-39. - Same-Publication of notice. 
    Notice of an application filed as provided in section 16-37 shall be published by the applicant in a newspaper published in the town, once a week for two (2) successive weeks prior to the date on which the application is heard. 
(Code 1981, § 17-23) 
Sec. 16-40. - Investigation of applicants. 
    Upon the receipt of an application furnished to the chief of police pursuant to section 16-38, it shall be the duty of the chief of police promptly to make an investigation as to the suitable character and qualification of the applicant to conduct such business and, in the case of corporations, to investigate the fitness of the officers, directors and stockholders. He shall report his findings in writing, which report shall be filed with the town manager prior to the regular council meeting at which the application is to be acted upon. Such written report, when so filed, shall be available to the applicant and to his attorney at law or to either. 
(Code 1981, § 17-24) 
Sec. 16-41. - Determination of necessity-Burden of proof upon applicant. 
    When the town council considers an application for a certificate required by the provisions of this article, the burden shall be upon the applicant to establish the existence of public convenience and necessity for the operation of the taxicabs designated in his application and all other facts required for the granting of such application. 
(Code 1981, § 17-25) 
Sec. 16-42. - Same-Standards considered by council. 
    The town council shall determine whether the public convenience and necessity require the operation of the taxicabs for which application has been filed under the provisions of this article. In making this determination, the following shall be considered: 
(1)  The adequacy and efficiency and safety of existing taxicab service and other forms of transportation for passengers already in existence. 
(2)  The probable permanence and quality of the service offered by the applicant. 
(3)  The financial status, character and qualification and responsibility of the applicant. 
(4)  The number and character of vehicles. 
(5)  Whether or not depots and terminals will be used; if so, their character and location. 
(6)  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers for hire in taxicabs. 
(Code 1981, § 17-26) 
Sec. 16-43. - Authority of town council to issue, refuse, etc. 
    The town council shall have the authority to grant a certificate as applied for under this article or to grant a certificate for a lesser number of vehicles than that specified in the application or to deny the application in the exercise of a sound discretion, after a consideration of the factors prescribed by section 16-42. 
(Code 1981, § 17-27) 
Sec. 16-44. - Issuance generally; fees; contents. 
    Upon determination by the town council that any application, filed as provided in section 16-37 shall be granted and upon payment to the finance director of a certificate fee, fixed from time to time by the town council, a certificate shall be issued to the applicant by the town manager and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner. 
(2)  The number, kind and description of vehicles, the operation of which is authorized by the certificate. 
(3)  The date of issuance and the date of expiration. 
(4)  The fact that the certificate is being issued subject to the provisions of this chapter and all other laws and ordinances governing the operation of taxicabs in the town. 
(Code 1981, § 17-28) 
Sec. 16-45. - Term. 
    Every certificate issued under this article shall be good and valid, unless revoked or suspended as provided in this article, from the date of issuance until the following thirty-first day of May and shall be valid annually thereafter until the thirty-first day of May of each year, unless revoked by the town council. 
(Code 1981, § 17-29) 
Sec. 16-46. - Transferability. 
    A certificate issued under this article shall be transferable only by and with the consent of the town council. Application for any such transfer shall be filed with the town manager and, upon the filing of such application for transfer, the person to whom the transfer is to be made shall file an application as if an original application were being made. The proceedings upon such transfer shall be the same as upon an original application. 
(Code 1981, § 17-30) 
Sec. 16-47. - Revocation, suspension, etc. 
    Any certificate issued pursuant to this article may be revoked, cancelled or suspended by the town council, after due notice to the certificate holder, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Failure to operate the taxicabs specified in the certificate. 
(2)  Failure to maintain taxicabs in good order or repair. 
(3)  Failure to pay the personal property tax or other taxes due the town or state on taxicabs specified in the certificate. 
(4)  Failure to maintain insurance as required under this chapter. 
(5)  Failure to report any accident as required by law or this chapter. 
(6)  Failure of the drivers employed by the holder of the certificate to stay neat in appearance. 
(7)  Failure of the drivers employed by the holder of the certificate to be courteous at all times. 
(8)  Failure of the drivers employed by the holder of the certificate to have and exhibit taxicab drivers' permits in the taxicab. 
(9)  Repeated and persistent violations of traffic and safety ordinances by drivers employed by the holder of the certificate. 
(10)  Employment of a driver who has been convicted a third time of a state, municipal or federal offense. 
(11)  Purchase by drivers employed by the holder of the certificate of alcoholic beverages of any description for their passengers or toleration of any disorderly conduct in the taxicab. 
(12)  Wilful or continued failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any other law or ordinance regulating the operation of public vehicles or taxicabs in the town. 
(13)  Wilful neglect to render promised service. 
(Code 1981, § 17-31) 
State Law reference- Unlawful transportation of alcoholic beverages, Code of Virginia, § 4-74 et seq. 
Sec. 16-48. - Change in authorized numbers of vehicles. 
    The town council is authorized from time to time to increase or decrease, as public convenience and necessity may require, the number of vehicles operated under certificates issued pursuant to this article; provided, that in the event the public convenience and necessity require a decrease in the number of vehicles so operated, the certificates last granted shall be the first to be subject to decrease. 
(Code 1981, § 17-32) 
Sec. 16-49. - Substitution of authorized equipment. 
    No equipment shall be substituted for that described in a certificate unless and until it has been inspected and approved by the chief of police and the substitution has been endorsed on the certificate by the chief of police and approved by the town manager. 
(Code 1981, § 17-33) 
Sec. 16-50. - Persons operating taxicabs on effective date of chapter. 
    All persons engaged in the business of operating taxicabs on the effective date of this chapter who can qualify with the requirements of this chapter shall be entitled to a certificate for each vehicle. No certificate for any additional vehicle shall be issued unless the council determines that the public convenience and necessity require such additional service. 
(Code 1981, § 17-34) 
Secs. 16-51-16-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAXICAB DRIVER'S PERMIT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal licensing of drivers of taxicabs, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-310; 58.1-3703(B)(13). 

Sec. 16-66. - Required. 
    No person shall drive a taxicab within the town unless he shall have obtained a special permit to be known as a "taxicab driver's permit," which shall be in addition to any other license required of such person. 
(Code 1981, § 17-35) 
Sec. 16-67. - Application-Making in person, fingerprints. 
    Each applicant for a taxicab driver's permit shall apply for his permit in person and have his fingerprints taken, which fingerprints shall constitute a part of his application. 
(Code 1981, § 17-36) 
Sec. 16-68. - Same-Contents. 
    Application for a taxicab driver's permit shall be made in writing under oath to the chief of police of the town and shall show the following: 
(1)  Full name of applicant. 
(2)  Present address. 
(3)  Age. 
(4)  Place of birth. 
(5)  Places of previous address and employment for the past five (5) years. 
(6)  Height. 
(7)  Weight. 
(8)  Color of eyes. 
(9)  Color of hair. 
(10)  Sex. 
(11)  Whether or not applicant is in good physical condition. 
(12)  Whether or not applicant has good hearing and good eyesight. 
(13)  Whether or not applicant uses or has used within the past five (5) years, intoxicating liquors, drugs or any other form of narcotic and, if so, to what extent. 
(14)  Whether or not applicant has ever been convicted of, plead guilty to or entered the plea of nolo contendere to the violation of any municipal, state, federal or other criminal law and, if so, the number of times and the kind of offenses and such other information as may be required by the chief of police. 
(15)  What experience, if any, applicant has had in the operation of cars. 
(16)  Whether or not applicant has previously been employed or licensed as a driver or chauffeur and, if so, whether or not his license has ever been revoked or suspended for any reason. 
(Code 1981, § 17-37) 
Sec. 16-69. - Same-Photographs. 
    Each applicant for a taxicab driver's permit shall file with his application two (2) recent photographs of himself of a size designated by the chief of police, one (1) of which shall be attached to and become a part of the application. 
(Code 1981, § 17-38) 
Sec. 16-70. - Same-Investigation. 
    The chief of police shall promptly make an investigation of the facts stated in an application, filed as provided in section 16-68, and shall make a written memorandum of his findings, which shall be kept on file in his office for the benefit of any interested party. 
(Code 1981, § 17-39) 
Sec. 16-71. - Medical examination of applicant. 
    The chief of police shall require of the applicant for a taxicab driver's permit such medical examination as he may deem proper. 
(Code 1981, § 17-40) 
Sec. 16-72. - Issuance or denial generally. 
    If the chief of police, upon the investigation made as provided in section 16-70, finds that the applicant is duly qualified and of good moral character, he shall issue him a taxicab driver's permit. If the chief of police is not satisfied of the qualifications and fitness of the applicant to operate taxicabs upon the streets of the town, he shall refuse to issue such permit. 
(Code 1981, § 17-41) 
Sec. 16-73. - Appeals from denial. 
    The applicant for a permit required by the provisions of this article shall have the right, within five (5) days from the day a taxicab driver's permit is denied, to appeal to the town manager from the decision of the chief of police denying the permit. The decision of the town manager shall be made after hearing relevant evidence and shall be subject to an appeal to the town council. 
(Code 1981, § 17-42) 
Sec. 16-74. - Form and contents. 
    Each taxicab driver's permit issued under this article shall contain a statement of the name, home address, business address and the employer of the holder thereof. One (1) of the photographs filed by an applicant for a taxicab driver's permit shall be attached to his permit in such manner that no other photograph may be substituted therefor without probability of detection. Taxicab drivers' permits shall be serially numbered. 
(Code 1981, § 17-43) 
Sec. 16-75. - Display. 
    Each taxicab driver's permit issued under this article shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the taxicab while such taxicab is being operated by or in the charge of the holder of such permit. 
(Code 1981, § 17-44) 
Sec. 16-76. - Fees. 
(a)  The fees with reference to taxicab driver's permits shall be as fixed from time to time by the town council. 
(b)  All fees, as provided for in this section shall be collected by the chief of police or some member of his department designated by him and shall promptly be paid over to the finance director to be placed in the general fund. 
(Code 1981, § 17-45) 
Sec. 16-77. - Term. 
    All taxicab drivers' permits issued under this article shall be valid, unless sooner revoked or suspended as provided in this article, from the date of issuance until the following thirty-first day of May of each year. 
(Code 1981, § 17-46) 
Sec. 16-78. - Transferability. 
    No taxicab driver's permit issued under this article shall be transferable. 
(Code 1981, § 17-47) 
Sec. 16-79. - Revocation or suspension generally. 
(a)  The town manager, upon application of the chief of police or any other interested party and upon ten (10) days' notice by personal service, shall have the power to revoke or suspend the taxicab driver's permit of any driver holding a taxicab driver's permit hereunder for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Repeated and persistent violation of traffic and safety laws and ordinances. 
(2)  Failure to report any accident in which such driver is involved, however slight. 
(3)  Operation of any taxicab known to the driver not to be in good order and repair. 
(4)  Conviction of reckless driving more than twice in any calendar year. 
(5)  Violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(6)  Violation of the laws of any state or the ordinances of any municipality. 
(7)  Purchase of alcoholic beverages of any description for a passenger or toleration of any disorderly conduct in a taxicab. 
(b)  The decision of a town manager relative to the revocation or suspension of a taxicab driver's permit shall be subject to an appeal to the town council. 
(Code 1981, § 17-48) 
Sec. 16-80. - Effect of conviction, etc., of crimes of moral turpitude. 
    A taxicab driver's permit issued under this article shall immediately become void and shall be immediately surrendered by the holder thereof upon his conviction of or plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the violation of any municipal, state, federal or other criminal law involving moral turpitude. 
(Code 1981, § 17-49) 
Sec. 16-81. - Driving without permit; employment of driver without permit. 
    Any person operating a taxicab on the streets of the town without a taxicab driver's permit and any owner of a taxicab who shall permit the same to be operated by any person who does not have a valid and effective taxicab driver's permit shall be punished as provided in section 16-2. 
(Code 1981, § 17-50) 
Chapter 17 - WATER AND SEWERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings, Ch. 4; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7; garbage, trash and weeds, Ch. 8; licenses, Ch. 9; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Municipal water supply, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-37 et seq., 15.1-332.1 et seq.; public utilities, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-292 et seq.; sewage disposal generally, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-317 et seq., 32.1-163 et seq.; municipal regulation and inspection of water supplies, sewers, septic tanks, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.1-854 et seq.; operation of water and sewage facilities within or without the town, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-875, 15.1-876; State Water Control Law, Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.2 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Adoption of construction standards. 
(a)  The manual entitled "The Public Facilities Manual for the Town of Warrenton, Virginia" is hereby adopted and is in full force and effect as if fully set forth herein. 
(b)  All water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm drains and streets which are constructed within any public right-of-way or easement or which are the extension of any public water line, sewer line, storm drain or street shall be constructed in accordance with the above manual. 
(c)  Such manual shall be on file in the office of the town recorder and shall be available for inspection during regular office hours. 
(Code 1981, § 19-1; Ord. No. 1992-12, 8-11-92) 
Sec. 17-2. - Applicability of fees. 
    Except where otherwise provided in this chapter, sewer and water connection fees as provided for in this chapter shall apply only where water and sewer mains exist abutting the property to be served. 
(Code 1981, § 19-3) 
Sec. 17-3. - Pro-rata payment for sewer and water conveyance facilities. 
(a)  When the town council, from time to time, upon application of town property owners, establishes need for the construction of sewer and/or water mains and other conveyance facilities, it may by ordinance authorize the construction of such sewer and/or water mains and other conveyance facilities, hereinafter referred to as "the project," and allocate the costs incurred by the town for the project among the benefitted property owners. 
(b)  Such ordinance shall be adopted after public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be published once a week for three (3) consecutive weeks and the public hearing shall be held no sooner than ten (10) days after the date the second notice appears in the newspaper. Such notice shall also be mailed to all benefitted property owners. 
(c)  The cost of the project shall include all costs for design, easement and right-of-way acquisitions, actual construction costs and any other costs incurred incident to the project, and shall be allocated among the benefitted property owners by the ordinance adopted by the town council. All costs shall be allocated on a pro-rata basis based upon established engineering estimates of the sewer and/or water flows, as the case may be, necessary for servicing each benefitted property. 
(d)  Benefitted property owners shall pay their pro-rata share of such costs prior to the time of connection of any portion of their property to the facilities installed as part of the project. In addition, payment of the pro-rata share shall include interest, at the rate established in the authorizing ordinance, from the date of completion of the project until payment. 
(e)  The town manager shall maintain for public inspection a record, in map or other form, of the sewer and/or water conveyance facilities subject to pro-rata fees provided herein. The finance director shall maintain a complete record of the costs of the project and the allocation of fees and shall notify the commissioner of revenue of the county of the costs payable by each benefitted property owner. 
(Ord. No. 1998-3, 4-14-98) 
Secs. 17-4-17-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - METERS AND SERVICE RATES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 17-21. - Use of meters generally. 
    All water furnished by the town will be furnished by meter measurements at the rates adopted by the town council and all water passing through any meter will be paid for according to the meter reading at such rate, whether used or wasted. 
(Code 1981, § 19-4) 
Sec. 17-22. - Selection of types, etc., of meters. 
    The town manager is authorized to select for the use of the town such types and makes of water meters as, in his knowledge, will best serve the town. 
(Code 1981, § 19-4) 
Sec. 17-23. - Meters property of town; right of entry to repair, etc. 
    Water meters shall be the property of the town and shall at all times be subject to control and inspection on the part of the town. Where the meter is located on or within any private property, building or premises, the town may enter such private property, building or premises at all reasonable hours for the purpose of examining, repairing or removing the meter in question or to take meter readings. 
(Code 1981, § 19-6) 
Sec. 17-24. - Replacement, etc., of injured meters. 
    Any water meter injured by hot water breaking from the heater or by any cause directly or indirectly attributable to the owner or occupant of the premises in question shall be replaced or repaired by the town at the expense of such owner or occupant. 
(Code 1981, § 19-7) 
Sec. 17-25. - Obstructed or covered meters. 
    If any customer of town water has his water meter so covered or obstructed that it cannot be easily read, then the water service to such customer shall be discontinued, after due notice by the town manager, until the customer in question corrects the situation at his own expense. 
(Code 1981, § 19-8) 
Sec. 17-26. - Removing, bypassing, etc., meters by unauthorized persons. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall turn or cause to be turned off or on the town water at the curb stopcock box or meter box or remove or replace a water meter or make any connection connecting the town water with the house service after a meter has been removed or make any connection around a meter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to turn any water cock for the purpose of allowing water to flow from the water main of the town into any premises when the water supply of such premises has been turned off for failure to pay the charges under this division. 
(Code 1981, § 19-9) 
Secs. 17-27-17-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CHARGES FOR WATER AND SEWER SERVICE 

Sec. 17-41. - Premises in town. 
    The water and sewer service rates to be charged for water consumed on any premises within the town shall be as provided for by the town council. 
(Code 1981, § 19-10; Ord. No. 1984-5, § 19-10, 6-5-84) 
Sec. 17-42. - Premises out of town. 
    The water and sewer service rates to be charged for water consumed on any premises outside the town shall be as provided for by the town council. 
(Code 1981, § 19-11; Ord. No. 1984-5, § 19-11, 6-5-84) 
Sec. 17-43. - Liability of owner of premises. 
    Where property is occupied by more than one (1) family or occupied other than by the owner, the owner of such property shall be directly liable to the town for the charges under this division for all water consumed on such property. The town manager shall bill the owner of such property for the water consumed thereon at the rates and times specified for the billing of water rents. 
(Code 1981, § 19-12) 
Sec. 17-44. - Discounts, etc., on vacated property. 
    No discount or rebate shall be allowed upon any bill for charges under this division by reason of property becoming vacant, unless the occupant of the property in question shall give written notice thereof to the town manager previous to the time the property becomes vacant. 
(Code 1981, § 19-13) 
Sec. 17-45. - Due dates. 
    The bills for charges under this division shall be due and payable on or before the twentieth day following the date of billing. 
(Code 1981, § 19-14; Ord. No. 1984-5, § 19-14, 6-5-84) 
Sec. 17-46. - Discontinuance of service for nonpayment. 
    If a bill for charges under this division is not paid by the thirtieth day following the billing period for which the bill was submitted, the town manager may discontinue the service to the premises in question. 
(Code 1981, § 19-15; Ord. No. 1984-5, § 19-15, 6-5-84) 
Sec. 17-47. - Estimate of consumption through defective, etc., meter. 
(a)  If any water meter at any time shall be found to have been tampered with or for any reason shall fail to register or shall be found defective in registering since the last previous reading, the water consumption for such period may be estimated by an average of previous readings through the same or from future readings. 
(b)  The town manager may adjust the bill for charges under this chapter where a leak has developed underground on the premises of such user and an excessive use of water has shown on the meter as a result of such leak which leak has been due to elements beyond the control of the water user, but only after due compliance with section 17-78. 
(c)  In the event of a loss of water due to an inside leak, resulting in a usage increase of at least one hundred fifty (150) percent over their average usage, the customer can request a courtesy adjustment of fifty (50) percent off the excess charges for usage over their average usage. Only one courtesy adjustment per customer, per three (3) years, will be granted for inside leaks. Any known leaks must have been repaired promptly and there must not be any ongoing leaks; it is to be verified by the meter report if available and/or a meter check by the meter department. 
(1)  Requests must be received in writing within sixty (60) days of the billing for the requested adjustment. Repairs must have been made within thirty (30) days of the billing for the high usage. 
(2)  Requests must include an explanation for the high usage, and include details of what was done to remedy the leak. 
(3)  A maximum of two (2) months will be considered for adjustment. 
(4)  Only one (1) adjustment per customer per three (3) years 
(5)  Failure to repair leaks in a timely manner may result in termination of service until repairs are made. 
(Code 1981, § 19-16; Ord. No. 2018-08 , 12-11-18) 
Sec. 17-48. - Charges for septic tank pumpers, etc. 
    Any person who discharges any animal or human excrement or garbage or other objectionable waste, from septic tanks or otherwise, directly into the sanitary sewer system by means other than through sewer connections shall be charged such rates as shall be provided by the town council. 
(Code 1981, § 19-17) 
Sec. 17-49. - Sewer service charge for property with private water supply. 
(a)  The owner of any residential property connected to the town sewer system, which property has a private water supply, shall pay in advance a charge in an amount as provided by the town council for such sewer service. 
(b)  The owner of any commercial property connected to the town sewer system, which property has a private water supply, shall pay for the sewer service such charges as may be established by contract with the town. 
(c)  So far as applicable, the other provisions of this division shall apply to the charges under this section. 
(Code 1981, §§ 19-18-19-20; Ord. No. 1984-5, § 19-18, 6-5-84) 
Secs. 17-50-17-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 17-66. - Duties of town manager. 
(a)  Subject to the control of the council, the town manager shall be charged with the general supervision, control and government of the town waterworks and water supply system. The town manager shall have general charge of the reservoir, fire plugs, fixtures and pipes connected to or laid down for the waterworks and of the lands on which the reservoirs and springs of the town and the water tower are located. 
(b)  The town manager shall diligently enforce all provisions of this Code and other ordinances relating to the town waterworks and prosecute all persons who may violate any such provisions. 
(Code 1981, § 19-21) 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 7. 
Sec. 17-67. - Map of mains and extensions. 
    The town manager shall keep and preserve a map of the location of the main pipes of the waterworks and water supply system of the town, showing the course, distance and size of each of them. When there is any extension of such main pipes, he shall, as soon as possible, mark on the map the place of such extension and the size of the pipe used in making it. 
(Code 1981, § 19-22) 
Sec. 17-68. - One connection meter allowed per consumer; classification of premises. 
(a)  The owner of premises within each class established by this section shall constitute a water consumer for which a minimum charge shall be made. One (1) connection and one (1) meter shall be allowed for one (1) consumer and only one (1) water consumer shall be supplied through one (1) connection or meter. 
(b)  For the purpose of supplying town water, premises shall be placed in one (1) or more of the following classes: 
(1)  A building under one (1) roof and occupied as one (1) residence, business or manufacture. 
(2)  A combination of buildings in one (1) common enclosure and occupied by one (1) family, business or manufacture. 
(3)  Every division of a double or tenement house having a partition wall and using separate hall or entrance. 
(4)  A building of one (1) or more apartments using in common one (1) hall or entrance. 
(5)  A building of one (1) or more apartments or offices, businesses or manufacturing using in common one (1) hall or entrance, or served by common restroom facility. 
(6)  A vacant lot or tract of land. (Code 1981, § 19-23) 
(Code 1981, § 19-23; Ord. No. 2017-08 , 9-12-17) 
Sec. 17-69. - Application for service; installation of service. 
    When any person owning property in the town along the line of any water main shall desire the introduction of water into his premises, he shall make written application therefor to the town manager on forms prescribed by him. Such application shall set forth the name of the applicant, the location and description of the property into which the water is to be introduced and the purpose for which the water is to be used. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee in such amount as is in accordance with the schedule of fees for installation of water service established by the town council. 
(Code 1981, § 19-24) 
Sec. 17-70. - Record of requests for introduction of water to premises. 
    There shall be kept, in the town manager's office, a record of requests for the introduction of water to premises and the record shall indicate that the owners of property, whose names are entered therein, request that water may be introduced upon the premises mentioned opposite their names, upon the terms prescribed by the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the town. 
(Code 1981, § 19-25) 
Sec. 17-71. - Certain work by authorized employees only. 
    No person other than an authorized employee of the town shall introduce water from the town pipes into any lot or tenement or construct or lay down or have constructed or laid down, any pipe or other work for the purpose of introducing water into a lot or tenement from the town pipes or break up any street for the purpose of constructing or laying down any such pipe or work. 
(Code 1981, § 19-26) 
Sec. 17-72. - Alterations or extensions to supply system on private premises. 
    Only a licensed plumber shall make alterations in or extensions to the water supply system of any premises or any pipe connected thereto. 
(Code 1981, § 19-27) 
Sec. 17-73. - Pipe lines laid by property owners. 
    Before the town furnishes water through pipe lines laid by property owners, such private lines, including the size, location and construction, must have been inspected and approved by the town manager or his authorized representative. Whenever the town furnishes water through any privately laid pipe lines, the town shall maintain such lines so long as it furnishes water through them. In consideration of such maintenance, the town shall have the right to connect with and furnish water to such additional consumers through such lines as the town may determine, without any charge being made by the owners of the lines to the town or to the owners of any property connected therewith. 
(Code 1981, § 19-28) 
Sec. 17-74. - Charge for restoring water after discontinuance. 
    There shall be a charge, as fixed from time to time by the town council, for turning on water to any premises after discontinuance of water service for any cause. 
(Code 1981, § 19-29) 
Sec. 17-75. - Fraudulent use of water. 
    No occupant of premises upon which water has been introduced shall permit water to be used, taken or received by any person other than the occupant or members or visitors of his family, except as provided in this chapter; provided, that this shall not be construed so as to prevent any person who has contracted for water on his own premises and whose fixtures are out of order, from obtaining water from some other person with the consent of the person occupying such premises. 
(Code 1981, § 19-30) 
Sec. 17-76. - Abandonment of service line. 
    When a property owner abandons a water service line, he shall notify the town manager of such abandonment. 
(Code 1981, § 19-31) 
Sec. 17-77. - Liability of town for temporary discontinuance, etc., of water supply. 
    The town does not, by virtue of the provisions of this chapter, assume any liability to the consumers of water for the volume or constant supply of water supplied. In the event it becomes necessary, for any cause over which the town has no control or because of the public interest, temporarily to cut off or discontinue the water supply in the whole or in any part of the town or to any particular consumer of property owner, the town shall not be liable to the consumer or property owner thereby deprived of water. 
(Code 1981, § 19-32) 
Sec. 17-78. - Leaks. 
(a)  The town shall not be responsible for any leaks which may develop or occur in water service pipes on premises of consumers of town water, whether or not such leaks occur on premises within the town or outside the town. 
(b)  If any consumer of water sold by the town is notified by the town manager that a leak or breakage of any kind exists on the water service line on the premises of such consumer of and such consumer shall fail to repair the same within twenty-four (24) hours after the receipt of such notice, the town manager shall cause the water from the town's water system to the premises of such consumer to be cut off and the same shall remain cut off until the town manager is furnished with satisfactory proof that such leak or breakage in the water service line has been completely repaired or otherwise remedied. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful if any hydrant, cock or other fixture is found leaking and the owner or occupant of the premises shall refuse or fail to have the necessary repairs made. 
(Code 1981, § 19-33) 
Sec. 17-79. - Defacing, etc., waterworks; wasting, etc., water generally. 
    No person shall deface or injure any fixture connected with or pertaining to the waterworks or place any building material, rubbish or other matter upon the stopcock of a street main or service pipe or obstruct access to any fixture connected with the waterworks or remove or injure any pipe, fire hydrant or cock or open any of them so as to waste water, nor shall any person use town water for a purpose for which he has neither paid nor obtained a license. 
(Code 1981, § 19-34) 
Sec. 17-80. - Right of entry for inspection. 
    Every person occupying any lot or tenement into which water is conveyed under this article shall permit any authorized agent of the town to enter such lot or tenement at reasonable hours to inspect the works therein or to see if the provisions of the law have been violated. 
(Code 1981, § 19-35) 
Sec. 17-81. - Prohibited activities at reservoirs. 
    No person shall bathe in the reservoirs of the town, deposit any offensive matter, sticks, mud or rubbish in the reservoirs or place the carcass of any animal or other deleterious substance on the watersheds or in any stream of any of the reservoirs. No person shall, without lawful authority, climb over or get through the enclosures of such reservoirs or hunt within such enclosures or fish in such reservoirs. 
(Code 1981, § 19-36) 
Sec. 17-82. - Size of pipes in tapping water mains. 
    In tapping the water mains for service pipes, no pipe of greater diameter than three-fourths inch shall be used, unless the owner of the property to be served, if such property to be served is within the town, has agreed in writing to pay the entire cost of the connection and has paid, in advance, the estimated cost of the installation or unless the owner, if the property to be served is outside the town, has paid in advance a fee in such amount as is in accordance with the schedule of fees for the installation of water service established by the council. 
(Code 1981, § 19-37) 
Secs. 17-83-17-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONSTRUCTION OF LINES OUTSIDE TOWN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- When water supply system may be operated outside town boundaries, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-875. 

Sec. 17-96. - Applications to lay lines, etc., make connections. 
    Any person outside the corporate limits of the town desiring town water shall make application to the town council for the privilege of laying or having laid a water line or main beyond the corporate limits of the town and connecting the same to the town water system. 
(Code 1981, § 19-38) 
Sec. 17-97. - Liability for costs. 
    Any person exercising a privilege granted pursuant to an application made as provided in section 17-96 shall bear the entire cost of such project. 
(Code 1981, § 19-39) 
Sec. 17-98. - Specifications for lines, etc. 
    All water lines or mains laid in the exercise of a privilege granted pursuant to an application made as provided in section 17-96 shall conform with the requirements and regulations adopted by section 17-1. 
(Code 1981, § 19-40) 
Sec. 17-99. - Metering. 
    Each house or customer served by a water line or main laid in the exercise of a privilege granted pursuant to an application made as provided in this division shall be metered separately, as provided in section 17-68. 
(Code 1981, § 19-41) 
Sec. 17-100. - Installation of fire plugs. 
    At the end of each deadend water main and at such other locations as may be required by the town manager any person exercising a privilege granted pursuant to an application made as provided in this division shall, at his own expense, install fire plugs of the type and character approved by the specifications adopted in section 17-1. 
(Code 1981, § 19-42) 
Sec. 17-101. - Title to and maintenance of lines, mains and fire plugs. 
    Upon completion of work done by a person exercising a privilege granted pursuant to an application made as provided in this division, the water lines or mains and fire plugs shall automatically be and become the sole and absolute property of the town and shall be maintained by the town. 
(Code 1981, § 19-43) 
Secs. 17-102-17-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLUORIDATION 

Sec. 17-121. - Supervision by state health department. 
    The state department of health shall have general supervision over treatments of the public water supply of the town with fluoride. 
(Code 1981, § 19-44) 
Sec. 17-122. - Duties of town manager. 
    Upon receiving a permit from the state department of health and until further direction of the town council, the town manager shall provide the means and proceed with the introduction of sodium fluoride or other suitable salt or acid of fluoride into the water supply of the town in such quantities as are required to maintain throughout the pipe distribution system a fluoride ion concentration approximately one part per million. 
(Code 1981, § 19-45) 
Sec. 17-123. - Records; testing for concentration. 
(a)  The water department shall keep an accurate daily record showing for each supply the number of gallons treated and the fluoridation concentration of the water before and after treatment. The water department shall also determine the fluoridation concentration in the water distribution system at such points and at such intervals as may be directed by the state health department. 
(b)  The water department shall furnish to the health department copies of records specified under the first paragraph of this section, at daily, weekly, and monthly intervals as may be required by the state health department. 
(Code 1981, § 19-46) 
Secs. 17-124-17-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SWIMMING POOLS 

Sec. 17-136. - Generally. 
    Water purchased for a swimming pool shall be purchased at the regular rates applicable in the town and the consumption thereof shall be metered, if so required by the town manager. 
(Code 1981, § 19-47) 
Sec. 17-137. - Purchase of water generally. 
    So long as the water supply of the town is sufficient, any property owner or resident whose property lies in the town may purchase water for a swimming pool, in a manner and at such time as may be determined by the town manager within his discretion. 
(Code 1981, § 19-49) 
Sec. 17-138. - Emptying. 
    Swimming pools in the town shall be emptied of water in a manner to be determined by the town manager upon the application of the property owner or resident purchasing water for such swimming pool. 
(Code 1981, § 19-49) 
Secs. 17-139-17-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - WATER CONSERVATION 

Sec. 17-146. - Authority to declare water emergencies. 
    During the continued existence of climatic, hydrological and other extraordinary conditions the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Town of Warrenton may require that certain uses of water, not essential to public health, safety and welfare, be reduced, restricted or curtailed. As the shortage of potable water becomes increasingly more critical, conservation measures to reduce consumption or curtail essential water use may be necessary. 
    The town manager, with the approval of the town council, is authorized to declare water emergencies affecting the use of water by persons and properties served by town water, inside and outside of the town boundaries, and to control and restrict the use of water during an emergency caused by a water shortage or other cause. 
(Ord. No. 1999-08, 8-10-99) 
Sec. 17-147. - Publication of declaration. 
    Upon the declaration of a water emergency pursuant to section 17-146, the town manager shall immediately post a written notice of the emergency at the front door of town hall, in a newspaper of general circulation in the area, announce on television and radio and use any other appropriate means of communication. 
(Ord. No. 1999-08, 8-10-99) 
Sec. 17-148. - Use of water restricted. 
    Upon the declaration of a water emergency pursuant to section 17-146, the town manager is authorized and directed to implement conservation measures by ordering the restricted use or absolute curtailment of the use of water for certain nonessential purposes for the duration of the water shortage in the manner hereinafter set out. In exercising this discretionary authority, and making the determinations set forth in section 17-150 thereof, the town manager shall give due consideration to water levels, available/usable storage on hand, draw down rates and the projected supply capability in source reservoirs in the Town of Warrenton, supply capacity, daily water consumption and consumption projections of the system's customers; prevailing and forecast weather conditions; fire service requirements; pipeline conditions including breakages, stoppages and leaks; estimates of minimum essential supplies to pre-serve public health and safety and such other data pertinent to the past, current and projected water demands. 
    All data collected and considered by the town manager shall be reduced to writing and maintained by the town manager. 
(Ord. No. 1999-08, 8-10-99) 
Sec. 17-149. - Limitation of restrictions. 
    The provisions of this division, or regulations promulgated hereunder by the town manager, which are hereby authorized, shall not apply to any governmental activity, institution, business or industry which shall be declared by the town manager, upon a proper showing, to be necessary for the public health, safety and welfare or the prevention of severe economic hardship or the substantial loss of employment. Any activity, institution, business or industry aggrieved by the finding of the town manager may appeal that decision to a water conservation appeals board appointed by the town council consisting of three members selected as follows: a single representative from the department of public utilities, and two citizens from the public at large. 
(Ord. No. 1999-08, 8-10-99) 
Sec. 17-150. - Water conservation measures. 
    Upon a determination by the town manager of the existence of the following conditions, the town manager shall take the following actions; which shall apply to any person whose water supply is furnished from the town water system: 
(a)  Condition 1. When moderate but limited supplies of water are available, the town manager shall, through appropriate means, call upon the general population to employ prudent restraint in water usage, and to conserve water voluntarily by whatever methods available. 
(b)  Condition 2. When very limited supplies of water are available, the town manager shall order curtailment of less essential usages of water, including, but not limited to, one or more of the following: 
(1)  The watering of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, plants, or any other vegetation, except indoor planting, greenhouse or nursery stocks and except limited watering for newly seeded lawns and watering by commercial nurseries of freshly planted plants upon planting and once a week for five (5) weeks following planting. 
(2)  The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, or any other type of mobile equipment, except in facilities operating with a water recycling system approved by the director of public works; provided, however, that any facility operating with a water recycling system shall prominently display in public view a notice approved by the director of public works/utilities stating that such recycling system is in operation. In lieu of the provisions hereof, the town manager may curtail the hours of operation of commercial enterprises offering such services or which wash their equipment. 
(3)  The washing of streets, driveways, parking lots, service station aprons, office buildings, exteriors of homes or apartments, or other outdoor surfaces. 
(4)  The operation of any ornamental fountain or other structure making a similar use of water. 
(5)  The filling of swimming and/or wading pools, or the refilling of swimming and/or wading pools which were drained after the effective date of the order. 
(6)  The use of water from fire hydrants for any purpose other than fire suppression or other public emergency. 
(7)  The serving of drinking water in restaurants, cafeterias or any other food establishment unless requested by the individual. 
(c)  Condition 3. When critically limited supplies of water are available, the town manager shall institute mandatory reductions on each customer as follows: 
(1)  Industrial, institutional, commercial, governmental, wholesale and all other nonresidential customers shall be allotted a percentage reduction based on that customer's average monthly and/or quarterly previous calendar year's consumption. 
(2)  Individual residential customers shall be limited to a specific volume or percentage reduction of water per quarter. 
If the allotted monthly/or quarterly water usage is exceeded, the customer shall be charged ten dollars ($10.00) for every one thousand (1,000) gallons of water consumed above the allotted volume. Where prior consumption data is not available, the town manager shall estimate allocations based upon the data available from similar activities of equal intensity. 
(d)  Condition 4. When crucially limited supplies of water are available, the town manager shall restrict the use of water to purposes which are absolutely essential to life, health and safety. 
The determination of conditions 2, 3 and 4 by the town manager shall be accompanied by a written report which shall set out the criteria utilized and data relied upon in making such determination including a narrative summary supporting the determination. Each report shall be available for public inspection in the town manager's office. The town manager shall forthwith transmit a copy of each report to the town council. 
(Ord. No. 1999-08, 8-10-99) 
Sec. 17-151. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this division, or of any of the conservation regulations promulgated by the town manager pursuant thereto, shall, Upon conviction thereof, in addition to additional charges set forth in subsection 17-150(c) be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Each act or each day's continuation of a violation shall be considered a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing, the town manager may suspend water service to any person continuing to violate the provisions of this ordinance or the regulations promulgated thereunder. If such water service is terminated, the person shall pay a re-connection fee of and all outstanding charges before service is restored. 
(Ord. No. 1999-08, 8-10-99) 
Sec. 17-152. - Notification of end of water emergency. 
    The town manager shall notify the town council when, in his opinion, the water emergency situation no longer exists. Upon concurrence of the council, the water emergency shall be declared to have ended. 
(Ord. No. 1999-08, 8-10-99) 
Secs. 17-153, 17-154. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWERS[3] 
Footnotes: 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 17-155. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abbreviations: The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD: Biochemical oxygen demand CFR: Code of Federal Regulations COD: Chemical oxygen demand EPA: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency gpd: Gallons per day LC 50 : Lethal concentration for fifty (50) percent of the test organisms l: Liter LEL: Lower explosive limit mg: Milligrams mg/l: Milligrams per liter NPDES: National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System O&M: Operation and maintenance POTW: Publicly owned treatment works RCRA: Resource Conservation and Recovery Act SIC: Standard industrial classification SWDA: Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq.) TSS: Total suspended solids USC: United States Code  
    Act or the act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. 
    Administrator: The administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency or his agents or delegates. 
    Approval authority: The executive director of the state water control board: 
    Authorized representative of the industrial user: 
(1)  If the industrial user is a corporation, "authorized representative" shall mean: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the industrial user is a partnership, association, or sole proprietorship, an "authorized representative" shall mean a general partner or the proprietor. 
(3)  If the individual user is representing federal, state or local governments, or an agent thereof, an "authorized representative" shall mean a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility. 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3) above may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the authorization is submitted to the town. 
    Best management practices: Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices or procedures of users to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants into the collection system of the town sewerage treatment system. Such practices may include, but not be limited to, notification plans of any accidental discharge, solvent management plans, operating procedures and practices to control batch discharge sludge and waste disposal, spillage or leaks, or drainage from raw material storage. 
    BOD (Biochemical oxygen demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)). 
    Building sewer: A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the POTW. 
    Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the act (§33 U.S.C. §1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial users and which appears in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471, incorporated herein by reference. 
    Collection system: All sewers which discharge wastewaters into the POTW, including the sewers of the town and those outside the limits of the town. 
    Combined sewer: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Composite sample: The sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on either an increment of flow or time. 
    Control authority: The term "control authority" shall refer to the superintendent of the municipal wastewater system, once the town has a U.S. EPA-approved pretreatment program according to the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11. 
    Cooling water: The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Director: The engineer for the town. 
    Discharge: The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants into the municipal wastewater system by an industrial user. 
    Environmental protection agency or U.S. EPA: The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the regional water management division director or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
    Garbage: Solid waste from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Holding tank waste: Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    House drain: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the house sewer, beginning five (5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    House sewer: The extension from the house drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Indirect discharge or discharge: The introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the act. 
    Industrial wastewater: Nondomestic wastewater originating from a nonresidential source, including any nonsanitary wastes which may be trucked into the POTW for disposal. 
    Interference: Any discharge into the collection system or the POTW, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, which: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and 
(2)  Therefore is a cause of a violation of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or in the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued therein (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
    Liquid waste hauler: Any person who transports material or substances liquid in nature which, if discharged into the sewer treatment system, would constitute effluent discharge subject to the provisions of this article. 
    Medical waste: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood byproducts, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites, etiologic agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes. 
    Municipal wastewater system or system or publicly owned treatment works or POTW: A "treatment works" as defined by Section 212 of the act (33 U.S.C. 1292), which is owned by the Commonwealth of Virginia or the Town of Warrenton (as defined by section 502(4) of the act). This definition includes any devices and systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. The term also means the municipality as defined in section 502(4) of the act which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to, and the discharges from, such a treatment works. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit or NPDES permit: A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
    Natural outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or ground water. 
    New source: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction or operations of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) (33 U.S.C. 1317(c)) of the act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307(c), provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production of wastewater generating process of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of paragraph (1)b. or (1)c. of this definition, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition. 
    Nondomestic waste: Any byproducts or discharge into the municipal wastewater system other than human excrement and household gray water (shower, dishwashing operations, etc.). Nondomestic pollutants include the characteristics of the wastewater; i.e. pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, odor. 
    Operator: The person responsible for the overall operation of a facility. 
    Owner: The person who owns a facility or part of a facility. 
    Pass through: Any discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the Commonwealth in quantities or concentrations, which alone, or in conjunction with indirect discharges or a discharge from other sources, is a cause of a violation of effluent limits, water quality standards or other requirements of the town's Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    Person: Any individual, association, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, joint stock company, trust, estate, municipality, state or federal governmental agency or entity, or their legal representatives, or any employee thereof, agent or assigns. 
    pH: A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard units; neutral wastewaters are numerically equal to 7 while the number increases to show increasing alkalinity and decreases to show increasing acidity. 
    Pollutant: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, industrial wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and agricultural wastes. 
    POTW treatment plant or treatment plant: That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment (including recycling and reclamation) of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
    Pretreatment or treatment: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater thereby rendering them less harmful to the municipal wastewater system prior to introducing such pollutants into the system. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, by process changes, or by other means except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment standard and requirements: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, including prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits imposed on an industrial user. 
    Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges: Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain defined types of industrial wastewater; the prohibitions appear in section 17-223 of this article. 
    Properly shredded garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority. 
    Sanitary sewer: A sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage: Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
    Sewer: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Slug load: Any pollutant (including BOD) released in a discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the specific discharge prohibitions contained in section 17-203 of this article. 
    Stormwater: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom, including snowmelt. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain: A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, excluding sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Submission: 
(1)  A request by a POTW for approval of a pretreatment program to the EPA or a director; or 
(2)  A request by a POTW to the EPA or a director for authority to revise the discharge limits in categorical pretreatment standards to reflect POTW pollutant removals. 
    Superintendent: The town manager designated by the town to supervise the operation of the municipal wastewater system and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article or his duly authorized representative. 
    Suspended solids: The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Town: The Town of Warrenton, a municipal corporation of Virginia. 
    User: Any person who contributes, or causes or allows the contribution of sewage or industrial wastewater into the municipal wastewater system, including persons who contribute such wastes from mobile sources. 
    User, industrial: Any person which is a source of discharge. 
    User, residential: Person only contributing sewage wastewater to the municipal wastewater system. 
    User, significant industrial (SIU): Except as provided in subsection (3) of this definition: 
(1)  Industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards; and 
(2)  Any other industrial user that discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); contributes a process wastestream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant; or is designated as significant by the town on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) immediately hereinabove, has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the town or the state water control board if the submission has not been approved, may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user or POTW, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user. 
    Wastewater: The liquid and water carried industrial wastes, or sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed to the municipal wastewater system. 
    Watercourse: A channel in which a flow of water occurs either continuously or intermittently. 
This article is gender neutral and the masculine gender shall include the feminine and vice versa. "Shall" is mandatory, "may" is permissive or discretionary. The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its use. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-156. - Flush toilet required. 
    Every building now erected or which may hereafter be erected, remodeled or repaired, whether occupied or to be occupied for any purpose, shall be provided by the owner thereof with an adequate number of sanitary flush-type toilet devices conforming to the Uniform Statewide Building Code, which devices shall be connected to the town sewer system; provided, that such building or premises are within three hundred (300) feet of a public sewer. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-157. - Frostproof water closets, cesspools and sanitary privies. 
(a)  Any sanitary privy in existence on the effective date of this section, which is situated on a lot or parcel of land within three hundred (300) feet of the town sewerage system, shall be removed within three hundred sixty (360) days after that date and a flush-type toilet device installed. 
(b)  Any frostproof water closet and cesspools are prohibited for use in the town. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-158. - Use of septic tanks, etc. 
    In cases where it is not practicable to make connection with the town system of sewers, the use of septic tanks or sanitary privies will be allowed, subject to the approval of the health department. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-159. - Removing obstructions. 
    In case of any stoppage in the public mains, the town shall remove the obstruction. If the stoppage occurs in the house sewer or drain, the property owner, whose property it connects with the main sewer, shall remove the obstruction. If he fails to remove the obstruction within forty-eight (48) hours after notice from the town manager, the obstruction may be removed by the town and the cost thereof, plus twenty (20) percent, shall be paid by the owner or occupant. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-160. - Damaging sewers, manholes, etc. 
    No person, while engaged in the construction of house sewers or otherwise, shall injure, trim, break or remove any portion of any main or lateral sewer or "Y" or manhole, lamphole or flush toilet tank or do any injury to any gas or water pipe or house sewer previously laid. No penalty fixed for violation of this Code shall prevent the town or any property owner from recovering any damages sustained by reason of such injury, by appropriate civil action or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-161. - Liability for damages, etc. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the town for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the town by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-162. - Notice and correction of violations. 
    Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served by the town with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Secs. 17-163-17-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTION GENERALLY 

Sec. 17-176. - Required generally. 
    Every building in existence prior to the construction of a public sewer adjacent to the lot or parcel of land on which such building stands shall connect to the public sewer within two (2) years of the time such sewer is constructed and made available for use. If the septic tank serving such building ceases to function properly so its continued operation constitutes a nuisance or menace to health, such building shall be connected to the adjoining public sewer immediately. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-177. - Specifications for materials and drains. 
    Specifications for materials and drains shall be as provided in the Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-178. - Diversion of certain wastes to sewer system. 
    Upon connection of premises to the sewer system, all cesspools, septic tanks and dry closets shall be abated and all wastewater from bathrooms, kitchen sinks and other domestic uses shall be diverted into the sewerage system of the town; provided, that no downspout from any building shall be connected with the municipal wastewater system or the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-179. - Permits generally. 
    No person shall make any connections with or opening into any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the town. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-180. - Connections by authorized employees only. 
    The connection of the house sewer to the sewer main or lateral shall be made by no person other than an authorized employee of the town. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-181. - Out-of-town premises not using town water. 
    Connections with the municipal wastewater system shall be allowed for premises outside the town, where town water is not used by the owner or occupant, subject to the approval of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-182. - Fees. 
    The town council shall establish a schedule of sewer connection fees for individual residential connections made to the town sewer for premises in town; individual residential connections made to the town sewer for premises outside the town boundaries; for commercial users; and industrial users. The property owner shall pay to the finance director such sewer connection fee as established by the town council before the connection to the sewer main is made. 
(1)  Premises in town. Any sewer connection fee not paid by the property owner shall constitute a lien on such property, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner as tax levies are enforced and collected. The town hereby reserves the right to run sewer lines from the sewer main to the line of the property owner and to charge the cost of so doing to the property owner, thereby creating a lien on such property, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner as tax levies and liens are enforced and collected. 
(2)  Nonresidents. 
a.  Except as otherwise provided, in the discretion of the town council and upon the execution of a contract between the town and nonresidents of the town, such nonresidents may be granted the privilege of connecting with the sewer of the town at such location and upon such terms and conditions as to the rights-of-way, easements, construction, maintenance and repair of such sewer as may be prescribed by the town council; provided, that all of the costs and expenses thereof shall be borne by the nonresident or his assignees and that the nonresident or his assignees shall pay to the town a fee in such amount as is in accordance with the schedule of sewer connection fees established by the town council for each individual connection that is made to the town sewer. 
b.  Every nonresident or his assignee obtaining sewer service under this section shall indemnify and save harmless the town against all loss, damage or injury to any person or property by reason of the construction, maintenance, use or repair of such sewer. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
DIVISION 3. - HOUSE SEWERS 

Sec. 17-183. - Inspection and approval of lines prior to connection; use of private lines by town. 
    Before a private sewer line may be connected with the town sewerage system, such private line, including the size, location and construction, must have been inspected and approved by the town manager or his authorized representative. In consideration of a permit being granted to connect the private lines with the town sewerage system, the town shall have the right to connect other sewers with the private sewer lines without any charge being made by the owner of the lines to the town or to the owner of any property connected therewith. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-184. - Notice to town manager of readiness for inspection. 
(a)  Any person engaged in the installation of a house sewer shall notify the town manager when the house sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. 
(b)  No backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-185. - Separate sewer for each building. 
    A separate and independent house sewer shall be provided for every building; except, that where one (1) building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the house sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one (1) house sewer. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-186. - Use of old house sewers for new buildings. 
    Old house sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the town manager, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-187. - Use of artificial means to convey sewage through house drains. 
    In all buildings in which any house drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the house sewer. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Secs. 17-188-17-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PUBLIC SEWERS 

Sec. 17-201. - Location of discharge into sewer system. 
(a)  Domestic waste. All domestic waste shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer system through regular sewer connections, except at a location designated by the town manager and under his direction. 
(b)  Stormwater and surface drainage: Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the town manager. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-202. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect dischargers of pollutants from all sources into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the town and enables the town to comply with all applicable state and federal laws including the Clean Water (Act 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403). The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system, including interference with its use or disposal of municipal sludge; 
(2)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  Ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is maintained at a level which allows its marketability; 
(4)  Protect both municipal personnel who may come into contact with sewage, sludge and effluent in the course of their employment as well as protecting the general public; 
(5)  Preserve the hydraulic capacity of the municipal wastewater system; 
(6)  Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the system; 
(7)  Provide for equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the municipal wastewater system; and 
(8)  Ensure the town complies with its NPDES permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other federal or state laws which the municipal wastewater system is subject to. 
(b)  This article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect [discharge] to the municipal wastewater collection system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, establishes administrative review procedures, requires user reporting, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(c)  This article shall apply to the town and to persons outside of the town who, by contract with the town, are included as users of the municipal wastewater system. Except as otherwise provided herein, the superintendent of the municipal wastewater system or his designees shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. By discharging wastewater into the municipal wastewater system, industrial users located beyond the town limits agree to comply with the terms and conditions established in this article, as well as any permits or orders issued hereunder. 
(d)  Administration. Except as otherwise provided herein, the superintendent shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the superintendent may be delegated by the superintendent to other town personnel. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-203. - General sewer use requirements. 
(a)  Prohibited discharge standards. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater to discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal wastewater system or the POTW which will cause interference or pass through. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the municipal wastewater system, whether or not the user is subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirement. Furthermore, no user may contribute the following substances to the system: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient, either alone, or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the municipal wastewater system. Included in this prohibition are wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty (60) degrees Celsius), using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21, any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. At no time shall two (2) successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the system or at any point in the system be more than five (5) percent nor any single reading over ten (10) percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. 
(2)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause interference with the flow in a sewer in any dimension, capable of causing obstruction to the flow in the municipal wastewater system or the POTW or interference with the proper operation of the municipal wastewater system or the POTW, including, but not limited to, improperly shredded garbage, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, wood or paunch manure; in no case, solids greater than one-half (1/2) inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
(3)  Any fats, wax, grease or oils including, but not limited to, petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(4)  Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 or more than 9.0, or otherwise having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, municipal wastewater system, equipment, or personnel of the town. 
(5)  Any wastewater containing pollutants in sufficient quantity (flow or concentration), either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to pass through or interfere with the municipal wastewater system, any wastewater treatment or sludge process, or constitute a hazard to humans or animals. 
(6)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(7)  Any substance which may cause the treatment plant effluent or any other residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the system cause the town to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal regulations or permits issued under Section 405 of the act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or other Commonwealth of Virginia requirements applicable to the sludge use and disposal practices being used by the town. 
(8)  Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently impart color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the town's NPDES permit. Color, in combination with turbidity, shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than ten (10) percent from the seasonably established norm for aquatic life. 
(9)  Any wastewater having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (fifty-five (55) degrees Celsius) or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which, at the point of intake to the POTW, has a temperature exceeding one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit (forty (40) degrees Celsius). 
(10)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes, except as specifically approved by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(11)  Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the system in a quantity that may cause worker health and safety problems. 
(12)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the town, in accordance with this article. 
(13)  Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, cooling water, and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the superintendent. 
(14)  Any industrial wastes containing floatable fats, waxes, grease or oils, or which become floatable at the wastewater temperature at the introduction to the treatment plant during the winter season; but in no case, industrial wastewater containing more than 100 mg/l of emulsified oil or grease. 
(15)  Nonbiodegradable cutting oils, commonly called soluble oils, which form a persistent water emulsion, and nonbiodegradable complex carbon compounds. 
(16)  Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes. 
(17)  Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the superintendent in a wastewater permit. 
(18)  Any material containing ammonia, ammonia salts, or other chelating agents which will produce metallic complexes that interfere with the municipal wastewater system. 
(19)  Any material identified as hazardous waste according to 40 CFR Part 261, except as may be specifically authorized by the superintendent. 
(20)  Any wastewater causing the treatment plant effluent to show a lethal concentration of fifty (50) percent (LC 50 ) as determined by a toxicity test of ninety-six (96) hours or less using a percentage of the discharge and aquatic test species chosen by the superintendent. 
(21)  Recognizable portions of the human or animal anatomy. 
(22)  Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the municipal wastewater system. 
Wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that these wastes could be discharged to the municipal wastewater system. All floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must discharge to the industrial user's pretreatment facility before connecting with the system. 
(b)  Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. Users subject to categorical pretreatment standards are required to comply with applicable standards as set out in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471 and incorporated herein by reference as fully as though set out. 
(c)  Commonwealth of Virginia requirements. Users are required to comply with any applicable pretreatment standards and requirements of the Commonwealth of Virginia, as set out in Virginia Regulation 680-14-01, which are incorporated herein by reference as fully as though set out. 
(d)  Right of revision. The town reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater permits, more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the municipal wastewater system, if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in this article, or the general and specific prohibitions contained. 
(e)  Dilution. No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or by any other manner or way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment, in order to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation, unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard, or in any other pollutant specific limitation developed by the town, is expressly prohibited. 
(f)  Special agreement. The town reserves the right to enter into special agreements with users setting out special terms under which the industrial user may discharge to the system. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a pretreatment standard. However, the industrial user may request a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. Industrial users may also request a variance from the categorical pretreatment standards from the U.S. EPA. Such a request will be approved only if the user can prove that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by U.S. EPA when establishing that pretreatment standard. An industrial user requesting a fundamentally different factor variance must comply with the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
DIVISION 5. - PRETREATMENT 

Sec. 17-204. - Pretreatment of wastewater. 
(a)  Pretreatment facilities. Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in section 17-203 above, within the time limitations specified by the superintendent. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the town shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the industrial user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the town for review, and shall be acceptable to the town before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge to the town under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Preliminary treatment generally. The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes exceeding the limitations set forth in this article, shall be subject to the review and approval of the town manager and, where deemed necessary by the town manager, the owner shall provide at his expense such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce the objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the limits provided for in this article, and to control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. 
Every industrial user shall provide all wastewater treatment that is required to enable the user to comply with the terms and conditions of its permit and the requirements of this division within the time limitations specified in its permit, and shall comply with all national categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. 
(c)  Additional measures. Whenever deemed necessary, the superintendent may require industrial users to restrict the industrial user's discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other condition as may be necessary to protect the municipal wastewater system and determine the industrial user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(1)  Each person discharging into the municipal wastewater system greater than one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons per day or greater than five (5) percent of the average daily flow in the system, whichever is lesser, shall install and maintain, on his property and at his expense, a suitable storage and flow control facility to insure equalization of flow over a twenty-four-hour period. The facility shall have a capacity for at least fifty (50) percent of the daily discharge volume and shall be equipped with alarms and a rate of discharge controller, the regulation of which shall be directed by the superintendent. A wastewater permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(2)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease, flammable substances, sand or other harmful substances; except, that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the owner, at his expense. 
(3)  Industrial users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(d)  Spill prevention plans. Industrial users shall provide protection from accidental discharge of materials which may interfere with the municipal wastewater system by developing spill prevention plans. Facilities necessary to implement these plans shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or industrial user's expense. Spill prevention plans, including the facilities and the operating procedures, shall be approved by the town before implementation of the plan. 
(e)  Tenant responsibility. Any person who shall occupy the industrial user's premises as a tenant under any rental or lease agreement shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the provisions of this article in the same manner as the owner. 
(f)  Separation of domestic and industrial wastestreams. All new and domestic wastewaters from restrooms, showers, drinking fountains, etc. shall be kept separate from all industrial wastewaters until the industrial wastewaters have passed through a required pretreatment system and the industrial user's monitoring facility. When directed to do so by the superintendent, industrial users must separate existing domestic wastestreams from industrial wastestreams. 
(g)  Hauled wastewater. Septic tank waste (septage) will be accepted into the municipal wastewater system only at a designated receiving structure within the treatment plant area, and at such times as are established by the superintendent; provided such wastes do not contain toxic or hazardous pollutants, and provided such discharge does not violate any other requirements established by the town. Permits for individual vehicles to use such facilities shall be issued by the superintendent. 
(1)  The discharge of industrial wastes as industrial septage requires prior approval and a wastewater permit from the town. The superintendent shall have authority to prohibit the disposal of such wastes, if such disposal would interfere with the treatment plan operation. Waste haulers are subject to all other sections of this article. 
(2)  Fees for dumping septage will be established as part of the user fee system as authorized in section 17-214(a) below. 
(h)  Vandalism. No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance or equipment, or other part of the municipal wastewater system. Any person found in violation of this requirement shall be subject to the sanctions set out in section 17-212, below. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-205. - Wastewater permit eligibility. 
(a)  Wastewater survey. When requested by the superintendent, all industrial users must submit information on the nature and characteristics of their wastewater by completing a wastewater survey prior to commencing their discharge. The superintendent is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require industrial users to update the survey. Failure to complete this survey shall be reasonable grounds for terminating service to the industrial user and shall be considered a violation of this article. 
(b)  Wastewater permit requirement. It shall be unlawful for significant industrial users to discharge wastewater, either directly or indirectly, into the town's sanitary sewer system without first obtaining an wastewater permit from the town sewer treatment plan superintendent. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the industrial user to the sanctions set out in sections 17-212 and 17-213. Obtaining a wastewater permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to obtain other permits required by federal, state, or local law. The superintendent may require that all industrial users, including liquid waste haulers, comply with such additional permit requirements of this article as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(c)  Permitting existing connections. Any significant industrial user which discharges nondomestic waste into the sanitary sewer system prior to the effective date of this article and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within ninety (90) days after said date, apply to the town for a wastewater permit and shall not cause or allow discharges to the town sewer treatment plant to continue after one hundred eighty (180) days from and after the effective date of this article, except in accordance with a permit issued by the superintendent. 
(d)  Permitting new connections. Any significant industrial user proposing to begin or recommence discharging nondomestic wastes into the sanitary sewer system must obtain a pretreatment permit prior to beginning or recommencing such discharge. An application for this permit must be filed at least ninety (90) days prior to the anticipated start-up date. 
(e)  Permitting extrajurisdictional industrial users. Any existing significant industrial user located beyond the town limits shall submit a permit application in accordance with section 17-205(f) below within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this article. New industrial users located beyond the town limits shall submit such applications to the superintendent ninety (90) days prior to discharging into the sanitary sewer. Upon review and approval of such application, the superintendent may enter into a contract with the user which requires the user to subject itself to and abide by this chapter, including all permitting, compliance monitoring, reporting, and enforcement provisions herein. Alternately, the superintendent may enter into an agreement with the neighboring jurisdiction in which the significant industrial user is located to provide for the implementation and enforcement of pretreatment program requirements against said user. It shall be unlawful for any nondomestic user located outside the town limits to continue discharges to the town sewer treatment plant, except as provided herein. 
(f)  Wastewater permit application contents. In order to be considered for a wastewater permit, all industrial users required to have a permit must submit the following information on an application form approved by the superintendent: 
(1)  Name of the facility, the operators and the owners, address, and location (if different from the address). 
(2)  Environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Standard industrial classification (SIC) code for pretreatment, the industry as a whole, and any processes for which federal categorical standards have been promulgated. 
(4)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any federal, state, or local standards, pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process, and nature and concentration (or mass if pretreatment standard requires) of regulated pollutants in each regulated process (daily maximum and average concentration or mass when required by a pretreatment standard). Sampling and analysis will be undertaken in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136, as amended. 
(5)  Time and duration of the discharge. 
(6)  Measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the municipal wastewater system from regulated process streams and other streams as necessary to use the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(7)  Daily maximum, daily average, and monthly average wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly, and seasonal variations, if any. 
(8)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used at the facility which are or could accidentally or intentionally be discharged into the town sewer treatment plant. 
(9)  The site plans, floor plans and mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location and elevation. 
(10)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production. 
(11)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day). 
(12)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation of the pretreatment system. 
(13)  If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance (O&M) is required to meet the standards, then the [application form] shall indicate the shortest time schedule necessary to accomplish installation or adoption of such additional treatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be longer than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions apply to this schedule: 
a.  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, beginning operation, and conducting routine operation). No increment referred to in (a) above shall exceed nine (9) months. 
b.  No later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the superintendent including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the superintendent. 
(14)  A statement reviewed by an authorized representative of the user and certified to by a qualified professional indicating whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and if not, what additional pretreatment is necessary. 
(15)  Any other information as may be deemed by the superintendent to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
(g)  Permit application signatories and certifications. 
(1)  All permit applications and/or industrial user reports required by this article must contain the following certification statement and be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(2)  All permit applications, industrial user reports, and certificates must be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, including, but not limited to: 
a.  By a responsible corporate officer, if the industrial user submitting the reports is a corporation. For the purpose of this paragraph, a responsible corporate officer means: 
1.  A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
2.  The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
b.  By a general partner or proprietor if the industrial user submitting the reports is a partnership or sole proprietorship respectively. 
c.  The principal executive officer or director having responsibility for the overall operation of the discharging facility if the industrial user submitting the reports is a federal, state, or local governmental entity, or their agents. 
d.  By a duly authorized representative of the individual designated in paragraph (a), (b) or (c) of this section if: 
1.  The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in paragraph (a), (b) or (c); 
2.  The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of the plant manager, operator of a well, or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
3.  The written authorization is submitted to the town. 
e.  If an authorization under paragraph (d) of this section is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of paragraph (d) of this section must be submitted to the town prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
(h)  Wastewater permit evaluation. The superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and may require additional information. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete permit application, the superintendent will evaluate the data furnished and determine whether to issue an industrial user wastewater permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. If no determination is made within this time period, the application will be deemed denied. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-206. - Wastewater permit issuance process. 
(a)  Duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified period not to exceed five (5) years. A permit may be issued for a period less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the superintendent. Each permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(b)  Contents. Wastewater permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by the superintendent to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the municipal wastewater system's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, protect ambient air quality, and protect against damage to the town municipal wastewater system. 
(1)  Wastewater permits must contain the following conditions: 
a.  A statement that indicates the permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five (5) years. 
b.  A statement that the permit is nontransferable without prior notification to, and approval from, the town, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing permit. 
c.  Effluent limits applicable to the user based on applicable standards in federal, Commonwealth of Virginia, and local law. 
d.  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, Commonwealth of Virginia, and local law. 
e.  Statement of applicable penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedules. 
(2)  Wastewater permits may contain, but need not be limited to the following: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization. 
b.  Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater pollutants or properties. 
c.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology or construction of appropriate containment devices, etc., designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system. 
d.  Development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions, including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routine discharges. 
e.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the municipal wastewater system. 
f.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the municipal wastewater system. 
g.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment. 
h.  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, standards for tests, and reporting schedules. 
i.  Requirements for immediate reporting of any instance of noncompliance and for automatic resampling and reporting within thirty (30) days where self-monitoring indicates a violation(s). 
j.  Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment standards and requirements. 
k.  Requirements for submission of periodic self-monitoring or specific notification reports. 
l.  Reserved. 
m.  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified in section 17-207 and affording the superintendent, or his representatives, access thereto. 
n.  Requirements for prior notification and approval by the superintendent of any new introduction or wastewater pollutants or of any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater prior to introduction into the municipal wastewater system. 
o.  Requirements for the prior notification and approval by the superintendent of any change in the manufacturing and/or pretreatment process used by the permittee. 
p.  Reserved. 
q.  Requirements for immediate notification of excessive, accidental, or sludge discharges, or any discharge which could cause any problems to the municipal wastewater system. 
r.  Reserved. 
s.  A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and Commonwealth of Virginia pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the permit. 
t.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the superintendent to ensure compliance with this article, and federal and Commonwealth of Virginia laws, rules and regulations; the term of the permit. 
(c)  Appeals. The superintendent will provide all interested persons with notice of final permit decisions. Upon notice by the superintendent, any person, including the industrial user, may petition to appeal to the superintendent to reconsider the terms of the permit within ten (10) days of the notice. 
(1)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(2)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to be placed in the permit. 
(3)  The effectiveness of the permit shall not be stayed pending a reconsideration by the authority. 
(4)  If the town fails to act within fifteen (15) days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. The superintendent's decision not to reconsider a final permit, not to issue a permit, or not to modify a permit, shall be considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review. 
(5)  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the superintendent's decision must do so by filing a complaint with the circuit court for the county within thirty (30) days of the superintendent's decision. 
(d)  Modification. The superintendent may modify the permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(2)  To address material or substantial alterations or additions to the industrial user's operation, processes, or wastewater discharge volume or character which were not considered in drafting the effective permit. 
(3)  A change in the municipal wastewater system that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge. 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the town's municipal wastewater system, town personnel or the receiving waters. 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the permit. 
(6)  Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in the permit application or in any required reporting. 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from such categorical standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; or 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the permit. 
(9)  To reflect transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator. 
(10)  Upon request of the permittee, provided such request does not create a violation of any applicable requirements, standards, laws, or rules and regulations. The filing of a request by the permittee for a permit modification, revocation and reissuance, or termination, or a notification of planned changes or anticipated noncompliance, does not stay any permit condition. 
(e)  Transfer. Wastewater permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator with prior approval of the superintendent, if the permittee gives at least thirty (30) days' advance notice to the superintendent. The notice must include a written certification by the new owner which: 
(1)  States that the new owner has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes. 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur. 
(3)  Acknowledge full responsibility for complying with the existing permit. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater permit voidable on the date of facility transfer. 
(f)  Denial, suspension or revocation. Any one (1) or more of the following are unlawful and in addition to or in lieu of any other penalties or remedies provided by this article, shall be grounds for the denial, suspension, termination, or revocation of a sewer connection or significant industrial user permit applied for by or issued to an industrial user pursuant to the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Failure to notify the town of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge. 
(2)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports. 
(3)  Tampering with monitoring equipment. 
(4)  Refusing to allow timely access to the facility premises and records. 
(5)  Failure to meet effluent limitations. 
(6)  Failure to pay fines. 
(7)  Failure to pay sewer charges. 
(8)  Failure to meet compliance schedules. 
(9)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey. 
(10)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility. 
(11)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement or any terms of the permit or the ordinance. 
Permits shall be voidable upon nonuse, cessation of operations, transfer of business ownership. All permits are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater permit. 
(g)  Reissuance. The user shall apply for permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application in accordance with section 17-205(f), a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. An expired permit will continue to be effective and enforceable until the permit is reissued if: 
(1)  The industrial user has submitted a complete permit application at least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration date of the user's existing permit. 
(2)  The failure to reissue the permit, prior to expiration of the previous permit, is not due to any act or failure to act on the part of the industrial user. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-207. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Baseline monitoring reports. Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or one hundred eighty (180) days after the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing significant industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the municipal system shall be required to submit to the town a report which contains the information set out hereinbelow. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, including existing users which have changed their operation or processes so as to become new sources, shall be required to submit to the town a report which contains the information listed set out hereinbelow. A new source shall also be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged. The information required by this section includes: 
(1)  Identifying information. The user shall submit the name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owners. 
(2)  Permits. The user shall submit a list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. The user shall submit a brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such industrial user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the system from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurements. The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the system from regulated process streams and other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The industrial user shall identify the categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  In addition, the industrial user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (and/or mass, where required by the standard or town) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average concentrations (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be performed in accordance with procedures set out in 40 CFR Part 136. 
c.  A minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. All other pollutants will be measured by twenty-four-hour composite samples obtained through flow proportional sampling techniques. If flow proportional composite sampling is infeasible, samples may be obtained through time proportional sampling techniques or through four (4) grab samples if the user proves such a sample will be representative of the discharge. 
(6)  Special certification. A statement reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified to by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required in order to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 17-205(f)(13) of this article. 
(8)  [ Certification required. ] All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 17-205(g) of this article. 
(b)  Compliance deadline reports. Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the municipal wastewater system, any industrial user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the town a report containing the information described in section 17-207(a)(4), (5) and (6). For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 17-205(g). 
(c)  Periodic compliance reports. Any significant industrial user shall, at a frequency determined by the superintendent, but in no case less than twice per year, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by such pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 17-205(g) of this article. 
(1)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the industrial user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the industrial user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(2)  In the event an industrial user's monitoring results indicates a violation has occurred, the industrial user must immediately notify the superintendent and resample its discharge. The industrial user must report the results of the repeated sampling within thirty (30) days of discovering the first violation. 
(d)  Report of changed conditions. Each industrial user is required to notify the superintendent of any planned significant changes to the industrial user's operations or pretreatment systems which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater. 
(1)  The superintendent may require the industrial user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater permit application under section 17-205(f), if necessary. 
(2)  The superintendent may issue a wastewater permit under section 17-205(h) or modify an existing wastewater permit under section 17-206(d) of this article. 
(3)  No industrial user shall implement the planned changed condition(s) until and unless the superintendent has responded to the industrial user's notice. 
(4)  For purposes of this requirement, flow increases of ten (10) percent or greater and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutant shall be deemed significant. 
(e)  Reports of potential problems. Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental or intentional discharges of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent the discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the town for review and approved by the town before construction of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. 
(1)  No industrial user which commences contribution to the system after the effective date of this article shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the town. 
(2)  In the case of an accidental or other discharge which may cause potential problems for the municipal wastewater system, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the town of the incident. This notification shall include the location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(3)  Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the superintendent, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measure to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the system, nature resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article. 
(4)  Failure to notify the town of potential problem discharges shall be deemed a separate violation of this article. 
(5)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph (b) above. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(f)  Reports from noncategorical users. All industrial users not subject to categorical pretreatment standards and not required to obtain a wastewater permit shall provide appropriate reports to the town as the superintendent may require. 
(g)  Sample collection. Except as indicated in 17-208(a), wastewater samples collected for purposes of determining industrial user compliance with pretreatment standards and requirements must be obtained using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the superintendent may authorize the use of time proportional sampling. 
(1)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, toxicity, sulfides, and volatile organic chemicals must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(h)  Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, or, if 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA and the town. 
(i)  Monitoring charges. The superintendent may recover the town's expenses incurred in collecting and analyzing samples of the industrial user's discharge by adding the costs to the industrial user's sewer charges. 
(j)  Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been transmitted at the time of deposit, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service. 
(k)  Recordkeeping. Industrial users shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records and information required to be retained under 40 CFR 403.12(o). These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning compliance with this article, or where the industrial user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-208. - Compliance monitoring. 
(a)  Inspection and sampling. The town shall have the right to enter the facilities of any industrial user to ascertain whether the purpose of the article is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Industrial users shall allow the superintendent or his representatives ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the town, state, and U.S. EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The city, state, and U.S. EPA shall have the right to set up or require installation of, on the industrial user's property, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The town may require the industrial user to install monitoring equipment, as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the industrial user at the industrial user's expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated periodically to ensure their accuracy. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the industrial facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the industrial user at the written or verbal request of the superintendent and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the industrial user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing town personnel access to the industrial user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(b)  Search warrants. If the superintendent has been refused access to a building, structure or property or has any part thereof, and if the superintendent has probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article or that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of the town designed to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then upon application by the town attorney, the municipal court judge of the town shall issue a search and/or seizure warrant describing therein the specific location subject to the warrant. The warrant shall specify what, if anything, may be searched and/or seized on the property described. Such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the superintendent in the company of a uniformed police officer of the town. In the event of an emergency affecting public health and safety, or if the industrial user consents, inspections shall be made without the issuance of a warrant. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-209. - Confidential information. 
    Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, and monitoring programs, and from town inspection and sampling activities shall be available to the public without restriction unless the industrial user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the town that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. 
(1)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(2)  When requested and demonstrated by the industrial user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-210. - Publication of significant violators. 
    The town shall annually publish, in the largest daily newspaper circulated in the area where the municipal wastewater system is located, a list of the industrial users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant noncompliance" shall mean: 
(1)  Sixty-six (66) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the discharge limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Thirty-three (33) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the town believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of town personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment or has resulted in the town's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s) which the town has reason to believe is significant. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-211. - Administrative enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Notification of violation. Whenever the superintendent finds that any industrial user has violated or is violating this article, a wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the superintendent or his agent may serve upon said user a written notice of violation. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to the superintendent. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the town to take emergency action without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(b)  Consent orders. The superintendent is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the industrial user responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the industrial user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as any administrative orders issued and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(c)  Show cause hearing. The superintendent may order any industrial user which causes or contributes to violation(s) of this article, wastewater permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement to appear before the superintendent and show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the industrial user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the industrial user. Whether or not the industrial user appears as noticed, immediate enforcement action may be pursued following the hearing date. 
(d)  Compliance orders. When the superintendent finds that an industrial user has violated or continues to violate the article, permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, he may issue an order to the industrial user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. Furthermore, the superintendent may continue to require such additional self-monitoring for at least ninety (90) days after consistent compliance has been achieved, after which time the self-monitoring conditions in the discharge permit shall control. 
(e)  Cease and desist orders. When the superintendent finds that an industrial user has violated or continues to violate this article, permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the superintendent may issue an order to the industrial user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements. 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations, and/or terminating the discharge. 
(f)  Emergency suspensions. The superintendent may suspend the wastewater permit of an industrial user, whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, interferes with the operation of the municipal wastewater system, or which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any industrial user notified of a suspension of its wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of an industrial user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the superintendent shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the municipal wastewater system, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. 
(2)  An industrial user which is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the cause of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the superintendent prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing set out herein. 
(g)  Termination of permit. In addition to those provisions in section 17-236 of this article, any industrial user which violates the following conditions of this article, wastewater permits, or orders issued hereunder is subject to permit termination: 
(1)  Violation of permit conditions. 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge. 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge. 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling. 
Noncompliant industrial users will be notified of the proposed termination of their wastewater permit and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 17-211(c) of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-212. - Judicial enforcement remedies and penalties. 
(a)  Injunctive relief. Whenever an industrial user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the superintendent, through the town's attorney, may petition the county court for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as may be appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the industrial user. Such other action as may be appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief may also be sought by the town. The court shall grant an injunction without requiring a showing of a lack of an adequate remedy at law. 
(b)  Civil penalties. Any industrial user which has violated or continues to violate this article, any order or permit hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement shall be liable to the superintendent for a maximum civil penalty of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per violation per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term-average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each business day during the period of the violation. 
(1)  The superintendent may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with the enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the town. 
(2)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the industrial user's violation, corrective actions by the industrial user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(3)  Where appropriate, the superintendent may accept mitigation projects in lieu of the payment of civil penalties where the project provides a valuable service to the town and the industrial user's expense in undertaking the project is at least one hundred fifty (150) percent of the civil penalty. 
(c)  Criminal prosecution. 
(1)  Any industrial user who willfully or negligently violates any provisions of this article, any orders or permits issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than twelve (12) months or both. 
(2)  Any industrial user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other documentation filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or wastewater permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than twelve (12) months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-213. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
(a)  Upset. An upset shall be an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against a user for violating a pretreatment standard and requirement if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The user can identify the cause of the upset. 
(2)  The facility was operating in a prudent and workmanlike manner at the time of the upset and was in compliance with applicable O&M procedures. 
(3)  The user submits, within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset, a description of the discharge and its causes, exact dates and times of the period of noncompliance (if not corrected, then time noncompliance is anticipated to end), and the steps being taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(4)  If this report is given orally, the user must also submit a written report containing such information within five (5) days unless waived by the superintendent. 
(5)  Upset shall mean an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards and requirements because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. Noncompliance caused by operational error, improperly designed pretreatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation does not constitute an upset. 
(b)  General/specific prohibitions. An industrial user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general and specific prohibitions in section 17-203 of this article if it can prove that it did not know or have reason to know that its discharge would cause pass through or interference and that either a local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to and during the pass through or interference; or no local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the town was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(c)  Bypass. The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an individual user's treatment facility shall be an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against the industrial user if the user can demonstrate that such a bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage. In order to be eligible for the affirmative defense, the industrial user must demonstrate that there was no feasible alternative to the bypass and submit notice of the bypass as required by 40 CFR 403.17. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
Sec. 17-214. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Pretreatment charges and fees. The town may adopt reasonable charges and fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the town's pretreatment program, which may include: 
(1)  Fees for permit applications, including the cost of processing such applications; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures, including the cost of reviewing monitoring reports submitted by industrial users; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Fees for filing appeals; 
(5)  Other fees as the town may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines and penalties chargeable by the town. 
(b)  Severability. If any provision of this article is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(c)  Conflicts. All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this article are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency or conflict. 
(Ord. No. 1993-4, 5-11-93) 
DIVISION 6. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE 

Sec. 17-215. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authorized agent means the person or agency of the town government designated by the town manager to act in his behalf in the enforcement of this chapter. 
    Discharge means to dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, dump, leak or place by any means, or that which is disposed, deposited, spilled, poured, injected, leaked or placed by any means. 
    Illicit discharge means any discharge to the storm drainage (storm sewer) system that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except discharges pursuant to either a Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) permit or discharges resulting from fire fighting activities. This definition shall not include the discharges listed in section 17-218(a) unless the town identifies such discharges as sources of pollutants to state water. 
    Person means a natural person, firm, co-partnership, association, corporation and/or their officers, directors or persons in control of management or agent and their legal successors. 
    Pollution means such alteration of the physical, chemical or biological properties of any state waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters (a) harmful or detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare, or to the health of animals, fish or aquatic life; (b) unsuitable with reasonable treatment for use as present or possible future sources of public water supply; or (c) unsuitable for recreational, commercial, industrial, agricultural, or other reasonable uses, provided that (i) an alteration of the physical, chemical, or biological property of state waters, or a discharge or deposit of sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes to state waters by any owner which by itself is not sufficient to cause pollution, but which, in combination with such alteration of or discharge or deposit to state waters by other owners, is sufficient to cause pollution; (ii) the discharge of untreated sewage by any owner into state waters; and (iii) contributing to the contravention of standards of water quality duly established by the town council, are "pollution" for the terms and purposes of this division. 
    Sanitary sewerage system means the publicly owned system of mains or pipes, manholes, pumping stations and wastewater treatment (water pollution control) facilities for the collection and treatment of sewage. 
    Sewage means the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments. 
    State waters means all water, on the surface or under the ground, wholly or partially within or bordering the commonwealth or within its jurisdiction, including wetlands, as defined in Section 62.1-44.3 of the Code of Virginia. 
    Storm drainage (storm sewer) system means the publicly owned system of mains or pipes, manholes, catchbasins, box culverts and other structures, for the conveyance of stormwater (or rainwater), surface water and groundwater, exclusive of sewage and industrial wastes. Open watercourses in which a flow of water occurs either continuously or intermittently, whether on public or private land, shall be considered as part of the storm drainage system. 
    Stormwater means stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, surface runoff and drainage. 
    Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) permit means the permit issued by the Commonwealth of Virginia to meet the requirements of the Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit Regulations (9VAC25-31 et seq). 
    Water system means the publicly owned system of mains or pipes, valves, hydrants, pumping stations, ground and elevated storage tanks and other structures for the distribution of potable water to residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments. 
    Wetlands mean any tidal and nontidal wetlands that meet the unified federal definition as delineated by hydrology, soils and vegetative characteristics. See Code of Federal Regulations, Title 33, Navigation and Navigable Waters, Chapter II, Part 328, Section 3. 
( Ord. No. 2014-05, 12-9-14 ) 
Sec. 17-216. - Storm drainage; storm sewer system. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person not specifically authorized by the town manager to do so, to remove a manhole cover or catch basin or grate inlet cover or to make any connections with, or any opening into, use, alter, disturb, or otherwise interfere with any manhole, catch basin, grate, inlet or other structure which is a part of the public storm drainage (storm sewer) system. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit into any open watercourse or gutter or pipe or other drainage structure, any rocks, logs, dirt, paper, branches, leaves, grass or any other material capable of causing a stoppage or disrupting the flow of storm or rainwater or otherwise adversely affecting the hydraulic capacity of the watercourse or drainage structure. 
( Ord. No. 2014-05, 12-9-14 ) 
Sec. 17-217. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person who violates or causes to be violated any provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Each day that such violation is committed, and each day that such violation is permitted to remain uncorrected, shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 2014-05, 12-9-14 ) 
Sec. 17-218. - Discharges to the storm drainage (storm sewer) system. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to cause or allow illicit discharges to the storm drainage (storm sewer) system or to state waters. Subject to the provisions of subsection (d) below, the following activities shall not be considered illicit discharge: 
(1)  Water line flushing; 
(2)  Landscape irrigation; 
(3)  Diverted stream flows or rising groundwaters; 
(4)  Infiltration of uncontaminated groundwater; 
(5)  Pumping of uncontaminated groundwater; 
(6)  Discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl spaces or footing drains; 
(7)  Air conditioning condensation; 
(8)  Lawn watering; 
(9)  Residential car washing; 
(10)  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; and 
(11)  Public street washing. 
(b)  The prohibition in (a) above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under a VPDES permit or waiver, provided that the discharge is in full compliance with all requirements of the VPDES permit as well as any other applicable laws or regulations pertaining to the discharge. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to connect, or cause or allow to be connected, to the storm drainage (storm sewer) system or state waters, without a VPDES permit, any structure that conveys any liquid other than stormwater or discharges listed in paragraph (a) of this section, including but not limited to pipes, drains, sanitary sewer lines, washing machine drains, or floor drains. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the connection. 
(d)  If any activity listed in paragraph (a) of this section is found by the authorized agent to be a source of pollution to state waters, the discharge shall be considered illicit and the authorized agent shall serve a written notice in accordance with section 17-220. 
( Ord. No. 2014-05, 12-9-14 ) 
Sec. 17-219. - Inspecting and monitoring stormwater discharge. 
    The authorized agent shall have the authority to inspect and monitor discharges and sources of potential discharge to the storm drainage (storm sewer) system to ensure compliance with this article, including the authority to enter upon private property to inspect or monitor such discharges or sources of potential discharge. The authorized agent shall also have the authority to initiate enforcement action in accordance with section 17-220. 
( Ord. No. 2014-05, 12-9-14 ) 
Sec. 17-220. - Penalties for violations of this article. 
(a)  If the town determines that there is an illicit discharge, notice shall be served upon the property owner of record by registered or certified mail to the address of the property owner of record. The notice shall specify the time within which corrective measures shall be completed. Failure to comply within the time specified shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter subject to the penalties outlined herein. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be responsible for testing, containing, cleaning up, abating, removing and disposing of any substance unlawfully discharged into the storm drainage (storm sewer) system or into state waters, or, if the authorized agent determines using recognized engineering standards that correction of the violation can best be accomplished by the town, shall be liable to the town for all costs of testing, containment, cleanup, abatement, removal and disposal of any substance unlawfully discharged into the storm drainage (storm sewer) system or into state waters. 
( Ord. No. 2014-05, 12-9-14 ) 
Secs. 17-221-17-240. - Reserved. 
APPENDIX A - FRANCHISES[1] 
FRANCHISING AND REGULATING 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2001-14, §§ 1-2, adopted May 8, 2001 repealed the former Appendix A and enacted a new Appendix A as set out herein. Material enclosed in brackets[ ] has been added to the text where necessary for purposes of classification. The former Appendix A pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2001-09, §§ 1-2, adopted May 8, 2001. 

ARTICLE I. - CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS 
    AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF WARRENTON, VIRGINIA ESTABLISHING A PROCEDURE FOR THE FRANCHISING OF CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS, AND SETTING FORTH RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE OPERATION OF SUCH SYSTEMS 
    WHEREAS, the Town Council, has determined it is in the best interest and consistent with the convenience and necessity of the Town to grant Franchises to one or more companies desiring to provide Cable Services within the confines of the Town and on the terms and conditions hereinafter set forth, and as may later be amended, and as may be further described in each Franchise Agreement; and 
    WHEREAS, the Town Council has further identified the purpose of this Ordinance to be as follows: 
1.  To provide a procedure for the granting, renewal and transfer, by the Town of Warrenton, of nonexclusive Franchises for providing Cable Services in the Town; 
2.  To regulate the erection, construction, reconstruction, installation, operation, maintenance, dismantling, testing, repair and use of Cable Systems in, upon, along, across, above, over or under or in any manner connected with the streets, public ways or public places within the jurisdiction of the Town of Warrenton as now or in the future may exist; 
3.  To provide for the payment of certain Franchise Fees and other valuable considerations to the Town. 
4.  To provide conditions under which such Franchised system or systems will serve present and future needs of government, public institutions, commercial enterprises, public and private organizations, and the citizens and general public of the Town; and 
5.  To provide remedies and prescribe penalties for any violation of this Ordinance for the violation of the terms and conditions of Franchises granted pursuant thereto, now, therefore, be it 
    ORDAINED, by the Council of the Town of Warrenton, Virginia, this ___ day of ________, 2001, that in order to establish a procedure for the granting of cable television Franchises, transfers and renewals thereof and to establish rules and regulations governing the operation of such systems thereof; and be it 
    FURTHER ORDAINED That the repeal provided in the preceding section of this Ordinance shall not affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or acquiring before the effective date of this Ordinance; nor shall it affect any prosecution, suit, or proceeding pending or any judgement rendered prior to the effective date of this Ordinance; nor shall it affect any right or franchise conferred by ordinance or resolution of the Town or any person or corporation; and be it 
    FINALLY RESOLVED It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Town Council of the Town of Warrenton, that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Ordinance hereby adopted are severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence, or paragraph or section of this ordinance, hereby adopted shall be declared unconstitutional or [otherwise] invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this ordinance hereby adopted. 
FRANCHISING AND REGULATING CABLE TELEVISION 
SYSTEMS 

SECTION 1: - DEFINITIONS 
    The definitions contained in this Ordinance rely on those contained in the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. Section 521 et seq.), as it is from time to time amended and interpreted. Any ambiguity shall be resolved by reference to the federal statutes, regulations and the decisions interpreting the same. As used in this article, the following words and terms have the following meanings. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. 
1.  "Council" Whenever the words "Council" or "Town Council" are used, they shall be construed to mean the Town Council of Warrenton, Virginia. 
2.  "Applicable Law" means all lawfully enacted and applicable Federal, State, and Town laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations, and orders as the same may be amended or adopted from time to time. 
3.  "Basic Service Tier" A Basic Service Tier shall, at a minimum, consist of the following: All signals carried in fulfillment of the requirements of Sections 614 [47 U.S.C.534] and 615 [47 U.S.C.535] of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended. Each such tier shall also include any public, educational and governmental access programming required by the Franchise of the Cable System to be provided to Subscribers; and any signal of any television broadcast station that is provided by the cable operator to any Subscribers, except a signal which is secondarily transmitted by a satellite carrier beyond the local service area of such station plus any additional video programming signals the cable operator desires to be added to the basic tier. 
4.  "Cable Service" means (A) the one-way transmission to Subscribers of video programming, or cable, and (B) Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming. 
5.  "Cable System" means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide Cable Service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple Subscribers within the Town. Such term shall not include (A) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (B) a facility that serves Subscribers without using any public right-of-way; (C) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of title II of the Communications Act of 1934, except that such facility shall be considered a Cable System (other than for purposes of Section 621 (c)) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to Subscribers; (D) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems; (E) an open video system that complies with the requirements of the Cable Act; or (F) the facilities of any other Person that is required to obtain a Franchise or permit for the use of the Public Rights-of-Way to provide Cable Service under Applicable Law. A reference to a Cable System refers to any part thereof, including, without limitation, converters. The foregoing definition of "Cable System" shall not be deemed to circumscribe or limit the valid authority of the Town to regulate or franchise the activities of any other telecommunications system or provider of telecommunications services to the full extent permitted by law. Any Franchise Agreement shall define the services any Franchisee is authorized to provide. 
6.  "Cable System Operator" means any person, group of persons, firm or corporation (A) who provides Cable Service over a cable television system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such Cable System, or (B) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such Cable System. 
7.  "Communications Act of 1934" means the legislation passed by Congress in 1934 that established a national telecommunications goal of high quality, universally available telephone service at reasonable cost. The Act also established the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and the Telecommunications Act of 1996 have all amended the Communications Act of 1934 as newer telecommunications technologies and national policies have evolved. 
8.  "Construction." The terms as they appear in any Franchise Agreement such as "completion of construction," "complete system construction," "satisfactorily complete and fully activate" shall mean that a cable system, as designed by a Grantee and approved by the Town Manager, has been installed and is ready to deliver cable service to subscribers. Proof of performance tests shall have been conducted on each otherwise completed segment of the cable system before direct marketing of that segment begins. However, the prohibition against direct marketing prior to the completion of construction does not include promotional activities directed towards all potential subscribers in general or institutional advertising that promotes the existence of a Grantee or its cable services. It is expected that segment of less than the entire system will be activated and subjected to proof of performance tests when completed. Construction of any segment or of the entire system will not be considered complete until proof of performance tests have been conducted on such segment (or in the case of the entire system, on all segments of the cable system) and any problems found during testing have been corrected. The term "completion of construction" does not include marketing and installation of subscriber service. 
9.  "Federal Communications Commission" or "FCC" That federal agency as presently constituted by the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, or any successor agency. 
10.  "Franchise" means a non-exclusive authorization granted in accordance with this Ordinance and exercised in accordance with a Franchise Agreement to install cables, wires, lines, optical fiber, underground conduit, and other devices necessary and appurtenant to the construction, operation, and maintenance of a Cable System along the Public Rights-of-Way within all or a portion of the Town to provide Cable Service. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include: (i) any other permit or authorization required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the Town required by the ordinances and laws of the Town; (ii) any permit, agreement, franchise for non-cable services, or authorization required in connection with operations on public streets or property including, without limitation, permits and agreements for placing devices on or in poles, conduits or other structures, whether owned by the Town or a private entity, or for excavating or performing other work in or along Public Rights-of-Way; or (iii) express or implicit authorization to provide Cable Service to, or install a Cable System on, private property without owner consent except for use of compatible easements pursuant to Section 621 (a) (2) of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. Section 541 (a) (2). 
11.  "Franchise Area" means the area of the Town that a Grantee is authorized to serve by its Franchise Agreement. 
12.  "Franchise Agreement" means a contract entered into in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance between the Town and a Grantee that sets forth, subject to this Ordinance, the terms and conditions under which a Franchise will be exercised. 
13.  "Grantee" or "Cable System Operator" means a natural person, partnership, domestic and or foreign corporation or entity, association, joint venture or organization of any kind granted a Franchise by the Town Council under this Ordinance including its lawful successor, transferee or assignee. 
14.  "Gross Revenues" means all amounts, which are charged and/or received, directly or indirectly, by a Grantee from or in connection with the provision of Cable Service over the cable system including, without limitation: 
(a)  Any revenue received from Subscribers, including but not limited to revenue for basic service, expanded basic service, other tier services, additional outlets, FM service, commercial service, premium channel service, pay-per-view service and related per-event services; 
(b)  Revenue received from Subscribers for installation, change in service and reconnection charges and similar fees; 
(c)  Revenue received from Subscribers for converters, remote controls or other equipment leased or rented to Subscribers in connection with the delivery of Cable Services to such Subscribers; 
(d)  Revenue received from Subscribers for service charges and late fees attributable to delinquent accounts. Revenue received from third parties, including advertising revenue, home shopping commissions, guide commissions, leased access payments, and studio and other facilities or equipment rentals; 
(e)  Revenue shall include any payment or consideration (including copyright and franchise fees, but excluding any utility users tax or new sales tax imposed by Town or the state or federal government) collected for direct payment to a third party. Franchise Fees paid to the Town are not deemed to be taxes and are not to be deducted from the total gross revenue figure on which Franchise Fees are paid; 
(f)  Revenue received by a Grantee from the delivery of other communications services over its Cable System, including without limitation telephony, data transmission, interactive services and other broadband information services, to the extent that such services are defined by applicable law or by an appellate court of competent jurisdiction governing Virginia (as a cable service); 
(g)  Gross Revenue shall also include the gross revenue of any other person which is derived directly or indirectly from or in connection with the operation of a system to the extent that said revenue is derived, through a means which has the effect of avoiding the payment of Franchise Fees to the Town that would otherwise be paid herein; 
(h)  There shall be deducted from Gross Revenue: 
(1)  Bad debts written off by Grantee in the normal course of its business, provided, however, that bad debt recoveries shall be included in gross revenue; and 
(2)  Refunds made to Subscribers or other third parties. 
(i)  In computing Gross Revenue from sources other than a Grantee's subscribers, including without limitation, revenue derived from the sale of advertising, home shopping services, guide sales, the lease of channel capacity on its Cable System, or any other such revenues derived from the operation of the Cable System, the amount of such revenues attributable or allocated to Grantee in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, for the purpose of determining Gross Revenues, shall be the aggregate revenue received by Grantee from such other sources during the period in question multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the number of Grantee's subscribers in the Town as of the last day of such period and the denominator of which shall be the number of subscribers within all areas served by Grantee's regional Cable System (if any) as of the last day of such period. 
15.  "Initial activation of service" or "initially providing cable service" shall mean with respect to a particular segment, group of segments or the entire cable system, as the case may be, that all proposed services and system capabilities as stated in the design of the cable system proposed by a Grantee are available and/or in place, construction has been completed (see definition of construction) and the completed segment or segments in question or the entire cable system, as the case may be, has been activated. 
16.  "Person" An individual, partnership, association, joint stock organization, corporation, or any lawful successor thereto or transferee thereof, but such term excludes the Town. 
17.  "Primary Service Area" (PSA) means the total area of the Town limits of the Town of Warrenton that is to be served by a Grantee. 
18.  "Public Rights-of-Way" means the surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, parkway, waterway, easement, or similar property in which the Town now or hereafter holds any property interest, which consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purpose of installing and maintaining, a Cable System. No reference herein, or in any Franchise Agreement, to a "Public Rights-of-Way" shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the Town that its interest or other right to control the use of such property is sufficient to permit its use for such purposes, and a Franchisee shall be deemed to gain only those rights to use as are properly in the Town and as the Town may have the undisputed right and power to give. 
19.  "State of the Art" A Cable System with production facilities, technical performance, capacity, equipment, components and service equal to that which has been developed and demonstrated to be more modern than generally accepted in the United [States] and used in the cable television industry for comparable areas of equivalent population. 
20.  "Subscriber" Any person who legally receives any service delivered over a Cable System. 
21.  "Term of Franchise" shall be for the number of years negotiated in the Franchise Agreement with the Town unless terminated earlier in accordance with this Ordinance. 
22.  "Total Number of Subscribers" means the number of Subscribers determined as follows: In the event a single fee is paid for service to a multiple dwelling unit the number of equivalent Subscribers shall be determined by dividing such fee by then prevailing Basic Service Tier Rate and rounding the resulting quotient to the nearest whole number. To this number shall be added the number of all other Subscribers. 
23.  The terms "will be available", "will be equipped", "will use", "will be designed", "will perform", "will be utilized", "will permit", "will allow", "will be activated", "will be initially connected", "will be capable", "will provide", "will employ", "will be established", "will be able", "will be implemented", "will be delivered", "will utilize", and other similar uses of terms denoting the activation of cable service or the delivery of equipment, facilities, or services, shall be interpreted to mean delivery or accomplishment at a date no later than the initial activation of service (see definition) unless otherwise and expressly and clearly stated or qualified to mean a more specific or different time. 
SECTION 2: - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
A.  Scope of Town's Authority 
    The Town may grant one or more Cable Television Franchises, and each such Franchise shall be awarded in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this Ordinance. 
B.  Franchise Required 
    A Franchise is required of any person desiring to construct, operate and maintain a Cable System within all or any portion of the Town. A Franchise may be granted by the Town Council to any Person, whether operating under an existing Franchise or not, who or which offers to furnish and provide such Cable System under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of this Ordinance and a Franchise Agreement acceptable to the Town Council. The grant of a cable franchise is not an authorization to provide other services nor is it a bar to the imposition of other compensation requirements. The operative content of each Franchise at any given time consists of all the Franchise documents (this Ordinance, a Franchise Agreement and any side letters or similar agreements) and includes any later changes thereto, including amendments to the Town Code, amendments to this Ordinance, and to the individual Franchise Ordinance granting a Franchise to a Cable Company to operate a Cable System. 
C.  Rights Reserved to Town 
    The Town hereby expressly reserves the following rights: 
    To exercise its governmental powers, now or hereafter, to the full extent that such powers may be vested in or granted to the Town. 
    To adopt and promulgate ordinances as it shall find reasonably necessary in the exercise of its lawful police power. Such power shall include all rights the Town may have under 47 U.S.C. § 552 and the absolute right of the Town to manage the Public Rights-of-Way and to adopt such regulations relating to the management of the Public Rights-of-Way as the Town and/or its departments shall provide. Nothing in a Franchise Agreement shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the various codes and ordinances of the Town regarding permits, fees to be paid, or manner of construction. 
    The powers of the Town may be exercised through amendment of this Ordinance as well as through enactment of separate ordinances and regulations. Subsequent amendments to this Ordinance may be adopted by the Town Council and compliance required of franchised cable companies in so far as the amendments are designed to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public through the lawful use of its police powers. 
D.  Unlawful Acts; Penalties 
    It shall be unlawful for any Person to establish, operate or carry on the business of distributing to any persons in the Town any television signals or radio signals by means of a Cable System unless a Franchise therefore has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance, and unless such Franchise is in full force and effect. 
    It shall be unlawful for any Person to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively, or otherwise, with any part of a Franchised Cable System within the Town for the purpose of enabling himself or herself or others to receive any television signal, radio signal, picture, program or sound, without payment to the owner of the Cable System. 
    It shall be unlawful for any Person without the consent of a Grantee, to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound. 
    Any Person violating any subsection of this section shall be punished by a fine or by imprisonment or by both fine and imprisonment in accordance with Federal, State or local ordinances, as it shall be amended from time to time. 
E.  Failure of Town to Enforce Compliance 
    A Grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the provisions of this Ordinance or the terms and conditions of a Franchise Agreement by any failure of the Town, upon any one or more occasions, to insist upon a Grantee's performance or to seek Grantee's compliance with any of the provisions of the Ordinance or terms or conditions of a Franchise Agreement. 
SECTION 3: - REQUIREMENTS FOR ISSUING NEW CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES 
A.  Application Non-Refundable Fee 
    An application for a new cable television Franchise (not a Franchise renewal) shall be submitted to the Town Council, or its designee, in accordance with the procedures established by the Council. The application will contain facts and information the Council deems appropriate. Applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) payable to the order of the "Town of Warrenton" which amount shall be used by the Town to offset direct expenses incurred in the franchising and evaluation procedures, including, but not limited to staff time and consulting assistance. 
B.  Grantee to Pay Costs of Granting Franchise 
    An applicant to whom the Council grants a nonexclusive Franchise, in addition to the nonrefundable fee specified herein above, shall pay to the Town, within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice of the amount, an amount set by the Council, or its designee, which shall represent the remaining out-of-pocket costs incurred by the Town, in granting the Franchise and not defrayed by fees forthcoming from the provisions of subsection "A" of this section. 
C.  Procedure Required by Town to Process an Application and/or Require a Request for Proposals 
1.  Upon receipt of an Application, the Town may either: (i) evaluate the Application pursuant to Section 3C[5] below conducting such investigations as it deems necessary; or (ii) issue a request for proposals after conducting, if necessary, a proceeding to identify the future cable related needs and interests of the community. Any such request for proposals shall be provided to the Person applying for an initial Franchise and made available to any other interested party. The request for proposals may contain a proposed Franchise Agreement. 
2.  An applicant shall respond to a request for proposals by filing an application within the time directed by the Town that contains the information and material set forth below in Section 3D, Application Requirements. The procedures, instructions, and requirements set forth in the request for proposals shall be followed by each applicant. Any applicant that has already filed an application need not refile the same materials with its response to the request for proposals, but must supplement its application to include any additional or different information or material required of the request for proposals. The Town or its designee may seek additional information from any applicant and establish deadlines for the submission of such information. 
3.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 3[A and B], a Person may apply for an initial Franchise by submitting an unsolicited Application containing the information required in Section 3D, [Application Requirements] and requesting an evaluation of that application pursuant to Section 3C[5]. Prior to evaluating such an application, the Town may conduct such investigations as are necessary to determine whether the application satisfies the standards set forth in Section 3C[5]. The Town may seek additional applications. 
4.  If the Applicant proposes to provide Cable Service to an area already served by an existing Franchisee, the identification of the area where the overbuild would occur and the ability of the Public Rights-of-Way and other property that would be used by the Applicant to accommodate an additional Cable System; 
5.  In evaluating an application for a Franchise, the Town shall consider, but not be limited to the following factors: 
(a)  Whether the Applicant has the financial, technical, and legal qualifications to provide Cable Service; 
(b)  Whether the application satisfies any minimum requirements established by the Town and is otherwise reasonable to meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the community, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests; 
(c)  Whether the Applicant will provide adequate community, educational, and governmental access channel capacity, facilities, or financial support; 
(d)  Whether issuance of a Franchise is in the public interest considering the immediate and future effect on the Public Rights-of-Way and private property that would be affected by the Cable System, including the extent to which installation or maintenance as planned would require replacement of property or involve disruption of property, public services, or use of the Public Rights-of-Way; the effect of granting a Franchise on the ability of the existing Franchise, if any, to meet the cable related needs and interests of the community; and the comparative superiority or inferiority of competing applications; and 
(e)  What effects a grant of a Franchise may have on competition in the delivery of Cable Service in the Town. 
    If the Town finds that it is in the public interest to issue a Franchise after considering the factors set forth above, and subject to the applicant's entry into a Franchise Agreement, it may issue a Franchise. If the Town denies an application for an initial Franchise, it will issue a written decision setting forth its reasons for denial. Prior to deciding whether or not to issue a Franchise, the Town will hold one or more public hearings or implement other procedures under which comments from the public on an application may be received. The Town may reject any application that is incomplete or fails to adequately and clearly respond to the information requested in a Request for Proposals. This Ordinance is not intended and shall not be interpreted to grant any applicant standing to challenge the denial of its application or the issuance of a Franchise to another. 
D.  Application Requirements 
    Ten copies of the application shall be filed with the Town Manager and shall contain such information as the Town may require, including, but not be limited to: 
1.  The names, residence and business addresses of all officers, directors and associates of the applicant; 
2.  The names, residence and business addresses of all officers, persons and entities having, controlling, or being entitled to have or control of one (1%) percent or more of the ownership of the applicant and the share of each person or entity. 
3.  The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity, including but not limited to cable communications systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent and subsidiary business entities and the areas served thereby. 
4.  A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant prepared by a certified public accountant or other person satisfactory to the Town Manager. If applicant is a corporation, audited financial statements are required for the five (5) previous fiscal years. If applicant is a partnership, copies of the "U.S. Partnership Return of Income" (IRS Form 1065) for the five (5) previous fiscal years. If applicant is a sole proprietorship, copies of personal financial statements for the five (5) previous fiscal years; 
5.  A statement identifying, by place and date, any and all cable communication system Franchises awarded the applicant, or its parent or subsidiary business entities; the status of those Franchises; the total cost of constructing such systems; and the amount of applicant's and its parent's or subsidiary's resources committed to their completion, together with the name and address and phone number of a responsible governmental official knowledgeable of the applicant; 
6.  A general description of the applicant's proposed operation; 
7.  A written commitment to timely service and restoration of property; 
8.  A schedule of proposed charges; 
9.  A statement setting forth the channels to be allocated for community, educational, and governmental use as contemplated by 47 U.S.C. § 531, and for leased access as required by 47 U.S.C. § 532; a description of the production facilities, equipment and financing to be made available by the applicant for public, educational and government access; and a statement establishing any additional revenues to be designated for programming or programming assistance for the access channels; 
10.  An estimated five (5) year operations proforma which shall include the initial and continuing plant investment, annual profit and loss statements detailing income and expenses, annual balance sheets, and annual levels of Subscriber penetration. The proforma shall also state the average return on investment anticipated by the applicant for the five (5) year operations period and shall state the method of computation thereof. Costs anticipated for voluntary services or contributions shall, if presented, be incorporated in the proforma as required in this article, but shall be separately identified in the proforma; 
11.  A statement detailing the applicant's prior operational experience in cable television systems and/or microwave service, including that of its officers, management and any staff to be associated with the proposed operation; 
12.  A general statement of the applicant's ability and intent to incorporate technological improvements and advancements in the cable television system as such improvements or advancements are generally available in the industry; 
13.  A demonstration of the applicant's technical ability to construct and/or operate the proposed Cable System in accordance with FCC Regulations, including identification of key personnel and their qualifications; 
14.  Identification of the area of the Town to be served by the proposed Cable System, including a description and detailed map of the proposed Franchise Area's boundaries. All areas within the Town limits are to be served by the proposed system; 
15.  If the Applicant proposes to provide Cable Service to an area already served by an existing Franchisee, the identification of the area where the overbuild would occur and the ability of the Public Rights-of-Way and other property that would be used by the Applicant to accommodate an additional Cable System; and 
16.  A demonstration of the applicant's legal qualifications to construct and/or operate the proposed Cable System, including but not limited to a demonstration that the Applicant meets the following criteria: 
(a)  The Applicant must not have had an Application for an initial or renewal franchise in the Town lawfully denied within the three (3) years preceding the date that its current Application was submitted; 
(b)  The Applicant must not have had any cable television franchise lawfully revoked by any franchising authority within five (5) years preceding the submission of the Application; 
(c)  The Applicant must have the necessary authority under Virginia Law to operate a Cable System; 
(d)  The Applicant must have the necessary authority under Federal Law to hold the Franchise and operate a Cable System. An Applicant must have, or show that it is qualified to obtain any necessary federal licenses or waivers required to operate the System proposed; 
(e)  The Applicant shall not have been convicted, at any time during the ten (10) years preceding the submission of the Application, of any act or omission of such character that the Applicant cannot be relied upon to deal truthfully with the Town and the Subscribers, or to substantially comply with its lawful obligations under Applicable Law, including obligations under consumer protection laws and laws prohibiting anti-competitive acts, fraud, racketeering, or other similar conduct; 
(f)  The Applicant shall not have filed materially misleading information in its Application or have intentionally withheld information that the Applicant lawfully is required to provide; and 
(g)  An elected official or Town staff member shall not hold a financial interest in the Applicant or an affiliate of the Applicant. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Town shall provide an opportunity to an Applicant to show that it would be inappropriate to deny it a Franchise by virtue of the particular circumstances surrounding the matter and the steps taken by the Applicant to cure all harms flowing therefrom and prevent their recurrence, the lack of involvement of the Applicant's principals, or the remoteness of the matter from the operation of its Cable Systems. 
17.  Any other reasonable and applicable information which the Town Manager or Town Council may request. 
18.  An affidavit or declaration of an authorized officer of the Applicant certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application, acknowledging the enforceability of application commitments, and certifying that the application meets all federal and state and Town requirements. 
E.  Request for Proposals, Public Comment Periods, Evaluating Applications, Public Hearing 
    Upon determination by the town Manager that an application is complete, the Town Manager shall cause to be prepared for the Town Council a report and recommendations on the application within one hundred twenty (120) days. 
    Upon filing, any Franchise application and related documents are public records open to inspection by the public during reasonable hours, including specifically the regular business hours of the Town Manager. 
    Following reasonable notice to the public, any Franchise application shall be available for inspection for a period of at least twenty days prior to the Town Council taking action on the same. Any citizen of the Town shall have the right to comment in writing, filed in advance, or orally at any meeting at which the Franchise applications are to be considered. 
    Upon receipt of the report and recommendations of the Town Manager, if the Town Council wishes to consider granting a Franchise, it shall pass a resolution declaring its intent and setting the date and time for a public hearing. The hearing date shall be not less than twenty (20) days nor more than forty (40) days after the date of the resolution. 
    The Town Manager shall publish a notice of the public hearing in the official newspaper of the Town at least once ten (10) days prior to the hearing. The notice shall state the name of the applicant, the proposed terms of the Franchise, any amounts or percentages to be paid to the Town during the life of the Franchise, any limitations as to time, place or type of service proposed, together with a general statement of the other major provisions of the proposed franchise, and that copies of the proposed franchise may be obtained at the office of the Town Manager. 
    At the time set for the hearing, the Town Council shall proceed to consider the application and all persons shall be given an opportunity to present their arguments, the Town Council may adjourn the hearing from time-to-time. 
F.  Granting or Denying a Franchise 
    In determining whether to grant a Franchise, the Town Council shall consider the degree to which the applicant has been responsive to the Town's requirements, the character and quality of proposed services, proposed rates, the experience, character and financial capability of the applicant, proposed management system, quality of proposed equipment, ability to meet construction requirements and any other factors deemed important to safeguard the interests of the public and the Town. 
    After examining all applications submitted pursuant to procedures specified in this Section (3) the Town Council is authorized, after a full hearing affording due process, to grant one or more nonexclusive Franchises conveying the right to construct and operate Cable Systems within the public ways of the Town. A Franchise may be awarded to applicants which in the Town Council's judgment will best serve the public interest and whose construction and financial plans and arrangements are both feasible and adequate to fulfill the conditions set forth in this Ordinance and incorporated into any Franchise granted. 
    No provision in this Ordinance shall be deemed or construed to require the Town Council to grant a Franchise following receipt of any Franchise application. 
    The Town Council may extend the hearing, as needed, to obtain additional information. Within thirty (30) days following the conclusion of the hearing the Town Council may by resolution deny or by ordinance grant an application for a Franchise. The Town Council's action shall be final and conclusive. 
    No Franchise shall become effective unless and until the ordinance granting same has become effective and in addition, unless and until all things required by this Section and Sections that specify requirements for a construction bond, Letter of Credit or Cash Surety, insurance and indemnity are done and completed, all of such things being hereby declared to be conditions precedent to the effectiveness of any Franchise. In the event any of these things are not done or completed in the time and manner required, the Town Council may declare the Franchise null and void. 
    Prior to the effective date of an ordinance granting a Franchise, the Grantee shall file with the Town Recorder a written acceptance of the Franchise together with the construction bond, Letter of Credit or Cash Surety, and insurance policies required by this Ordinance. The written acceptance shall include an agreement to be bound by and to comply with and to do all things required by the provisions of this ordinance and the Franchise. The written acceptance shall be acknowledged by the Grantee before a notary public, and shall in form and content be satisfactory to and approved by the Town Attorney. 
G.  Franchise Term 
    The term of a Franchise shall be for the number of years negotiated in the Franchise Agreement with the Town unless terminated earlier in accordance with this Ordinance. 
H.  Grantee to be Bound by Terms and Conditions of Cable Ordinance and Franchise Agreement. Procedure if Conflict 
    No Franchise shall be valid until Grantee enters into a Franchise Agreement having terms and conditions acceptable to the Town. In the event of a conflict between the Franchise Agreement and the provisions of this Ordinance the provisions of this Ordinance shall prevail. Failure to provide services as promised in Grantee's Franchise may be deemed a breach of this Ordinance to which the provisions of Section 16 and Section 17 of this Ordinance shall apply. 
SECTION 4: - FRANCHISE FEES 
    For the reason that the streets and public ways to be used by a Grantee in the operation of its cable system within the boundaries of the Town are valuable public properties acquired and maintained by the Town at great expense to its taxpayers, and that the grant to a Grantee of the use of the said streets and the right to operate a cable system in the Town are valuable property rights without which a Grantee would be required to invest substantial capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions, and because the Town will incur costs in regulating and administering the franchise, a Grantee shall pay to the Town, an amount equal to five percent (5%) of Grantee's gross revenue. 
    The Franchise Fee shall be payable quarterly to the Town. A Grantee shall file a complete and accurate sworn statement, verified by a responsible, qualified financial representative authorized to represent the Company, listing each and every type of revenue included in Gross Revenues collected as a result of its doing business within the Town during the period for which said quarterly payment is made. Such payment shall be made to the Town Manager not later than sixty (60) days after the end of each calendar quarter. 
    The Town may examine all applicable records of a Grantee to determine accuracy of amounts payable to Town. 
    The Town shall have right to audit and to re-compute any amounts determined to be payable under this Ordinance; provided, however, that (i) such audit shall take place within thirty-six (36) months following the close of each of a Grantee's fiscal years and (ii) if Grantee has underpaid the Franchise Fee for the audit period by five percent (5%) or more, a Grantee shall pay the cost of the audit. Any additional amount due to the Town as a result of the audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days following written notice to a Grantee by the Town, said notice shall include a copy of the audit report. 
    In the event that any Franchise fee payment or re-computed amount is not made on or before the applicable dates heretofore specified, and following notice by the Town to a Grantee, interest shall be charged daily from such date at the annual rate equivalent to the then existing prime rate of the largest bank in the Town plus two percent (2%). 
    Should Grantee be required under Federal, State or Local law to pay refunds to subscribers, the Town shall return to a Grantee for direct reimbursement to subscribers, an amount equal to that portion of the franchise fee that was paid on the total amount of the refund to subscribers. The franchise fee refund may be paid in a lump sum, partial payments or any other method chosen by the Town. Refunds received by a Grantee from the Town shall be distributed directly to subscribers by cash or credit to their cable billing and shall be calculated by a Grantee to reflect the actual usage of each subscribers cable services. 
SECTION 5: - TRANSFERS AND ASSIGNMENTS 
A.  Grantee Shall Offer Town Prior Opportunity to Purchase System 
    In the event of a bonafide offer to purchase the cable system, the Town shall have sixty (60) days from the date of receipt by the Town of written notice of the pending sale (including a copy of the offer itself and all relevant details thereto) in which to match said bonafide offer of purchase on the same terms and conditions as contained in the original offer. Any offer of purchase must be in writing to be considered bonafide. 
B.  Prior Written Consent of Town required Before any Sale, Assignment, or Transfer of a Franchise 
    A Franchise and any rights or obligations of a Grantee under the Franchise shall not be sold, assigned, or transferred, either in whole or in part, or leased, or sublet, in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or tangible or intangible property therein (tangible property being defined as more than forty-nine percent (49%) of the tangible property of a Grantee located in the Town either cumulatively or at any one time), pass to or vest in any person without prior written consent of the Town. Such consent shall not be required for a trust, mortgage, or other hypothecation in whole or in part to secure an indebtedness, and such consent shall not be required for purchase money security interests incurred in the ordinary course of business. 
C.  Prior Written Consent of the Town Required Before any Transfer of Ownership or Control of Grantee 
    Ownership or control of Grantee shall not be transferred without the prior written consent of the Town. 
D.  Grantee to Submit Application Documenting Information Required by the Town 
    A Grantee shall promptly notify the Town of any action or proposed action requiring consent of the Town pursuant to Sections 5B through 5N of this Ordinance. 
    A Grantee shall submit to the Town an original application and four copies, unless otherwise directed, which application shall fully describe the terms and conditions of the action or proposed action subject to this Section and clearly state the basis on which the application should be approved. The application shall also contain all documentation to support the showings required under Sections 5E and 5F. 
    At any time during the review process, the Town reserves the right to require additional supporting documentation from a Grantee or any other person involved in the action or proposed action to support the showing required of Grantee under Sections 5E and 5F. A Grantee shall provide all requested assistance to the Town in connection with any such inquiry and, as appropriate, shall secure the cooperation and assistance of all other persons involved in such action. 
    The Town shall respond to any application requiring the Town's consent under this Section (5B through 5N) within one hundred twenty (120) days after such application, and all information required by the Town under this Ordinance, a Grantee's Franchise Agreement, and Applicable Law in connection with the application, has been received by the Town. Such an application shall be deemed approved if the Town should fail to render a final decision within one hundred twenty (120) days following a Grantee's filing with the Town of the FCC application form, including all information reasonably required by this Ordinance, Grantee's Franchise Agreement and Applicable Law, unless a Grantee and the Town agree to an extension of time; provided, however, that the Town may deny such an application among other grounds, for a Grantee's failure to submit the information required by this Ordinance, Grantee's Franchise Agreement and Applicable Law. 
E.  Showings Required of Proposed Assignee. Assignee Must Agree to Conditions Prescribed by Town 
    A proposed assignee or transferee must demonstrate that it possesses the legal, financial and technical qualifications necessary to perform all the terms, conditions and obligations under a Grantee's Franchise Agreement for the remaining term thereof, and such reasonable additional obligations required of the assignee or transferee by the Town for the specific and limited purpose of assuring the performance by the assignee or transferee of all the terms, conditions and obligations of the Franchise Agreement, and, in connection with this purpose, a proposed assignee or transferee must provide the following information: 
1.  Legal Qualifications. The application shall identify the proposed assignee or transferee and, if the proposed assignee or transferee is not a natural person, each of its officers, directors or shareholders owning or beneficially holding five percent (5%) or more of its outstanding voting shares, general partners and limited partners holding an equity interest in the proposed assignee or transferee of five percent (5%) or more, and the respective percentage share of each such identified officer, director, shareholder or general or limited partner. The proposed assignee or transferee shall disclose any pending administrative, legal, equitable or dispute resolution proceeding before, or adverse final action taken during the past three (3) years by, any court, administrative body or arbitrator with respect to the proposed assignee, transferee or its officers, directors, or other persons having an equitable interest in five percent (5%) or more of the voting stock of such transferee or assignee in a civil, criminal, administrative or equitable proceeding brought under the provisions of any law or regulation related to the following: any felony; revocation, suspension or involuntary transfer of any authorization (including cable franchises) to provide video programming or other communication services; antitrust or unfair competition; fraudulent statements to a governmental unit; material breach of a cable Franchise Agreement, including but not limited to a material failure to provide PEG access channels, facilities or equipment; or final rate regulation proceeding in which the proposed rate was not sustained. 
2.  Financial Qualifications. The proposed assignee or transferee must demonstrate that it has sufficient net liquid assets on hand or available from committed resources to consummate the transaction and operate a Grantee's Cable System for six (6) months. The application for transfer shall include recent financial statements, including audited financial statements if available, of the proposed assignee or transferee prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, including balance sheets, income and expense statements, capital expenditure statements and accounting notes for the past three (3) years. Such statements, if not otherwise publicly available, may be designated as confidential and shall be maintained as such by the Town to the extent permissible under state and local law. 
3.  Technical Qualifications. The application shall set forth a narrative account of the proposed assignee's or transferee's technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding Cable Systems. The narrative account shall include, but not be limited to, a list of the Cable Systems currently and formerly owned or operated by assignee or transferee within the past three (3) years; summary information concerning appropriate management personnel that will be involved in the management and operation of the assignee's or transferee's Cable System; a list of any material violations of the technical rules of the FCC or of federal, state or local governments, including but not limited to violations of rules and regulations regarding signal quality, safety and construction cited during the past three (3) years by a franchising authority or by Local, State or Federal governments involving currently or formally owned or operated Cable Systems. 
4.  Customer Service. The assignee or transferee must submit to the Town (i) a reasonably detailed narrative describing, or a representative manual (if such a manual exists) containing, assignee's or transferee's customer service procedures, (ii) copies of at least two representative annual customer notices provided by other systems owned or operated by assignee or transferee, (iii) a summary of assignee's or transferee's proposed billing procedures, (iv) a sample customer service bill which assignee or transferee proposes to use in Grantee's system, and (v) a copy of a sample customer service complaint log or form, printed out from an electronic or computerized complaint recording system, which assignee or transferee proposes to use in Grantee's system. 
5.  Compliance with Franchise Agreement and Cable Ordinance. The proposed assignee or transferee must agree to comply with all provisions of a Grantee's Franchise Agreement and the Cable Ordinance, as well as such reasonable additional terms and conditions as the Town may require for the specific and limited purpose of assuring the proposed assignee's or transferee's compliance with such provisions, including without limitation such additional terms and conditions as the Town may require to remedy or avoid the recurrence of any past violations of the terms of a Franchise or of federal, state or local laws in the operation of Grantee's, assignee's or transferee's Cable System or service. 
F.  Grantee and Assignee or Transferee to Assist Town in its Inquiry of Prospective Controlling Party. Grantee Promptly to Notify Town of any Actual or Prospective Change in Control of Franchise 
1.  Grantee's Responsibility. A Grantee shall assist the Town in its inquiry into an assignee's or transferee's capabilities under Section 5E. 
2.  Assignee's or Transferee's Responsibility. In seeking the Town's consent to any change in ownership or control of a Franchise or of a Grantee, assignee or transferee shall have the responsibility to establish, to the satisfaction of Town, that assignee or transferee has all of the legal, financial, and technical qualifications necessary to perform all of the terms, conditions and obligations of a Grantee under its Franchise Agreement for the remaining term thereof. The Town may request, and assignee or transferee shall provide, all reasonable financial data relative to the transfer, including but not limited to the materials specified in Section 5E of this Ordinance. In addition, assignee or transferee shall provide to the Town the terms and conditions of the sale, credit agreements, partnership agreements and any other information reasonably related to the assignee's or transferee's acquisition of a Grantee's Franchise which is needed to clarify the change in ownership. 
G.  Transfer or Assignment without Prior Consent Deemed to be Material Breach, and may be Subject to Liquidated Damages 
    Any transfer or assignment of a Franchise or of ownership or control of Grantee without the prior consent of the Town shall be null and void unless later ratified by the Town and shall: (i) be deemed a material breach of a Franchise Agreement and (ii) among and/or in addition to other remedies available to the Town, be subject to a penalty or liquidated damages assessment, on a daily basis, until the transfer or assignment is approved, or if not approved, until the prior ownership, control or other status quo is restored to a condition satisfactory to the Town. 
H.  Town May Revoke Franchise if Unauthorized Transfer or Assignment Occurs 
    If the Town fails to approve or denies its consent to any such transfer or assignment of a Franchise or of the ownership or control of a Grantee and such action has nevertheless been effected, the Town may revoke a Franchise and terminate a Franchise Agreement unless control of a Grantee or the system is promptly restored to its status prior to such unauthorized action or to a status acceptable to the Town. 
I.  Consent of Town to Transfer or Assignment shall not Constitute Waiver of Town Rights 
    The consent or approval of the Town Council to any transfer or assignment of a Franchise or of ownership or control of a Franchise shall not constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the Town unless the Town Council specifically releases or waives such rights. 
J.  No Transfer or Assignment to be Approved within Three Years or Prior to Completion of Grant, Construction or Acquisition 
    In the absence of compelling circumstances, the Town Council will not approve any transfer of control of a Grantee or assignment of a Franchise or Cable System within three (3) years of its grant or initial construction or acquisition, respectively. 
K.  Grantee Must Notify Town of any Agreement to Transfer or Assign Cable System and Terms of Sale 
    A Grantee must notify the Town whenever it reaches a definitive written agreement to sell, transfer or assign its Cable System, or any portion thereof. A Grantee must also notify the Town of the terms and conditions of any proposed sale as required by Section 5A, 5D and 5F2. 
L.  Successor-in-Interest Must Become Signatory to an Agreement 
    In no event shall an assignment of a Franchise or a transfer of ownership or control be approved without the successor-in interest becoming a signatory to the existing Franchise Agreement. 
M.  Grantee Not to Enter Into Any Management Contract if it Results in a Change of Control 
    A Grantee shall not enter into any management contract or other arrangement for the management of the system, to the extent that such contract or other arrangement would result in a significant change of operational control of a Grantee or the system (as defined in Section 5G) without the prior consent of the Town. 
N.  Processing Fee May Be Imposed By Town 
    The Town may impose a processing fee upon a Grantee and/or the assignee or transferee to cover its costs of considering and evaluating an application for assignment or transfer of a Franchise. 
SECTION 6: - LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION 
A.  Indemnification of the Town 
    It shall be expressly understood and agreed by [and] between the Town government and a Grantee that a Grantee shall save the Town government and its agents and employees harmless from and against all claims, damages, losses, and expenses, including attorneys fees sustained by the Town government on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever arising out of but not limited to copyright infringements and all other damages arising out of the installation, operation or maintenance of the cable system authorized herein, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this Ordinance and any franchise granted hereunder. A Grantee shall be promptly notified in writing by the Town of any notice of any claims, and Grantee shall have control of the defense of any action on such claims and all negotiations for its settlement or compromise. Should any actions or inaction of a Grantee become, or in a Grantee's opinion be likely to become, the subject of any such claim or action, the Town shall permit a Grantee, at its option and expense, to take such reasonable action as may be necessary in order to avoid or mitigate any such claim. Lastly, a Grantee shall have no liability to the Town under any provision of this paragraph with respect to any claim or action brought against the Town which is based solely on the actions of the Town. 
B.  Reimbursement of Costs 
    A Grantee shall pay all expenses incurred by the Town defending itself with regard to all damages and penalties mentioned in Section 6A above. 
C.  Public Liability Insurance 
    A Grantee shall maintain and by its acceptance of a franchise, specifically agrees that it will maintain liability insurance in the form approved by the Town Attorney, throughout the term of the Franchise. Such insurance will be with an insurance company that is: 
(1)  licensed to do business in the State of Virginia; 
(2)  approved by the State of Virginia; 
(3)  acceptable to the Town; 
(4)  rated "A-VI" or better by A.M. Best or "A" or better by Standard and Poor's. 
    Such insurance will: 
(1)  name the Town of Warrenton and its officers, employee, board members, and elected representatives and agents as additional insured (as the interests of each insured may appear) as to all applicable coverage; 
(2)  will provide for forty-five (45) days notice to the Town for cancellation, non-renewal, or material change; 
(3)  provide for notice to the Town Manager by certified mail; 
(4)  provide that all provisions of this Cable Regulatory Ordinance, as amended, concerning liability, duty, and standard of care shall be underwritten by contractual coverage sufficient to include such obligations within applicable policies; and 
(5)  insure the Town and a Grantee in the minimum amount of: 
a.  Workmen's Compensation: As required by all applicable Federal, State, and other laws; 
b.  Company Liability: Each occurrence one million dollars ($1,000,000.00); 
c.  Comprehensive General Liability: Bodily injury, each occurrence one million dollars ($1,000,000.00); property damage, each occurrence one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) and aggregate one million dollars ($1,000,000.00); 
d.  Comprehensive Automobile Liability: Including non-ownership and hired car coverage as well as owned vehicles with minimum limits as follows: bodily injury for each occurrence three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00); property damage for each occurrence one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00); and 
e.  Copyright infringement insurance indemnifying, defending, and saving harmless the Town and its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees from and against all claims of any person whatsoever for copyright infringement occasioned by the operations of the Grantee under the Franchise granted under this Ordinance, or alleged to have been so caused or occurred, within a minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
    Neither the provisions of this section nor any damages recovered by the Town thereunder, shall be construed to or limit the liability of a Grantee under any franchise issued hereunder or for damages. 
    Insurers shall have no right of recovery against the Town, it being the intention that the insurance policies shall protect Grantee and the Town and shall be primary coverage for all losses covered by the policy(ies). 
    The company(ies) issuing the insurance policies shall have no recourse against the Town for payment of any premiums or assessments which all are set at the sole risk of a Grantee. 
D.  Notice of Cancellation or Reduction of Coverage 
    The insurance policies mentioned above shall state that the policies are extended to cover the liability assumed by a Grantee under the terms of any Franchise Agreement and shall contain the following endorsement: 
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the amount of coverage thereof reduce until thirty (30) days after receipt by the Town by registered mail of written notice of such intent to cancel or reduce the coverage" 
E.  Evidence of Insurance Filed with The Town 
    A certificate of insurance which certifies that a Grantee has obtained insurance coverage in compliance with this section and that all required premiums have been paid, shall be filed and maintained with the Office of the Town Recorder and with the Director of Finance during the term of the franchise and may be changed from time to time to reflect changing liability limits. A Grantee shall immediately advise the Town Attorney of any litigation that may develop that would affect this insurance. 
F.  No Waiver of Insurance, Construction Bond or Letter of Credit or Cash Surety 
    Recovery by the Town of any amounts under insurance, the Construction Bond (Section 6G.) or Letter of Credit or Cash Surety (Section 16), or otherwise does not limit a Grantee's duty to indemnify the Town in any way; nor shall such recovery relieve a Grantee of its obligations under a Franchise, limit the amounts owed to the Town, or in any respect prevent the Town from exercising any other right or remedy it may have. 
G.  Construction Bond 
    Prior to any Cable System construction, upgrade, or other work in the Public Rights-of-Way, a Grantee shall establish in the Town's favor a performance bond in an amount specified in a Franchise Agreement or other authorization as necessary to ensure a Grantee's faithful performance of the construction, upgrade, or other work. 
    In the event a Grantee subject to such a performance bond fails to complete the Cable System construction, upgrade, or other work in the Public Rights-of-Way in a safe, timely, and competent manner in accord with the provisions of a Franchise Agreement, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the Town as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of a Grantee, or the cost of completing or repairing the Cable System construction, upgrade, or other work in the Public Rights-of-Way, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney's fees, up to the full amount of the bond. The Town may also recover against the bond any amount recoverable against the Letter of Credit or Cash Surety where such amount exceeds that available under the Letter of Credit or Cash Surety. 
    Upon completion of the Cable System construction, upgrade, or other work in the Public Rights-of-Way and payment of all construction obligations of the Cable System to the satisfaction of the Town, the Town may eliminate the bond or reduce its amount after a time appropriate to determine whether the work performed was satisfactory, which time shall be established considering the nature of the work performed. The Town may subsequently require a new bond or an increase in the bond amount for any subsequent construction, upgrade, or other work in the Public Rights-of-Way. 
    The construction bond shall be issued by a surety with an A-1 or better rating of insurance in Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition and shall be subject to the approval of the Town. 
    The construction bond shall contain the following endorsement: 
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled by the surety nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety until sixty (60) days after receipt by the Town, by registered mail, of written notice of such intent to cancel or not to renew" 
SECTION 7: - CABLE SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION 
A.  Map and Plan to be Provided 
    Grantee shall submit a construction or reconstruction plan not less than sixty (60) days prior to the date Grantee intends to commence construction or reconstruction of the Cable System, and that plan shall be incorporated by reference and made a part of a Grantee's Franchise Agreement. The plan shall include Cable System design details, equipment specifications, and design performance criteria. The plan shall also include a map of the entire Franchise Area and shall clearly delineate the following: 
1.  Areas within the Franchise Area where the Cable System will be available to Subscribers, including a time schedule of construction or reconstruction for each year that construction or reconstruction is proposed; and 
2.  Areas within the Franchise Area where the Cable System cannot reasonably be extended due to lack of present or planned development or other similar reasons, with the areas and the reasons for not serving them clearly identified on the map. 
B.  Delay in System Construction or Reconstruction Requires Consent by Town Council 
    Any delay in the Cable System construction or reconstruction beyond the times specified in the plan shall require application to the Town and consent of the Town Council after receiving recommendation from the Town Manager. Any delay beyond the construction or reconstruction timetable set forth in the plan, unless approved by the Town Council, will be considered a violation of the Franchise for which the provisions of Sections 6G, 16 and 17 shall apply. However, nothing in this Section shall prevent a Grantee from constructing or reconstructing the Cable System earlier than planned. 
C.  System Construction and Operation to be Consistent with Town Requirements; the Town may Observe Annual Proof of Performance Tests; the Town May Conduct Independent Tests 
    Grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner such that it operates at all times consistent with all laws, ordinances, and construction standards of the Town; the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission; and detailed standards submitted by a Grantee as part of its application, which standards shall be incorporated by reference into a Franchise Agreement. In addition, a Grantee shall provide the Town with the opportunity to observe the conduct of, and receive a written report of the results of Grantee's proof of performance tests. The Town may at any time conduct independent measurements of the system. 
    The Grantee shall continue, through the term of the franchise, to maintain the technical, operational, and maintenance standards and quality of service set forth in this Ordinance. Should the Town Council find that the Grantee has failed to maintain these standards and quality of service, the Grantee shall comply with the corrective measures ordered by the Town Council that are designed to restore the cable system and the cable services provided to standards required by this Ordinance. Failure to comply with the Town Council's order will constitute a breach of a franchise for which the remedy of [Sections] 17 and 18 is applicable. 
    All construction within the Town of Warrenton shall conform to the standards that are set forth in the current edition of the Town's Standards for Rights-of-Way/Easement Construction. A Grantee shall at all times abide by the requirements and standards therein, including, but not limited to those provisions pertaining to job site traffic control. 
D.  Additional Specifications - Standby Power, National, State and Local Codes 
    Grantee shall construct, install and maintain the Cable System in an orderly and professional manner, using due diligence and materials of good and durable quality. All cables and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with and in the same manner as electric and telephone lines. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering considerations. Underground installations shall be in conformance with all applicable codes. 
    A Grantee shall maintain equipment capable of providing standby power to be engaged automatically in the event of a power failure for twenty-four (24) hours at the primary headend, tower, and HVAC systems and for a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours to the first active device on all trunk lines, or two (2) hours at fiber optic nodes. 
    A Grantee shall at all times comply with applicable Sections of the following, all as from time to time amended and revised, and all other applicable rules and regulations now in effect or hereinafter adopted by the Town: 
1.  National Electrical Safety Code (ANSI) most recently adopted; 
2.  National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters); 
3.  The Bellcore Blue Book Manual of Construction; 
4.  The Rules and Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission; 
5.  The Town Building Code; 
6.  Zoning and Subdivision Regulations; 
7.  Town of Warrenton's Published Design and Construction Standards (Public Facilities Manual). 
In any event, a Grantee shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the Franchise area or other areas where a Grantee may have equipment located. 
E.  Access to Grantee's Trenches by Other Utilities 
    Grantee shall cooperate in the planning, locating and construction of its Cable System in utility joint trenches or common duct banks with other telecommunications providers. The Town will provide advance notice to any Grantee when it plans to open a trench and each Grantee shall provide notice to the Town when it plans to open a trench. A Grantee and the Town will offer to make space available to the other and to other Persons who participate in joint trenching, on reasonable terms and conditions. 
F.  If Town Determines Any Part of Facilities are Harmful to Health and Safety of Any Person, Grantee Shall Promptly Correct 
    If, at any time, it is determined by the Town or any other agency or authority of competent jurisdiction that any part of the system facilities are endangering the public, including without limitation missing vault or pedestal covers, temporary drop cables that cross walkways, driveways or other areas, and low cables, riser problems and other violations of State or local laws that are harmful to the health or safety of any person, then a Grantee shall correct all such conditions, at its own costs and expense, within 24 hours of receipt of notice from the Town or any other agency or authority of competent jurisdiction. Until such conditions are corrected, Grantee shall post suitable warnings to ensure that the health and safety of persons possibly affected is ensured. 
G.  Grantee to Maintain System in Conformance with FCC Radiation Rules 
    A Grantee shall construct, operate and maintain the system in conformance with FCC Signal Leakage requirements, 47 C.F.R. 76 subpart K, to prevent interference with the transmission or reception of over-the-air broadcast signals. A Grantee shall not interfere with the ability of any Subscriber to utilize his or her television receiver for any lawful purpose. The connection of any cable input selector device or any converter to a Subscriber's terminal shall not be considered as interference with the Subscriber's ability to utilize his or her television receiver. 
H.  Grantee to Take All Necessary Steps to Prevent Accidents 
    A Grantee shall, at its own cost and expense, take all necessary efforts to prevent accidents at its work sites, including the placing and maintenance of proper guards, fences, barricades, and security personnel and, at night, suitable and sufficient lighting. 
I.  Notice of Cable Construction/Repair to Subscribers 
    Grantee shall notify residents on affected streets of pending construction, or major repairs including any which require street or sidewalk trenching, at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to commencement of such work. Notification shall be by leaving an appropriate notice at the residence (i.e. door hanger notice and by first-class mail). All notices shall include the Company's telephone number. 
    In the event of a system extension or rebuild, possibly affecting general system reception, a Grantee shall notify all of its Subscribers by a character generated message on a local origination channel, stating the scope and duration of the proposed extension or rebuild and its impacts at least fourteen (14) days prior to commencement of such work. Emergency repairs shall be handled by a door hanger. 
SECTION 8: - REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO USE OF TOWN STREETS AND PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
A.  The Town Has the Right to Use Poles and Conduits Owned By Grantee 
    The Town shall have the right to install and maintain free of charge upon any poles or in any conduit owned by a Grantee any wire and pole fixtures that do not unreasonably interfere with a Grantee's own use of the poles and conduits. Grantee shall notify the Town when it enters into an agreement for use of its poles and conduits. Copies of agreements for use of Grantee's conduits or poles in the Public Rights-of-Way or on other public property shall be available for review upon the Town's request. 
B.  All Grantee's Facilities to be Installed Only at Locations Approved by Town Manager or his/or her Designee 
    Any poles, wires, cable lines, conduits or other properties of a Grantee to be constructed or installed in streets shall be so constructed or installed only at such locations and in such manner as shall be approved in writing by the Town Manager or his/or her designee in the exercise of his or her reasonable discretion. 
C.  During Construction, Reconstruction or Maintenance of System Grantee, Shall Not Obstruct Public Ways Without Prior Consent of Authorities 
    In connection with the construction, reconstruction, operation, maintenance, repair, or removal of the system, a Grantee shall give due regard to the aesthetics of the Franchise areas and shall not obstruct the public ways, streets, railways, passenger travel, or other traffic to, from or within the Town, without prior consent of the appropriate Town authorities. In addition: 
1.  All transmission and distribution structures, lines, and equipment erected by a Grantee within the Town shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any streets or public way. 
2.  In case of any disturbance to any public way, street, easement, paved area or other property, a Grantee at its own cost and expense and in a manner and time period approved by the Town, shall replace and restore such Public Rights-of-Way in as good condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done. 
D.  Restoration of Property 
    In case of any damage of any property during installation, construction, operation, or removal, the Grantee shall, at its own cost and expense justly compensate the owner of said property for all damages incurred by the property owner. 
E.  Permits Required to be Obtained Prior to Any Physical Work Being Performed in Town's Streets 
    A Grantee or its authorized contractors must obtain permits from the Town Manager or his/or her designee, Building and/or other appropriate Departments prior to any physical work being performed in the Town's streets, or on Town-owned property. Permits will be issued to a Grantee or its contractors only on approved plans by approved contractors, which plans must be submitted concurrently with or prior to the request for the construction permit. All work will be done in accordance with the Town's specifications including the Town's regulations pertaining to [aesthetic} considerations and must comply with all Applicable Law. 
F.  Grantee to Prepare Detailed Maps of Entire System Prior to Issuance of Permit for Construction or Reconstruction. Maps also to be Filed With Affected Utility Companies 
    A Grantee shall provide strand maps of the entire Cable System to the Office of the Town Manager or his/or her designee. 
    In addition, Grantee shall provide to the Town full and unrestricted access to Grantee's as built maps, plans, records, and documents so as to permit the Town to review Grantee's system prior to issuance of any construction or reconstruction permits, provided however the Town shall have no right to copy as built maps unless afforded by a court of competent jurisdiction or as may be agreed to by the Franchisee. 
G.  Upon Undergrounding of Utility Lines, Grantee Shall Concurrently Place Lines Underground in Conduits at Depth Approved by Town Manager or his/or her designee 
    Trunk, feeder and drop cable may be constructed overhead where poles now exist and electrical or telephone lines or both are now overhead, but where electrical or telephone lines are now underground, all trunk, feeder and drop cable shall be constructed underground at such depths and locations as shall be approved by the Town Manager or his/or her designee. 
    In all sections of the Town where all the cables, wires, or other like facilities of public utilities are placed underground, a Grantee shall place its cables, wires or other like facilities underground to the maximum extent that the existing technology reasonably permits a Grantee to do so. 
    If at any time the Town Manager determines that existing wires, cable or other like facilities of public utilities anywhere in the Town shall be changed from an overhead to an underground installation, a Grantee shall also, at Grantee's sole expense, convert its system to an underground installation. However, if public funds of the Town of Warrenton are available to other public utilities for the purpose of defraying the cost of the change in facilities, such funds shall also be made available to a Grantee. 
    Whenever and wherever electrical lines and telephone lines are moved from overhead to underground placement in an area, all Cable System facilities and plant in that area shall be similarly and concurrently moved underground by a Grantee at a Grantee's sole cost and expense at such depths and locations as shall be approved by the Town Manager or his/or her designee. 
H.  Grantee May Be Required to Move its Facilities to Accommodate Changes in Public Improvements 
    A Grantee shall from time to time protect, support, temporarily dislocate, or temporarily or permanently, as may be required, remove or relocate, without expense to the Town or any other governmental entity, any facilities installed, used, or maintained under a Franchise, if and when made necessary by any lawful change of grade, alignment, or width of any public street by the Town or any other governmental entity, or made necessary by any other public improvement or alteration in, under, on, upon or about any public street or other public property, whether such public improvement or alteration is at the instance of the Town or another governmental entity, and whether such improvement or alteration is for a governmental or proprietary function, or made necessary by traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation or any other public project or purpose of the Town or any other governmental entity. The decision of the Town Manager or his/or her designee under this Section, absent review by the Town Council, shall be final and binding on a Grantee. 
I.  Grantee Shall Obtain Prior Approval Before Altering any Town Facility; Alterations to be at Cost of Grantee 
    In connection with the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, or removal of the system, a Grantee shall, at its own cost and expense, protect any and all existing structures belonging to the Town. A Grantee shall obtain the prior approval of the Town before altering any water main, sewage or drainage system, or any other municipal structure in any public way or street, because of the presence of the system in the public ways or streets. Any such alteration shall be made by a Grantee, at its sole cost and expense, and in a manner reasonably prescribed by the Town. A Grantee shall also be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace or repair and restore to as close to its prior condition as is reasonably possible and in a manner reasonably specified by the Town, any public way, street or any municipal structure involved in the construction of the system that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of any work thereon by or on behalf of a Grantee. 
J.  Grantee Shall Temporarily Move its Wires to Permit Moving of Buildings 
    Grantee shall, at the request of any person holding a moving permit issued by the Town, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid to a Grantee by the person requesting the same, and Grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. Grantee shall be given not less then ten (10) days' prior written notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
K.  Grantee Shall Repair and Restore Damage to Town Facilities and Shall Maintain Restoration 
    In the event that a Grantee during construction, installation, inspection or repair of its facilities causes damage to pavement, sidewalks, driveways, landscaping or other property, a Grantee or the authorized agent shall, at its own expense and in a manner approved by the Town, replace and restore such places to the same condition which existed before said work was commenced. A Grantee shall further continue to maintain all such restoration in the condition approved by the Town should the Town reasonably determine, within two (2) years from the date of such restoration, that such surface requires additional restoration work to place it in as good a condition as before the commencement of the work, a Grantee shall perform such additional restoration to the reasonable satisfaction of the Town. 
    In the event the construction or maintenance (except for emergency repairs) of the cable system requires the temporary closing of a traffic lane or lanes, a Grantee shall notify the Town Manager not less than three (3) days prior to the construction or maintenance. The Town Manager may require a Grantee to submit a traffic control plan and may also require that all lanes of traffic be open and available to traffic during peak traffic hours. 
L.  Failure by Grantee to Complete Required Work in any Street Can Result in Town Causing Work to be done at Expense of Grantee 
    Upon failure of a Grantee to complete any work required by law, or by the provisions of a Franchise, to be done in any street or other public place, within ten (10) days following due notice and to the satisfaction of the Town Manager or his/or her designee, the Town may, at its option, cause such work to be done and a Grantee shall pay to the Town the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the Town Manager or his/or her designee to a Grantee within ten (10) days after receipt of such itemized report. Or, at Town's option, Town may demand of Grantee the estimated cost of such work as estimated by the Town Manager or his/or her designee, and such shall be paid by Grantee to Town within ten (10) days of such demand; upon award of any contract or contracts for such work, Grantee shall pay to Town within ten (10) days of demand any additional amount necessary to provide for cost of such work. Upon completion of such work, Grantee shall pay to Town or Town shall refund to Grantee such sums so that the total received and retained by Town shall equal the cost of such work. "Cost" as used herein shall include fifteen percent (15%) for Town's overhead expense. 
M.  Town May Remove Grantee's Facilities as may be Required During Emergencies 
    The Town reserves the right to remove any portion of a Grantee's equipment and facilities as may be required in any emergency as determined by the Town without liability for interruption of Cable Service and the Town shall not be obligated to restore Cable Service or to pay the costs of expenses of restoring Cable Service. 
N.  Cost of Tree Trimming is to be at Expense of Grantee; Town has Option to Decide Whether Town or Grantee Does the Trimming 
    A Grantee shall notify the Town regarding the need to trim trees upon and overhanging streets of the Town so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of a Grantee. At the option of the Town, such trimming may be done by the Town at the expense of a Grantee, or by a Grantee under the Town's supervision and direction at the expense of a Grantee. When authorized, such trimming shall be limited to the area required for clear cable passage and shall not include major structural branches, which materially alter the appearance and natural growth habits of the tree. If such trimming is not performed by the Town, a Grantee shall be responsible for any and all damages to any tree as a result of trimming, or to the land surrounding any tree, whether such tree is trimmed or removed, or for damage to property or person caused by such trimming and removal of any tree. 
O.  Grantee Shall Remove System from any Public Street Following Termination or Expiration of Franchise 
    In the event that the use of a part of the Cable System is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, or in the event such Cable System or property has been installed in any street or public place without complying with the requirements of the Franchise, or the Franchise has been terminated, canceled or has expired without renewal, a Grantee shall promptly, at its own expense, and upon being given ten (10) days notice from the Town Manager, remove from the streets or public places all such property and poles of such Cable System other than any which the Town Manager may permit to be abandoned in place. In the event of such removal, a Grantee shall promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been removed to a condition satisfactory to the Town Manager. 
P.  Grantee's Property May be Considered Abandoned 90 Days After Termination or Expiration of Franchise 
    Any property of a Grantee remaining in place ninety (90) days after the termination or expiration of a Franchise shall be, at the option of the Town Council, considered permanently abandoned. The Town Manager or his/or her designee may extend such time not to exceed an additional thirty-(30) days. 
Q.  Abandonment in Place shall be Done at Direction of the Department of Public Works: Ownership of Property Shall be Transferred to Town 
    Any property of a Grantee permitted to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such a manner, as the Department of Public Works shall prescribe. Upon permanent abandonment of the property of a Grantee in place, a Grantee shall submit to the Town an instrument in writing, with form to be approved by the Town Attorney transferring to the Town the ownership of such property. If such an instrument is not received within thirty (30) days of the abandonment, the property shall automatically become that of the Town. 
R.  Placement of Cable System Equipment 
    Nothing contained in this ordinance nor any franchise agreement executed under the authority contained in this ordinance shall operate to convey to the Grantee the right to use or locate any poles, equipment or other parts of the cable system in the boundaries of any private rights of way or private streets located in the Town. Grantee shall, prior to construction of any portion of the cable system within a private street or private right of way, obtain and record all necessary easements, or grants of use from the owner(s) of the private streets or rights of way. 
SECTION 9: - SYSTEM OPERATION 
A.  Type and Scope of System 
    A Grantee shall install and maintain the system as proposed and agreed upon in a Franchise Agreement. 
B.  Basic Service Tier 
    Each Grantee of a Cable System shall provide its Subscribers a separately available Basic Service Tier to which subscription is required for access to any other tier of service. 
C.  Access Channels 
    A Grantee shall provide and maintain the number and type of access channels as are set forth in a Franchise Agreement. 
D.  Supervision and Regulation of Franchises by The Town 
    The Town may do all things necessary and proper to supervise, inspect, and regulate the construction and operation of cable television systems Franchised under this Ordinance; implement complaint procedures; regulate rates as authorized by Federal, State, and Local laws; monitor and enforce compliance with this Ordinance and any cable television Franchise granted by the Town. 
    In order to serve and maintain the Town's continuing regulatory jurisdiction and supervision over the operation of outstanding cable franchises, the Town Manager, or his/her designee shall have general supervisory authority over all outstanding cable franchises. 
E.  Performance Evaluation Sessions 
    The Town and the Grantee shall hold scheduled performance evaluation sessions once every three years on the anniversary of a Franchise Agreement. All such evaluation sessions shall be open to the public. 
    Ninety (90) days prior to each performance evaluation session, the Grantee shall submit to the Town a written report, in reasonable detail, covering the significant events related to the Grantee's performance or nonperformance of the terms and conditions of its Franchise Agreement and the Cable Ordinance during the period from the submission of the last report. Such reports shall, cover significant events including, but not limited to those events related to the following topics: 
1.  Compliance with, and any modification necessary with respect to, the financial commitments required under the Franchise Agreement; 
2.  Compliance with requirements regarding system characteristics and technical performance and testing requirements;. 
3.  Compliance with construction terms, standards, and schedules; 
4.  Compliance with all other provisions of this Ordinance and a Franchise Agreement. 
5.  A description of the changes made or contemplated to the mix and quality of programming in the broad categories of video programming or other services on the system. Nothing in this paragraph, however, shall imply the Town has regulatory authority or power of censorship over the content of programming on the Grantee's channels, the public and educational access channels or the leased channels; 
6.  The status of the State-of-the Art communications technologies; 
7.  Compliance with, and any modification necessary with respect to the Grantee's privacy protection policies; 
8.  A summary of all service interruptions; 
9.  A summary of all significant and representative Subscriber and user complaints and the action taken by the Grantee in response thereto; 
10.  A summary of relevant developments in the legal and regulatory arenas; and 
11.  Other events which the Town, or the Grantee may find significant. 
    Within sixty (60) days after receipt of the Grantee's report, the Town Manager may request for clarification, additional reasonable and appropriate information on specific topics which the Grantee shall supply within sixty (60) days of such request. [Clarification Period] The Town may review the Grantee's performance to determine whether the Grantee has complied with the terms and conditions of the Franchise Agreement and shall, following completion of any such review, provide for a public performance evaluation session to discuss the report with the Grantee and seek public participation and comments regarding Grantee's operations. Nothing in this Section shall affect the Town's enforcement remedies provided elsewhere in this Ordinance and a Franchise Agreement. 
    Special evaluation sessions may be held at any time during the term of a Franchise Agreement at the request of the Town or the Grantee. 
    All evaluation sessions shall be open to the public and announced in a newspaper of general circulation in accordance with legal notice at least ten (10) days proceeding each session. A Grantee shall notify its Subscribers of all evaluation sessions by: (1) a mailing directly to all Subscriber households and units at least ten (10) days preceding each session and (2) by announcement on at least one (1) channels (within channels 2-12) of its system between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. for five (5) consecutive days preceding each session. 
    Topics which may be discussed at any scheduled or special evaluation session may include, but not be limited to: service rate structures; Franchise fees; liquidated damages; free or discounted services; application of new technologies; system performance; services provided; access channels; programming offered; Subscriber complaints; privacy; judicial and FCC rulings; line extension policies; and other Grantee, or Town rules and regulations. 
    Within sixty (60) days after the conclusion of the public evaluation session, the Town Manager shall prepare a report with respect to the adequacy of system performance and quality of service. If inadequacies are found which result in the apparent violation of any of the material provisions of this Cable Ordinance or a Franchise Agreement, the Grantee shall be notified by the Town Manager that the Grantee shall have a maximum of thirty (30) days from the date of the notice to respond and propose a plan for implementing any improvement or correction for curing any deficiency cited in the Town Manager's report. 
    If a Grantee fails or refuses to correct a deficiency within the thirty (30) days notification or any extension of time granted by the Town Manager or Town Council, a Grantee shall pay to the Town a penalty of five thousand dollars ($5000.00.00) plus one hundred dollars ($100.00) per calendar day, including the first day, for each day that the deficiency continues. 
    Assessment of all penalties against a Grantee may be appealed to the Town Council, which shall have the authority, by resolution, to waive or adjust penalties if it is in the Town Council's judgement a waiver is deemed to be justified. 
F.  Grantee to Maintain an Office or Service Center in Town Limits 
    A Grantee shall maintain a business office or service center within the Town limits, which shall be open during the business hours stated in the Consumer Services Standards of Section 10, and staffed and operated to respond to customers in at least four ways: accept payments and resolve billing difficulties; to give out and exchange or accept return converters; schedule and conduct service or technician calls; answer Subscriber inquiries; and resolve complaints. Grantee shall also provide additional convenient bill payment locations through cooperative arrangements with banks, shopping centers and /or similar facilities. Subscribers shall be promptly notified of any change of address or telephone numbers of such business office or bill payment locations. Grantee shall also prepare a written notice to familiarize residents with the location of said business office and bill payment locations, the services available, and complaint procedures. This notice is to be given to each new Subscriber upon installation of service, and is to be distributed at least once per year to all Subscribers. 
G.  Repair and Maintenance Crew to be Maintained that is Capable of Responding to Subscriber Complaints 
    Grantee shall maintain sufficient repair and maintenance crews capable of responding to Subscriber complaints or requests for service in accordance with Customer Service Standards described in Section 10. 
H.  Outage Log to be Maintained Showing Details of Service Failures 
    A Grantee shall maintain an outage log showing the date, approximate time, location, duration, number of Subscribers affected, type and probable cause of all headend, trunk, or distribution line service failures due to causes other than routine testing or maintenance at reasonable times. A copy of such log showing the "availability criteria" (below) shall be filed with the Town Manager of the Town on a quarterly basis and shall be retained by a Grantee for a period of three (3) years. 
    A Grantee will design, procure, install and maintain its equipment with the objective of meeting a monthly system availability criteria of 99.5% measured as follows: 
Power On - 
Outage Time / Power On
I.  Planned Service Interruption 
    A Grantee may intentionally interrupt service on the Cable System only for good cause and for the shortest time possible and, except in emergency situations or to the extent necessary to correct the affected Subscribers' service problems, only after a minimum of forty-eight (48) hours prior notice to Subscribers and the Town of the anticipated service interruption; provided, however, that planned maintenance that does not require more than two (2) hours' interruption of service and that occurs between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. shall not require such notice to Subscribers, but shall require notice to the Town no less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the anticipated service interruption. 
J.  The Town Can Require Grantee to Test System and Report on System Performance 
    When there have been repeated complaints made or when there exists other evidence which, in the judgment of the Town, casts doubt on the reliability or quality of Cable Service, the Town shall have the right and authority to compel a Grantee at its expense to test, analyze, and report on the performance of the Cable System. Such report shall be delivered to the Town no later than fourteen (14) days after the Town formally notifies a Grantee and shall include the following information: the nature of the complaints which precipitated the special test(s); which Cable System component(s) was/were tested, the equipment used, and procedure(s) employed in said testing; the results of such test(s); and the methods(s) in which said complaints were resolved. 
K.  Required Tests May be Done by Independent Qualified Engineer 
    The Town Manager of the Town may require that tests and analyses shall be supervised by a qualified engineer selected by the Town who is not on the permanent staff of a Grantee. Said tests shall be paid for by a Grantee within twenty (20) days after the Town submits the engineer's invoice if the engineer's tests reveal substantial substandard technical performance pursuant to FCC and established industry standards. The aforesaid engineer shall sign all records of the special tests and forward to the Town Manager such records with a report interpreting the results of the tests and recommending actions to be taken by a Grantee and the Town. 
SECTION 10: - CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS 
A.  Definitions 
1.  Normal business hours means those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases "normal business hours" must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend hours. 
2.  Normal operating conditions means those service conditions, which are within the control of the cable operator. Those conditions which are not within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the Cable System. 
3.  Service interruption means the loss of picture or sound on one or more cable channels. 
B.  Exceptions 
    Nothing in this Ordinance is intended to prevent or prohibit: 
1.  The Town and a Grantee from agreeing to customer service requirements that exceed the standards set forth in this Ordinance; 
2.  The Town from enacting or enforcing any consumer protection law ; or 
3.  The establishment or enforcement of any ordinance or regulation concerning customer service that imposes customer service requirements that exceed or address matters not addressed by the standards set forth in this Ordinance. 
C.  Customer Service Standards 
    A Grantee shall conform to minimum standards as shall be established by the Town for telephone access, repair service response, timeliness of installation work, and work order scheduling. A Grantee is subject to the following customer service standards, which are to be certified quarterly as to compliance by a Grantee to the Town. 
    Telephone Access: Use by the company of a telephone answering machine (except for an automated call handling and audio response unit) in connection with its customer service functions is prohibited. Furthermore, use of an answering service is limited to no more than 8 hours per day. 
    Answering Promptness: At least 90% of the time, telephone callers shall be connected to a live service representative staff member or operator within thirty seconds, seven days per week. Busy conditions should not be encountered by subscribers attempting to make contact with the company more frequently than 3% of the time. 
    Office Access: A company's local office shall be open for business at least eight hours per day on weekdays. 
    Installation and Repair Service: The following policies with regard to installation and service shall be met by all Grantees: 
• Installations must be completed within five business days; 
• Grantees shall respond on a same day basis to all individual outages that are reported prior to 4:00 p.m.; 
• Grantees shall respond the next day to all individual outages that are reported after 4:00 p.m.; 
• Grantees shall respond immediately to all reported outages affecting between 3 and 19 subscribers when the outage is reported between 6:00 a.m. and midnight; 
• Grantees shall respond by 6:00 a.m. to all outages affecting between 3 and 19 subscribers when the outage is reported between midnight and 6:00 a.m.; 
• Grantees shall respond immediately to all reported outages affecting more than 20 subscribers, regardless of when the outage is reported; 
• Grantees shall respond the next business day to all reports of poor reception; 
• Grantees shall offer subscribers the option of appointment windows, six days per week, including at least 8:00 a.m. until noon, 1:00 p.m. until 5:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m. until 8:00 p.m. (Sunday excluded). 
• Drop wires in underground service areas that are temporarily placed above ground shall be buried within two weeks of the date and time of the temporary installation, except in those situations where weather conditions make trenching impractical. 
• Between the time that a new customer is signed up for service and the time service is installed, he or she shall be afforded a right of rescission. 
• The installation completion objectives shall be met at least 90% of the time as measured on a quarterly basis. 
• At $20.00 rebate shall be given to subscribers when a Grantee fails to meet its service appointment schedule; and no installation fee shall be charged in the event that the company's installers miss their appointment. 
D.  Rebates 
    Subscribers shall be compensated through the use of a rebate for cable service outages lasting longer than 24 hours. Cable service outages for the purpose of this section shall be defined as complete loss of video and/or audio. The right of the subscriber to receive a rebate for cable service outages of twenty-four (24) hours or more shall be clearly stated in the Customer Service Brochure. 
E.  Parental Control Feature 
    Grantee shall provide a parental control option to all subscribers. The availability of this option should be clearly stated in the Customer Service Brochure (described below). 
F.  Customer Service Brochure 
    Consistent with § 76.309 of the Rules and Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, Grantee shall provide an informational package to all of its new subscribers at the time they are first connected to the cable. This information shall include, at minimum: a full and complete listing of all rates and charges (including all available discounts, if any, such as those that apply to senior citizens) and a statement of the company's various operating policies, including those that relate to late charge assessments and instructions on filing of complaints. The material shall also describe the customer service standards that the company is required to meet. In addition, the brochure shall contain a channel/service guide as well as instructions as to how to contact a Grantee for service and what to do if problems cannot be resolved through normal channels. The brochure shall also present subscribers with instructions on how to connect VCRs and other such devices as part of the cable installation. Thereafter, subscribers shall be provided a copy of all of this information at least once a year on a routine basis. 
G.  Sales of Subscriber Lists Prohibited 
    The Grantee shall not sell or allow use of subscriber lists for any purpose not connected with the operation of the cable system. 
H.  Monitoring 
    No monitoring of any terminal connected to the cable system shall take place without specific written authorization by the user of the terminal in question of each occasion. 
I.  Customer Service Statistics and Reporting 
    A Grantee shall provide the Town Manager annual customer service performance statistical reports that contain the following information: 
• Service outages by location (area) and the number of subscribers affected, listing the time each outage was first noted and the time service was restored; 
• Number of repair service requests received in the past quarter; 
• Average hold time for customer service telephone calls that were received in the past period; 
• Percentage of telephone calls that were answered within 30 seconds during the past period; 
• Percentage of time when all incoming trunk lines were in a busy condition; 
• Breakdown by type of complaint received (e.g. "complete outage" or "snowy picture" etc.); 
• Breakdown by cause of problem (e.g. "subscriber equipment" or "drop/converter" or "system" etc.); 
• Breakdown by time of response or resolution (e.g. "within 24 hours" or "same day" etc.); 
• Subscribers added, each tier and each premium channel; and Subscribers disconnected each tier and each premium channel. 
SECTION 11: - CUSTOMER BILLING 
    Customers shall be notified of any changes in rates, programming services, or channel positions as soon as possible through announcements on the Cable System and in writing. Notice must be given to Subscribers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the cable operator. In addition, a Grantee shall notify Subscribers thirty (30) days in advance of any significant changes in other information required to be disclosed to Subscribers. 
    Bills shall be clear, concise, and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized with itemizations including, but not being limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills shall clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including operational charges, rebates, and credits. In case of a billing dispute, a Grantee must respond to a written complaint from a Subscriber within thirty (30) days. 
    Refund checks shall be issued promptly, but not later than: 
• The customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the request or thirty (30) days, whichever is earlier; or 
• Upon the return of the equipment supplied by the cable operator if service is terminated. 
• Credits will be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. 
SECTION 12: - ENFORCEMENT OF CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS 
    Reports Required of Compliance and Enforcement of Customer Service Standards 
    A Grantee shall report to the Town [on] annually on or before June 30th of each year regarding its compliance with customer service standards [Report shall include information not already included in response to Section 10D]. A report form shall be developed in consultation between the Town and a Grantee that will provide the detail necessary to monitor Grantee's compliance with customer service standards. Upon breach of the customer service standards and failure of a Grantee to remedy such breach upon ten (10) days' prior written notice from the Town, the Town may invoke the penalty provisions of this Section or the liquidated damages provision of the Franchise Agreement without prejudice to any other remedy otherwise available to the Town. A Grantee shall also promptly comply with all procedures established by the Town regarding the handling of all complaints received directly by the Town from Town residents regarding cable television service. 
1.  A Grantee shall file with the Town a notarized statement signed by an officer or local system manager certifying compliance with these customer service standards on a quarterly basis. 
2.  An officer or local system manager who knowingly and/or intentionally signs a false certificate shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by up to ninety (90) days in jail or a fine of $500.00 or both. 
3.  Failing to file a certificate shall subject a Grantee to pay a civil forfeiture to the Town of $500.00 per day. 
4.  A Grantee in non-compliance shall file with the Town a statement specifying areas of non-compliance along with a remedial plan. Failing to file a non-compliance statement and a remedial plan shall subject a Grantee to pay a civil forfeiture to the Town of $500.00 per day. 
SECTION 13: - REPORTS AND RECORDS OF CABLE TV OPERATION 
A.  Annual Financial Reports Required 
    During the term of a Franchise, a Grantee shall file annually with the Town Manager not later than 90 days after the end of its fiscal year and, if the Franchise is terminated or expires prior to the end of a Grantee's fiscal year, 90 days after such termination or expiration, two (2) copies of: 
1.  A financial statement applicable to the Cable System serving the Town, including a detailed statement of Gross Revenues applicable to its operation during the preceding twelve (12) month period; and the gross revenue from each revenue source attributable to the operations of Grantee from within the Town; and 
2.  An operational report that summarizes the annual report information required in Section 12. 
    These reports shall be certified as being correct by a responsible financial representative authorized to represent the Grantee and there shall be submitted along with them such other reasonable information as the Town shall request. 
B.  Grantee Shall Annually File Prior to March 31 Current Maps Showing Location of Equipment Installed 
    A Grantee shall file in a format acceptable to the Town Manager or his/or her designee, on or before the last day in March of each year, up-dated strand maps showing all Cable System equipment installed and in place in streets, public or private rights-of-way and other public or private places of the Town. The maps shall be provided to the Town in electronic format, if available, and on hard copy. 
C.  Ownership Reports Required 
    During the term of a Franchise, a Grantee shall file with the Town not later than three (3) months after the end of each subsequent fiscal year during which a Franchise was accepted and within three (3) months after the end of each subsequent fiscal year two (2) copies of the Grantee's annual report: 
1.  The names and both business and residential addresses and phone numbers of the cable television system resident manager and engineer shall be made available to the Town Manager. 
D.  Public Availability of Reports 
    Such reports as required under this Ordinance shall be available to the public in the Office of the Town Recorder, during normal business hours. 
E.  Correspondence 
    Upon request a Grantee shall simultaneously file with the Town Manager a copy of any petition, application, report and communication pertaining to the operations of the cable television system that are transmitted by a Grantee to, or received by a Grantee from, any federal, state or other regulatory commissions, agencies or courts regarding the local Cable System. 
F.  Town's Access to Records 
    The Town shall have access during all normal business hours to all Grantee's records required to be maintained by this Ordinance or any Franchise Agreement. 
SECTION 14: - RATE REGULATION 
A.  Town Reserves Right to Regulate Rates. 
    The Town reserves the right to regulate a Grantee's rates for cable service to the fullest extent permitted by Applicable Law. Upon demonstrating to the Town that Grantee is not subject to "effective competition" in the Franchise Area as that term is defined in 47 CFR 76.905, Grantee shall establish rates for services and submit such rates to the Town Manager prior to offering service to customers. 
B.  Rates Not Subject to Regulation 
    When Grantee's rates are not subject to regulation, [for example, when it is factually demonstrated that a Cable System is subject to effective competition (47 CFR Section 76.905)] Grantee may change its published rates upon thirty (30) days' written notice to its Subscribers and the Town. However, such notice is not required for rates that are temporarily changed for promotional purposes if such rates are lower than published for rates. 
C.  Rates Subject to Regulation. 
    If during the term of a Franchise, Grantee ceases to be subject to effective competition in its franchise area, the Town Council may regulate rates for the provision of basic cable service as expressly permitted by applicable Federal, State and Municipal law and the rules of Federal, State and Municipal agencies having jurisdiction over cable service rates. 
D.  Change in Rates Requires Petition to Town Council. 
    A Grantee may petition the Town Council for a change in rates subject to regulation as specified in Section 14C by filing a proposed rate schedule with the Town Recorder which petition shall include the justification(s) for the proposed schedule. One (1) copy of the petition shall remain on file with the Town Recorder and be open for public inspection. 
E.  Public Hearing. 
    The Town Council may hold a public hearing to consider the proposed change in rates subject to regulation, at which hearing all persons desiring to be heard, including the grantee, shall be heard. 
F.  Notification of Subscribers. 
    Upon notice of any public hearing as provided in Section 14E, a Grantee shall notify its Subscribers of the time, place and subject matter of the public hearing by announcement or display on at least two (2) channels of its system between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m., for at least five (5) consecutive days prior to the hearing. In addition, notice of any public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of local general circulation at least once not less than seven (7) days before the public hearing. 
G.  Grantee to Pay for Rate Review. 
    Any reasonable expenses incurred by the Town government in the rate review process shall be paid by the Town. 
H.  Current Rate Schedule to be Filed with Town: 30 Days Notice Required Prior to Rate Change. 
    A Grantee, for information purposes, and for the Town to ensure nondiscrimination, shall provide the Town with a complete schedule of all current basic service and enhanced service rates and [charges], including pay TV and pay per view rates and charges, and shall give thirty (30) days prior notice from the date of mailing to the Town and to all affected Subscribers of any pricing changes or additional charges, excluding temporary marketing and sales discounts or offers. Forty-five (45) days before any price changes or additional charges are to take effect, a Grantee shall provide the Town with a copy of the proposed notification for Subscribers so that the Town may review the text of the notice to assure accuracy of information being presented to subscribers. 
I.  Grantee to Furnish Service to Each Person in Franchise Area Making Request for Service. 
    Grantee shall furnish and maintain Cable Service to each person within the Franchise area who makes a bona fide request to receive such service that is based upon the requirements of this ordinance and/or a Franchise Agreement. Nothing in a Franchise Agreement shall limit the right of a Grantee to deny service to any person who has a negative credit or service history with a Grantee, which may include non-payment of bills or theft or damage to a Grantee's equipment, or who has threatened or assaulted employees of a Grantee in the course of their employment. Provided that in the event service is denied, a Grantee shall give written notice to the person requesting service of his or her right to appear to the Town a Grantee's decision to deny service, and of the Town's authority to reverse a Grantee's decision in instances where a Grantee has acted unreasonably. 
J.  Discriminatory or Preferential Practices Prohibited. 
    The Grantee shall not, in its rates or charges, or in making available the service or facilities of its system, or in its rules and regulations, or in any other respect, discriminate on the basis [of] [race], religion, ethnicity or gender. This provision shall not be deemed to prohibit promotional campaigns to stimulate subscriptions to the system or other legitimate uses thereof. 
K.  Town Adopts Rate Regulation Procedures Consistent With FCC Rules. 
    The Town hereby adopts by reference rules of the Federal Communications Commission set forth in Subpart N (Cable Rate Regulation) of Part 76 (Cable Television Service) of Chapter I of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulation regarding the regulation of cable television rates for basic service and associated equipment, as amended. The Town adopts by reference procedures set forth in 47 CFR Section 0.459 regarding confidential business information submitted by a Grantee in a rate regulation proceeding. 
    A Grantee that will fully or repeatedly fails to comply with a rate regulation or refund order directed specifically at a Grantee shall be subject to a monetary forfeiture as determined by the Town. 
SECTION 15: - FRANCHISE RENEWAL PROCESS 
    The Franchise renewal process of the Town shall be in accordance with Section 626 [47 U.S.C. 546] Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and with all other applicable state and federal laws. 
SECTION 16: - LETTER OF CREDIT OR CASH SURETY 
A.  Grantee is Required to File an Irrevocable Letter of Credit or Cash Surety 
    Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of a Franchise, Grantee shall deposit with the Town an Irrevocable Letter of Credit or Cash Surety in the amount set forth in the Franchise Agreement and issued by a local federally insured commercial lending institution that has been approved by the Town. The form and substance of said Letter of Credit or Cash Surety shall be subject to the approval by the Town Attorney. The Letter of Credit shall be used to assure: the faithful performance by a Grantee of all provisions of the Franchise Agreement and the Cable Ordinance; compliance with all orders, permits and directions of the Town Manager or any agency, commission, board, department, division or office of the Town having jurisdiction over any aspect of a Grantee's performance under a Franchise and this Ordinance; and the payment by a Grantee of any penalties, liquidated damages, claims, liens, Franchise Fees, taxes or other fees due to the Town which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the Cable System, including cost of removal of any property of a Grantee. 
B.  Letter of Credit or Cash Surety May Be Drawn Upon By the Town After Following Specified Procedure that Assures Due Process to Grantee 
    The Letter of Credit or Cash Surety may be drawn upon by the Town by presentation of a draft at sight on the lending institution, accompanied by a written certificate signed by the Town Manager certifying that a Grantee has failed to comply with the Franchise Agreement and/or this Ordinance, stating the nature of the noncompliance, and stating the amount being drawn. Examples of the nature of the noncompliance for drawing upon the Letter of Credit or Cash Surety include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Failure of a Grantee to pay to the Town any Franchise Fees, taxes, liens or other fees after ten (10) days written notice of delinquency; 
2.  Failure of a Grantee to pay to the Town after ten (10) days written notice, any amounts due and owing by reason of the indemnity provisions of Section 5; 
3.  Failure of a Grantee to pay to the Town any liquidated damages due and owing pursuant to a Franchise Agreement; 
4.  Failure to make any payment required by an Agreement within the time fixed therein; 
5.  Failure to pay to the Town within ten (10) working days after receipt of written notice, any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the Town has been compelled to pay or incur by the reason of any material act or default by a Grantee; 
6.  Failure to comply within ten (10) working days after receipt of written notice from the Town, with any material provisions of an Agreement or Cable Ordinance which the Town reasonably determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount from the Letter of Credit, Cash Surety or other instrument. 
    In the event of such noncompliance, the Town may order the withdrawal of the appropriate amount of liquidated damages, penalties, fees or otherwise from the letter or other instrument for payment to the Town, provided that, prior to each such withdrawal; (i) a Grantee shall be afforded an opportunity to cure any of said failures within thirty (30) days after written notice from the Town that the withdrawal is to be made; or (ii) if such cure cannot be reasonably accomplished within such thirty (30) days, then a Grantee shall have a reasonable time to cure, provided that a Grantee commences such cure within such thirty (30) days and diligently pursues such cure to completion. 
C.  Letter of Credit or Cash Surety shall be Replenished to Original Amount Following Any Draw Down 
    Grantee shall structure the Letter of Credit or Cash Surety in such a manner so that if the Town at any time draws upon the Letter of Credit or Cash Surety, the amount of available credit shall automatically increase to the extent necessary to replenish that portion of the available credit exhausted by the honoring of the draft. The intent of this Subsection is to make available to the Town at all times a Letter of Credit or Cash Surety in the amount specified in the Franchise Agreement. 
D.  The Town's Rights with Respect to Letter of Credit or Cash Surety Are in Addition to Other Rights 
    The rights reserved to the Town with respect to the Letter of Credit or Cash Surety are in addition to all other rights of the Town, whether reserved by a Franchise Agreement or authorized by law, and no action or proceeding against a Letter of Credit or Cash Surety shall affect any other right the Town may have. 
SECTION 17: - LIQUIDATED DAMAGES 
A.  Parties Shall Agree to Specific Liquidated Damages to be Paid by Grantee for Certain Delays or Non-performance 
    A Grantee's failure to comply with any timing or performance requirement set forth in a Franchise Agreement will result in damage to the Town, the amount of which will be impracticable to ascertain. Therefore, the Town and a Grantee will negotiate the amount of liquidated damages to be set forth in a Franchise Agreement. Every Franchise Agreement shall provide that the Town's recovery of such damages shall be without prejudice to any other remedy the Town may have. 
B.  Procedures Established to Assure Grantee of Due Process and Opportunity to Cure Problem Before Damages Assessed 
    If the Town Manager, following prior reasonable notice to a Grantee to cure any problem that might result in liquidated damages, concludes that a Grantee is liable for liquidated damages pursuant to the Franchise Agreement, he/she shall issue to Grantee by certified mail a Notice of Intention to Assess Liquidated Damages. The Notice shall set forth the basis of the assessment, and shall inform a Grantee that liquidated damages will be assessed from the date of the Notice unless the Assessment Notice is appealed for hearing before the Town Council and the Town Council rules (a) that the violation has been corrected, or (b) that an extension of the time or other relief should be granted. If a Grantee desires a hearing before the Town Council, it shall send a written Notice of Appeal by certified mail to the Town Manager within ten (10) days of the date on which the Town Manager sent the Notice of Intention to Assess Liquidated Damages. After the hearing, if the Town Council sustains in whole or in part the Town Manager's Assessment of Liquidated Damages, the Town Manager may at any time thereafter draw upon the Letter of Credit or Cash Surety required by Section 16. Unless the Town Council indicates to the contrary, said liquidated damages shall be assessed beginning with the date on which the Town Manager sent the Notice of Intention to Assess Liquidated Damages and continuing thereafter until such time as the violation ceases, as determined by the Town Manager. 
SECTION 18: - FORFEITURE AND TERMINATION 
A.  Franchise May be Terminated for Material Breach of Terms and Conditions-Examples Given 
    In addition to all other rights and powers retained by the Town, the Town reserves the right to terminate a Franchise and all rights and privileges of a Grantee in the event of a material breach of this Ordinance or a Franchise Agreement. A material breach by a Grantee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Violation of any material provision of the Cable Ordinance or Franchise Agreement or any material rule, order, regulation or determination of the Town made pursuant to a Franchise; 
2.  Practice any fraud or deceit upon the Town or the Subscribers of the Cable System; 
3.  Failure to begin or complete Cable System construction, reconstruction or Cable System extension as provided under a Franchise Agreement; 
4.  Failure to restore Cable Service after forty-eight (48) consecutive hours of interrupted Cable Service, except when there is just cause and when approval of such interruption is obtained from the Town Manager; 
5.  Substantial failure to satisfy the requirements regarding system characteristics or repeated failure to meet the technical performance standards specified in a Franchise Agreement; 
6.  Abandonment of the system, in whole or in material part, without the prior written consent of the Town; 
7.  Substantial failure to supply the Access channels and other support and any related services, equipment and facilities as required in a Franchise Agreement; 
8.  Substantial and repeated failure to comply with the consumer service standards and requirements set forth in the Cable Ordinance and Franchise Agreement; 
9.  Any material misrepresentation of fact, made by or on behalf of a Grantee in its proposal to obtain a Franchise, or in connection with the negotiation or re-negotiation of, or any amendment or other modification to a Franchise Agreement, to the extent that any such misrepresentation was relied upon by the Town; 
10.  There is made an assignment for the benefit of creditors or an appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over the business of a Grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy assignment for the benefit of creditors, or other action or proceeding, unless the conditions set forth in Section 18E(1) and (2) are fulfilled. 
B.  Procedures Outlined Leading to Possible Termination of Franchise 
    The Town Manager may make a written demand that a Grantee comply with any provision, rule, order, or determination under or pursuant to the Cable Ordinance or a Franchise Agreement. If the violation breach, failure, refusal or neglect by a Grantee continues for a period of thirty (30) days following such written demand without written proof that the corrective action has been taken or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, the Town Manager may place the issue of termination of a Franchise before the Town Council. The Town Manager shall cause to be served upon Grantee, at least twenty (20) days prior to the date of such Town Council meeting, a written notice of intent to request such termination and the time and place of the meeting. The causes for pending termination and the reasons alleged to constitute such cause shall be recited in the notice. Public notice shall be given of the meeting and the issue, which the Town Manager is to consider. 
C.  Town Council Shall Hear and Consider Issues and Determine if a Violation has Occurred 
    In a public proceeding, the Town Council shall hear and consider the issue and shall hear any person interested therein, and shall determine, whether or not any violation by a Grantee has occurred. In such a proceeding, the grantee shall be afforded the right to call witnesses, give testimony, and introduce evidence into the record. 
D.  Town Council May Declare Franchise Terminated if Compliance Does Not Occur Within Specified Period 
    If the Town Council shall determine the violation by a Grantee was the fault of a Grantee and within its control, the Town Council, may, by resolution, declare that the Franchise of a Grantee be terminated, unless there is compliance within such period as the Town Council may fix. 
E.  Franchise May Cease and Terminate One Hundred Twenty (120) Days After Appointment of Receivers 
    Any Franchise granted shall, at the option of Town, cease and terminate one hundred twenty (120) days after the appointment of a receiver or receivers or trustee or trustees to take over and conduct the business of Grantee whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy, or other action or proceeding unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said one hundred twenty (120) days, or unless: 
1.  Such receivers or trustees shall have within one hundred twenty (120) days, after their election or appointment fully complied with all the terms and provisions of this Ordinance and a Franchise granted pursuant hereto, and the receivers or trustees within said one hundred twenty (120) days shall have remedied all defaults under the Franchise; and, 
2.  Such receivers or trustees shall have within one hundred twenty (120) days executed an Agreement duly approved by the Court having jurisdiction, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision, and limitation of the Franchise Agreement. 
F.  Procedure if a Foreclosure Occurs 
    In the case of a foreclosure or other involuntary sale of the plant, property, and equipment of Grantee, or any part thereof, Town may serve notice of termination upon Grantee and to the purchaser at such sale, in which event the Franchise Agreement and rights and privileges of Grantee shall cease and terminate thirty (30) days after service of such notice unless: 
1.  Town has approved the transfer of the Franchise, as and in the manner in this Ordinance provided; and 
2.  Such successful purchaser shall have covenanted and agreed with Town to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of the Franchise Agreement. 
SECTION 19: - PURCHASE OF CATV SYSTEM BY TOWN 
A.  Rights to Purchase 
    In the event a Grantee forfeits or Town revokes a Franchise for cause, or when the renewal of a Franchise has been denied, Town shall have the right, directly or as an intermediary to purchase the Cable System. 
B.  Franchise Valuation 
    Under circumstances where the Franchise has been revoked for cause, forfeited or nonrenewed for cause by the Town, the acquisition shall be at an equitable price in accordance with 47 U.S.C. § 547. 
C.  Date of Valuation 
    The date of valuation shall be no earlier than the day following the date of expiration or termination and no later then the date Town makes a fair and reasonable offer for the system or the date of transfer of ownership, whichever occurs first. 
D.  Transfer to Town 
    Upon exercise of this option and the payment of the above sum by the Town, a Grantee shall immediately transfer to the Town possession and title to those facilities and property, real and personal, used in the operation of the Cable System, free from any and all liens and encumbrances not agreed to be assumed by the Town in lieu of some portion of the purchase price set forth above; and a Grantee shall execute such warranty deeds or other instruments of conveyance to Town as shall be necessary for this purpose. 
SECTION 20: - WAIVERS 
    Any provision of this Ordinance may be waived for good cause shown, at the sole discretion of the Town, by resolution of the Town Council. 
    A Grantee may submit a written request for a waiver to the Town Council at any time during the Franchise term. Such request for a waiver, at the sole discretion of the Town Council, may be set for a public hearing, and a decision shall be made within 120 days following the submission. Procedures for the modification of Franchise obligations shall be in compliance with Section 625 [47 U.S.C. 545] Title VI, Communication Act of 1934. 
    The Town Council may authorize the economic, technical, or legal evaluation of such waiver request, and a Grantee shall be required to reimburse the Town for any expenditure incurred by the Town in connection with such evaluation. 
    This Section is enacted solely for the convenience and benefit of the Grantor and shall not be construed in such a manner as to create any right or entitlement for a Grantee. 
SECTION 21: - SUNDRY PROVISIONS 
    Every direction, notice or order by the Town to be served upon a Grantee shall be delivered or sent by registered mail to the office responsible for the local Cable System. Every notice served upon the Town shall be delivered or sent by first class mail to the Town Manager, Town of Warrenton, Virginia. 
    All provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to a Grantee, its successors, and assignees, as may be approved by Town Council in accordance with this Ordinance. 
    The rights granted by this Ordinance are subject to all Franchises and permits heretofore or hereafter granted by the Town Council to use the streets of the Town by other public utility or public service corporations. It is not intended by the grant of a Franchise to abridge the exercise of the police power heretofore or hereafter granted to the Town by the State. The grant of a Franchise is subject to all Ordinances and resolutions or agreements adopted by the Town Council as the same now exist or may be hereafter amended, revised or codified, in the lawful exercise of any other power granted to the Town. 
    Specific mention of the materiality of any of the provisions herein is not intended to be exclusive of any others for the purpose of determining whether any failure of compliance hereunder is material and substantial. 
    If any particular Section of this Ordinance, or the particular application thereof, shall be held invalid, the remaining provisions, and their application, shall not be affected thereby. 
    A Grantee, upon its acceptance of a Franchise, shall be bound by the provisions of this Ordinance, all responses, statements, and all matters agreed upon in a Franchise Agreement. 
    A Grantee shall assume the cost of any publications required by law and such is payable upon a Grantee's filing of acceptance of a Franchise Agreement. 
    In the event that any provision of the Cable Act of 1984, 1992, or 1996 or other statute, law or regulation, which is relied on herein or in any Franchise Agreement for any definition or requirement, is repealed, then the language of such provision at the time of such repeal shall nevertheless continue to apply for purposes of this Ordinance or any Franchise Agreement, regardless of such repeal, except as otherwise provided herein or in any Franchise Agreement or as prohibited by such subsequent repeal or amendment. 
    The rights and remedies reserved to the Town by this Ordinance are cumulative and shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other rights or remedies which the Town may have with respect to the subject matter of this Ordinance. A waiver of any right or remedy by a party at one time shall not affect the exercise of said right or remedy or any other right or other remedy by such party at any other time. The failure of the Town to take any action in the event of a material breach by a Grantee shall not be construed or otherwise be deemed to constitute a waiver of the right of the Town to take such action at any other time in the event that said material breach has not been cured, or with respect to any other material breach by a Grantee. 
    In the event that, after the effect date of this Ordinance, any court, agency, commission, legislative body, or other authority of competent jurisdiction: (i) declares the Ordinance invalid, in whole or in part, or (ii) requires a Grantee either to: (a) perform any act which is inconsistent with any provision of the Ordinance or (b) cease performing any act required by any provision of the Ordinance, the Town shall reasonably determine whether said declaration or requirement has a material and adverse effect on the Ordinance. When a Grantee intends to exercise its rights pursuant to such declaration, a Grantee shall so notify the Town of said declaration or requirement. 
    The headings contained in this Ordinance and any Franchise Agreement are to facilitate reference only, do not form a part of this Ordinance or a Franchise Agreement, and shall not in any way affect the construction or interpretation hereof. 
SECTION 22: - EFFECTIVE DATE 
    This Ordinance shall become effective upon its passage. 
Repeal of Ordinances in Conflict [If Any] 
[List Specific Ordinances] 
Adopted: May 8, 2001 
Voting For: Lewis, Foley, Norden, Athey, Walker, Rice, Tarr 
Voting Against: _______ 
Evelyn J. Weimer, Town Recorder 
APPENDIX B - P.P.E.A.[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 4-12-11 has been included herein at the direction of the city. Amendments made after this initial ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes at the end of the amended section. Absence of a parenthetical history note indicates material is from the original ordinance. Material enclosed in brackets [ ] has been added to the text where necessary for purposes of classification or clarification. 

I. - Introduction. 
    The Public-Private Education Facilities and Infrastructure Act of 2002 (Va. Code §§ 56-575.1 et seq.) as amended from time to time, (the P.P.E.A.) grants responsible public entities the authority to create public-private partnerships for the development of a wide range of projects for public use if the public entity determines: (i) that there is a need for the facility or project; (ii) that the estimated cost of the facility or project is reasonable in relation to similar facilities or projects; and (iii) that the public-private partnership's plans will result in the timely development or operation of the project. 
    The P.P.E.A. defines "responsible public entity" to include any public entity that "has the power to develop or operate the applicable qualifying project." Individually negotiated interim or comprehensive agreements between a private entity and a responsible public entity will define the respective rights and obligations of the responsible public entity and the private entity. This document sets forth the procedures to guide the private operators(s) and the County in entering into an interim comprehensive agreement pursuant to the P.P.E.A. 
A.  Guideline overview. The Town of Warrenton (the Town) is a "responsible public entity" that "has the power to acquire, design, construct, improve, renovate, expand, equip, maintain, or operate the applicable qualifying project" and therefore is a "responsible public entity" as that term is used in the P.P.E.A. The P.P.E.A. provides that a responsible public entity shall not proceed to consider any proposal by a private entity for approval of a qualifying project until the responsible public entity has adopted and made publicly available guidelines that are sufficient to enable the responsible public entity to comply with the provisions of the P.P.E.A. In order to facilitate the consideration by the Town of qualifying projects under the P.P.E.A., these guidelines were adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Warrenton, Virginia on ___________. 
These guidelines contain the implementation procedures and guidelines developed by the Town to guide the selection of projects as authorized by the P.P.E.A. These guidelines shall be made publicly available. The person designated as the primary point of contact for information on these guidelines and for submission of solicited or unsolicited proposals under the P.P.E.A. is: 
The Purchasing Agent 
Town of Warrenton 
18 Court Street 
Warrenton, VA 20186 
In the event the P.P.E.A. is amended in a manner that either conflicts with these guidelines or concerns material matters not addressed by these guidelines, the Town shall appropriately amend the guidelines. If the guidelines are not amended prior to the effective date of the new law, the guidelines nonetheless shall be interpreted in a manner to conform to the new law. 
B.  Qualifying facilities and projects. In order for a project to come under the P.P.E.A., it must meet the definition of a "qualifying project." The P.P.E.A. contains a broad definition of qualifying project that includes public buildings and facilities of all types; for example: 
1.  An education facility, including, but not limited to, a school building (including any stadium or other facility primarily used for school events), any functionally related and subordinate facility and land to a school building and any depreciable property provided for use in a school facility that is operated as part of the public school system or as an institution of higher education; 
2.  A building or facility that meets a public purpose and is developed or operated by or for any public entity; 
3.  Improvements, together with equipment, necessary to enhance public safety and security of buildings to be principally used by a public entity; 
4.  Utility and telecommunications and other communications infrastructure; 
5.  A recreational facility; and 
6.  Technology infrastructure, including but not limited to telecommunications, automated data processing, word processing and management information systems, and related information, equipment, goods and services; or 
7.  Any improvements necessary or desirable to any unimproved locally- or state-owned real estate. 
C.  Reservation of town rights. As set forth in these Guidelines, the Town reserves all rights available to it by law in administering these Guidelines including, without limitation, the right in its sole discretion to: 
1.  Reject any and all proposals at any time; 
2.  Terminate consideration or evaluation of any and all proposals at any time; 
3.  Suspend, discontinue and/or terminate discussions regarding confidentiality agreements, interim agreements and comprehensive agreements at any time prior to the authorized execution of such agreements by all parties; 
4.  Suspend or eliminate conceptual phase review and proceed directly to detailed phase review; 
5.  Negotiate with a proposer without being bound by any provision in its proposal; 
6.  Negotiate with fewer than all proposers at any given time; 
7.  Request and/or receive additional information regarding any proposal; 
8.  Issue addenda to and/or cancel any RFP or IFB; 
9.  Revise, supplement or withdraw all or any part of these Guidelines; 
10.  Assess, retain and/or waive any and all fees required to be paid by proposers in accordance with these Guidelines; 
11.  Request revisions to conceptual or detailed phase proposals. 
12.  Take any other action permitted under law. 
II. - General provisions. 
A.  Proposal submission. A proposal may be either solicited by the Town or delivered by a private entity on an unsolicited basis. Proposers may be required to follow a two-part proposal submission process consisting of an initial conceptual phase (part 1) and a detailed phase (Part 2). The initial conceptual phase of the proposal should contain specified information on proposer qualifications and experience, project characteristics, project financing, anticipated public support or opposition, or both, and project benefit and compatibility. The Part 2 detailed proposal should contain specified deliverables. 
    The P.P.E.A. allows private entities to include innovative financing methods, including the imposition of user fees or service payments, in a proposal. Such financing arrangements may include the issuance of debt instruments, equity or other securities or obligations, including, if applicable, the portion of the tax-exempt private activity bond limitation amount to be allocated annually to the Commonwealth of Virginia pursuant to the federal Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 for the development of education facilities using public-private partnerships, and to provide for carryovers of any unused limitation amount. The P.P.E.A. is a flexible development tool that allows the use of innovative financing techniques. Depending on the public entity's authority and the circumstances of each transaction, financing options might include the use of special purpose entities, sale and lease back transactions, enhanced use leasing, property exchanges, development agreements, conduit financing and other methods allowed by law. 
    Proposals should be prepared simply and economically, providing a concise description of the proposer's capabilities to complete the proposed qualifying project and the benefits to be derived from the project by the public entity. Project benefits to be considered are those occurring during the construction, renovation, expansion or improvement phase and during the life cycle of the project. Proposals also should include a comprehensive scope of work and a financial plan for the project, containing enough detail to allow an analysis by the Town of the financial feasibility of the proposed project. For specific applications, the Town may request in writing, clarification to the submission. The County may establish criteria by which the proposer may provide clarification to the submission. The cost analysis of a proposal should not be linked solely to the financing plan, as the Town may determine to finance the project through other available means. 
    The P.P.E.A. is intended to encourage proposals from the private sector that offer the provision of private financing in support of the proposed public project, which may include commensurate risk to the private operator, but may also benefit the operator through innovative approaches to project financing, development and use. However, while substantial private sector involvement is encouraged, qualifying facilities will still be devoted primarily to public use and typically involve facilities essential to the public health, safety and welfare. Accordingly, the Town shall continue to exercise full and proper due diligence in the evaluation and selection of operators for these projects. In this regard, the qualifications, capabilities, resources and other attributes of a prospective operator and its whole team shall be carefully examined for every project. In addition, operators proposing projects shall be held strictly accountable for representations or other information provided regarding their qualifications, experience or other contents of their proposals, including all specific aspects of proposed plans to be performed by the operator. 
B.  Affected local jurisdictions. Any private entity requesting approval from or submitting a conceptual or detailed proposal to the Town shall provide other affected units of local government with a copy of the private entity's request or proposal by certified mail, express delivery or hand delivery, after the Town determines whether to accept such proposal. Affected local jurisdictions that are not responsible public entities under the proposed qualifying project shall have 60 days from the receipt of the request or proposal to submit written comments to the Town at either or both the conceptual and detailed phases and to indicate whether the proposed qualifying project is compatible with the (i) local comprehensive plan, (ii) local infrastructure development plans, or (iii) capital improvements budget or other government spending plan. Comments received within the 60-day period shall be given consideration by the Town, and no negative inference shall be drawn from the absence of comment by an affected local jurisdiction. This is to only apply to the County of Fauquier and its Agencies and Authorities. 
C.  Proposal review fee. The Town shall receive an analysis of the proposal from appropriate internal staff or outside advisors or consultants with relevant experience in determining whether to enter into an agreement with the private entity. No fee may be charged by the Town to process, review or evaluate any solicited proposal submitted under the P.P.E.A. The Town may charge a fee to the private entity to cover the costs of processing, reviewing, and evaluating any unsolicited proposal or competing unsolicited proposal submitted under the P.P.E.A., including a fee to cover the costs of outside attorneys, consultants, and financial advisors. Any fee charged for such review of a proposal should be reasonable in comparison to the level of expertise required to review the proposal and should not be greater than the direct costs associated with evaluating the proposed qualifying project. "Direct costs" may include (i) the cost of staff time required to process, evaluate, review and respond to the proposal and (ii) the out-of-pocket costs of the Town for attorneys, consultants and financial advisors. 
    The proposal fee may cover all or part of the initial review process. For example, the Town may require a proposal fee in an amount sufficient to cover all anticipated direct costs associated with evaluating the proposal, or the Town may require a smaller initial processing fee with an additional proposal fee to be charged should the project proceed beyond the initial review. Any charges by the Town to the private entity shall be documented. If the cost of reviewing the proposal exceeds the initially established proposal fee, the Town may assess the proposer the additional costs deemed necessary to evaluate the proposal. 
    For rejected proposals, the Town may establish a schedule for refunding any portion of fees paid in excess of its direct costs associated with evaluating the proposal. If the cost of reviewing the proposal is less than the initially established proposal fee, the Town may refund to the proposer the excess fee. Any refunds owed by the Town may be offset by any outstanding obligations of the proposer to the Town. 
    Proposers shall pay to the Town the following review fees, in certified funds, to offset the cost of processing and reviewing unsolicited proposals, or unsolicited competing proposals. Unless otherwise indicated fees shall be paid in accordance with the following table, with percentages being of the total estimated cost of the proposed project: 
Review Stage Fee Minimum Maximum Conceptual 1% $2,500.00 $15,000.00 Detail 1% $5,000.00 $50,000.00 ($50,000.00 maximum aggregate total actual cost for both stages)  
The minimum fee shall be submitted in certified funds at the time the initial "Conceptual" and "Detail" proposals are submitted. 
D.  Freedom of Information Act. Generally, proposal documents submitted by private entities are subject to the Virginia Freedom of Information Act ("FO1A"). In accordance with § 2.2-3705(A)(56) of FOIA, such documents are releasable if requested, except to the extent that they relate to (i) confidential proprietary information submitted to the Town under a promise of confidentiality or (ii) memoranda, working papers or other records related to proposals if making public such records would adversely affect the financial interest of the public or the private entity or the bargaining position of either party. 
    Subsection 56-575.4 G of the P.P.E.A. imposes an obligation on the Town and any affected local jurisdiction to take appropriate action to protect confidential proprietary information submitted by a private entity or operator. When the private entity requests that the Town not disclose information, the Town must (i) invoke the exclusion when the data or materials are submitted to the Town or before such submission, (ii) identify the data and materials for which protection from disclosure is sought, and (iii) state why the exclusion from disclosure is necessary. A private entity may request and receive a determination from the Town as to the anticipated scope of protection prior to submitting the proposal. The Town is authorized and obligated to protect only confidential proprietary information, and thus will not protect any portion of a proposal from disclosure if the entire proposal has been designated confidential by the proposer without reasonably differentiating between the proprietary and non-proprietary information contained therein. 
    Upon receipt of a request that designated portions of a proposal be protected from disclosure as confidential and proprietary, the Town shall determine whether such protection is appropriate under applicable law and, if appropriate, the scope of such appropriate protection, and shall communicate its determination to the proposer. If the determination regarding protection or the scope thereof differs from the proposer's request, then the Town should accord the proposer a reasonable opportunity to clarify and justify its request. Upon a final determination by the Town to accord less protection than requested by the proposer, the proposer should be accorded an opportunity to withdraw its proposal. A proposal so withdrawn should be treated in the same manner as a proposal not accepted for publication and conceptual-phase consideration. 
    Once a comprehensive agreement has been entered into, and the process of bargaining of all phases or aspects of the comprehensive agreement is complete, the Town shall make available, upon request, procurement records in accordance with its ordinances in effect at that time. 
E.  Use of public funds. Virginia constitutional and statutory requirements as they apply to appropriation and expenditure of public funds apply to any interim or comprehensive agreement entered into under the P.P.E.A. Accordingly, the processes and procedural requirements associated with the expenditure or obligation of public funds shall be incorporated into planning for any P.P.E.A. project or projects. 
F.  Applicability of other laws. Nothing in the P.P.E.A. shall affect the duty of the Town to comply with all other applicable law not in conflict with the P.P.E.A. The applicability of the Town Code and the Virginia Public Procurement Act (VPPA) is as set forth in the P.P.E.A. and incorporated herein. 
III. - Solicited proposals. 
    The Town may invite bids or proposals from private entities to acquire, design, construct, improve, renovate, expand, equip, maintain or operate qualifying projects. The procedures and requirements applicable to any particular solicited bid or proposal shall be specified in the solicitation for that proposal and shall be consistent with the requirements of the P.P.E.A. and other applicable law. All such solicitations shall be by issuance of a written Invitation for Bid ("IFB") or Request for Proposal ("RFP"), in accordance with the Town's ordinances and resolutions. Any proposal submitted pursuant to the P.P.E.A. that is not received in response to an IFB or RFP shall be deemed an Unsolicited Proposal under Article V. This shall include (a) proposals received in response to a notice issued by the Town that it has received another Unsolicited Proposal, and (b) proposals received in response to publicity by the Town concerning particular needs but where the Town has not issued a formal IFB or RFP. 
    The RFP or IFB should specify, but not necessarily be limited to, information and documents that must accompany each proposal and the factors that will be used in evaluating the submitted proposals. The RFP should be posted in such public areas as are normally used for posting of the Town's notices, including the Town website. Notices should also be published in a newspaper or other publications of general circulation. The RFP or IFB should also contain or incorporate by reference other applicable terms and conditions, including any unique capabilities or qualifications that will be required of the private entities submitting proposals. Pre-proposal conferences may be held as deemed appropriate by the Town. 
IV. - Unsolicited proposals. 
    The P.P.E.A. permits the Town to receive, evaluate and select for negotiations unsolicited proposals from private entities to acquire, design, construct, improve, renovate, expand, equip, maintain, or operate a qualifying project. 
    The Town may publicize its needs and may encourage interested parties to submit proposals subject to the terms and conditions of the P.P.E.A. When such proposals are received without issuance of an RFP, the proposal shall be treated as an unsolicited proposal. Unsolicited proposals should be submitted to the Town Purchasing Agent by delivering one original and ten complete copies, together with the required review fee, as previously determined by the Purchasing Agent upon request and submission of relevant information to the Purchasing Agent by the proposer. The Town Manager shall submit to the Town Council a copy of the unsolicited proposal and a summary recommendation to the Council so that at its next general meeting, or any called special meeting, the Council can decide whether or not to undertake conceptual-phase consideration of the unsolicited proposal. If upon preliminary review, the Town Manager decides to recommend to the Town Council to undertake a complete review and evaluation of the unsolicited proposal, the Town Manager may designate a working group to initiate such complete review and evaluation. However, as soon as reasonably possible, the Town Council should consider and vote on the recommendation of the Town Manager. If the Town Council votes against undertaking the review and evaluation, the Town Manager shall cease such work unless subsequently directed otherwise by the Town Council. The balance of any unexpended fee shall be returned. 
    To ensure that the Town receives the best value for any qualifying project, the Town will seek and encourage competing unsolicited proposals. 
A.  Decision to accept and consider unsolicited proposal; notice. 
1.  Upon receipt of any unsolicited proposal or group of proposals and payment of the required fee by the proposer or proposers, the Town should determine whether to accept the unsolicited proposal for publication and conceptual-phase consideration by the procedures in section IV, above. The Town reserves the right to reject any and all proposals at any time. 
2.  If the Town chooses to accept an unsolicited proposal for conceptual-phase consideration, it shall post a notice in a public area regularly used by the Town for posting of public notices for a period of not less than 45 days. The Town shall also publish the same notice for a period of not less than 45 days in one or more newspapers or periodicals of general circulation in the jurisdiction, and may post such notice on the Town Website to notify any parties that may be interested in submitting competing unsolicited proposals. In addition, the notice should also be advertised in Virginia Business Opportunities and on the Commonwealth's electronic procurement website. The notice shall state that the Town (i) has received and accepted an unsolicited proposal under the P.P.E.A., (ii) intends to evaluate the proposal, (iii) may negotiate an interim or comprehensive agreement with the proposer based on the proposal, and (iv) will accept for simultaneous consideration any competing proposals that comply with the procedures adopted by the Town and the provisions of the P.P.E.A. The notice also shall summarize the proposed qualifying project or projects, and identify their proposed locations. 
B.  Initial review by the town at the conceptual stage (part 1). 
1.  Only proposals complying with the requirements of the P.P.E.A. that contain sufficient information for a meaningful evaluation and that are provided in an appropriate format should be considered by the Town for further review at the conceptual stage. Formatting suggestions for proposals at the conceptual stage are found at Section V. A. 
2.  The Town will determine at this initial stage of review whether it will proceed using: 
a.  Standard procurement procedures consistent with the VPPA; or 
b.  Guidelines developed by the Town that are consistent with procurement of other than professional services through "competitive negotiation" as the term is defined in § 2.2-4301 of the Code of Virginia. The Town may proceed using such guidelines only if it makes a written determination that doing so is likely to be advantageous to the Town and the public based upon either (i) the probable scope, complexity or priority of need; (ii) the risk sharing including guaranteed cost or completion guarantees, added value or debt or equity investments proposed by the private entity; or (iii) increase in funding, dedicated revenue or other economic benefit that would otherwise not be available. 
3.  After reviewing the original proposal, and any competing proposals submitted during the notice period, the Town may determine: 
a.  not to proceed further with any proposal, 
b.  to proceed to the detailed (Part 2) phase of review with the original proposal, 
c.  to proceed to the detailed phase (Part 2) with a competing proposal, or 
d.  to proceed to the detailed phase (Part 2) with multiple proposals. 
4.  In the event that more than one proposal will be considered in the detailed (Part 2) phase of review, the Town shall consider whether the unsuccessful proposer should be reimbursed for costs incurred in the detailed phase of review, and such reasonable costs may be assessed to the successful proposer in the comprehensive agreement. 
5.  Discussions between the Town and private entities about the need for infrastructure improvements shall not limit the ability of the Town to later determine to use standard procurement procedures to meet its infrastructure needs. The Town retains the right to reject any proposal at any time prior to the execution of an interim or comprehensive agreement. 
V. - Proposal preparation and submission. 
A.  Format for submissions at conceptual stage (Part 1). The Town shall not be liable for any cost incurred by the proposers in preparing, submitting or presenting the proposal and in satisfying any demonstration or other requirements for an unsuccessful proposal. 
    The Town may require that proposals at the conceptual stage contain information labeled with tabs in the following areas: (i) qualifications and experience, (ii) project characteristics, (iii) project financing, (iv) anticipated public support or opposition, or both, (v) project benefit and compatibility and (vi) any additional information as the Town may reasonably request to comply with the requirements of the P.P.E.A. Suggestions for formatting information to be included in proposals at the conceptual stage include: 
B.  Qualifications and experience. 
1.  Identify the legal structure of the firm or consortium of firms making the proposal. Identify the organizational structure for the project, the management approach, and how each partner and major subcontractor (over $1,000,000) in the structure fits into the overall team. All members of the operator's team, including major subcontractors known to the proposer must be identified at the time a proposal is submitted for the Conceptual Stage. Identified team members, including major subcontractors (over $1 million), may not be substituted or replaced once a project is approved and comprehensive agreement entered into, without the written approval of the Town. Include the status of the Virginia license of each partner, proposer, contractor, and major subcontractor. 
2.  Describe the experience of the firm or consortium of firms making the proposal, the key principals and project managers involved in the proposed project including experience with projects of comparable size and complexity, including prior experience bringing similar projects to completion on budget and in compliance with design, land use, service and other standards. Describe the past safety performance record and current safety capabilities of the firm or consortium of firms. Describe the past technical performance history on recent projects of comparable size and complexity, including disclosure of any legal claims, of the firm or consortium of firms. Describe the length of time in business, business experience, public sector experience, and other engagements of the firm or consortium of firms. Include the identity of any firms that will provide design, construction and completion guarantees and warranties, and a description of such guarantees and warranties. 
3.  For each firm or major subcontractor ($1 million or more) that will be utilized in the project, provide a statement listing all of the firm's prior projects and clients for the past 3 years and contact information for same (name, address, telephone number, e-mail address). If a firm has worked on more than ten (10) projects during this period, it may limit its prior project list to ten (10), but shall first include all projects similar in scope and size to the proposed project and, second, it shall include as many of its most recent projects as possible. Each firm or major subcontractor shall be required to submit all performance evaluation reports or other documents which are in its possession evaluating the firm's performance during the preceding three years in terms of cost, quality, schedule maintenance, safety and other matters relevant to the successful project development, operation, and completion. 
4.  Provide the names, prior experience, addresses, telephone numbers and email addresses of persons within the firm or consortium of firms who will be directly involved in the project or who may be contacted for further information. 
5.  Provide a current or most recently audited financial statement of the firm or firms and each partner with an equity interest of twenty percent or greater. 
6.  Identify any persons known to the proposer who would be obligated to disqualify themselves from participation in any transaction arising from or in connection to the project pursuant to The Virginia State and Local Government Conflict of Interest Act, Chapter 31 (§ 2.2-3100 et seq.) of Title 2.2. 
7.  Identify proposed plan for obtaining sufficient numbers of qualified workers in all trades or crafts required for the project. 
8.  For each firm or major subcontractor that will perform construction and/or design activities, provide the following information: 
a.  A sworn certification by an authorized representative of the firm attesting to the fact that the firm is not currently debarred or suspended by any federal, state or local government entity. 
b.  A completed qualification statement that reviews all relevant information regarding technical qualifications and capabilities, firm resources and business integrity of the firm, including but not limited to, bonding capacities, insurance coverage and firm equipment. This statement shall also include a mandatory disclosure by the firm for the past three years [for] any of the following conduct: 
i.  Bankruptcy filings. 
ii.  Liquidated damages. 
iii.  Fines, assessments or penalties. 
iv.  Judgments or awards in contract disputes. 
v.  Contract defaults, contract terminations. 
vi.  License revocations, suspensions, other disciplinary actions. 
vii.  Prior debarments or suspensions by a governmental entity. 
viii.  Denials of prequalification, findings of non-responsibility. 
ix.  Safety past performance data, including fatality incidents, "experience modification rating," "total recordable injury rate" and "total lost workday incidence rate". 
x.  Violations of any federal, state or local criminal or civil law. 
xi.  Criminal indictments or investigations. 
xii.  Legal claims filed by or against the firm. 
9.  Worker Safety Programs: Describe worker safety training programs, job-site safety programs, accident prevention programs, written safety and health plans, including incident investigation and reporting procedures. 
C.  Project characteristics. 
1.  Provide a description of the project, including the conceptual design. Describe the proposed project in sufficient detail so that type and intent of the project, the location, and the communities that may be affected are clearly identified. 
2.  Identify and fully describe any work to be performed by the Town or any other public entity. 
3.  Include a list of all federal, state and local permits and approvals required for the project and a schedule for obtaining such permits and approvals. 
4.  Identify any anticipated adverse social, economic, environmental and transportation impacts of the project measured against the Town's comprehensive land use plan and applicable ordinances and design standards. Specify the strategies or actions to mitigate known impacts of the project. Indicate if environmental and archaeological assessments have been completed. 
5.  Identify the projected positive social, economic, environmental and transportation impacts of the project measured against the Town's comprehensive land use plan and applicable ordinances and design standards. 
6.  Identify the proposed schedule for the work on the project, including sufficient time for the Town's review and the estimated time for completion. 
7.  Identify contingency plans for addressing public needs in the event that all or some of the project is not completed according to projected schedule. 
8.  Propose allocation of risk and liability, and assurances for timely completion of the project. 
9.  State assumptions related to ownership, legal liability, law enforcement and operation of the project and the existence of any restrictions on the Town's use of the project. 
10.  Provide information relative to phased openings of the proposed project. 
D.  Project financing. 
1.  Provide a preliminary estimate and estimating methodology of the cost of the work by phase, segment, or both. 
2.  Submit a plan for the development, financing and operation of the project showing the anticipated schedule on which funds will be required. Describe the anticipated costs of and proposed sources and uses for such funds, including any anticipated debt service costs. The operational plan should include appropriate staffing levels and associated costs. Include any supporting due diligence studies, analyses, or reports. 
3.  Include a list and discussion of assumptions underlying all major elements of the plan. 
4.  Identify the proposed risk factors and methods for dealing with these factors. Describe methods and remedies associated with any financial default. 
5.  Identify any local, state or federal resources that the proposer contemplates requesting for the project along with an anticipated schedule of resource requirements. Describe the total commitment, if any, expected from governmental sources and the timing of any anticipated commitment, both one-time and on-going. 
6.  Identify the need, if any, for the Town to provide either its general obligation or moral obligation backing. The underlying assumptions should address this need and/or state that the credit would be via a "Service Agreement", for example. Any debt issuance should be expected to receive an investment grade rating from a nationally recognized bond rating agency. If the unenhanced rating is not investment grade, the Town may require the use of credit enhancements. 
7.  Outline what impact, if any, a drop in interest rates would have on the ultimate annual project cost. Indicate if there is a method to refinance for cost savings. Indicate who would receive the benefit of any cost savings from a refinancing. Would the savings go to the Town, would the savings be shared and to what extent, or does the firm only receive benefit of this potential? 
8.  Outline the financial penalties, if any, that would result should the Town wish to terminate a project early or restructure the cash flows for some reason of its own choosing. The firm should be specific on this point. 
9.  If the firm has already chosen an underwriter(s), provide a breakout of the fees to any underwriting firm(s) and the type of obligation the firm(s) are using with a financing component. Be specific as to tax-exempt, taxable, floating rate, fixed rate, etc. If the firm has not yet chosen an underwriter(s), the Town reserves the right to have input into the selection of that underwriter(s). 
E.  Project benefit and compatibility. 
1.  Identify community benefits, including the economic impact the project will have on the local community in terms of amount of tax revenue to be generated for the Town, the number jobs generated for area residents and level of pay and fringe benefits of such jobs, and the number and value of subcontracts generated for area subcontractors. 
2.  Identify any anticipated public support or opposition, as well as any anticipated government support or opposition (including that in any affected jurisdiction), for the project. 
3.  Explain the strategy and plans, including the anticipated timeline that will be carried out to involve and inform the general public, business community, and governmental agencies in areas affected by the project. 
4.  Describe any anticipated significant benefits to the community and the Town, including anticipated benefits to the economic, social, environmental, transportation, etc., condition of the Town and whether the project is critical to attracting or maintaining competitive industries and businesses to the Town. 
5.  Compatibility with the Town's and/or affected jurisdiction's local comprehensive plan (including related environmental, land use and facility standards ordinances, where applicable), infrastructure development plans, transportation plans, the capital improvements plan and capital budget or other government spending plan. 
6.  Any additional information as the town may reasonably request. 
F.  Format for submissions at detailed stage (Part 2). If the County decides to proceed to the detailed phase of review with one or more proposals, the following information, should be provided by the private entity unless a wavier of the requirement or requirements is agreed to by the Town: 
1.  A topographical map (1:2,000 or other appropriate scale) depicting the location of the proposed project. 
2.  Conceptual site plan indicating proposed location and configuration of the project on the proposed site. 
3.  Conceptual (single line) plans and elevations depicting the general scope, appearance and configuration of the proposed project. 
4.  Detailed description of the proposed participation, use and financial involvement of the Town in the project. 
5.  A list of public utility facilities, if any, that will be crossed by the qualifying project and a statement of the plans of the proposer to accommodate such crossings. 
6.  A statement and strategy setting out the property identification and plans for securing all necessary property. The statement must include the addresses and tax map designations of the identified property as well as a list of any property the proposer intends to request the Town to condemn. A letter of transmittal that bears the signature of an authorized representative of the prime contractor and designates by name not more than two individuals, either of which is, authorized to negotiate and sign a contract with the Town. 
7.  A detailed listing of all firms that will provide specific design, construction and completion guarantees and warranties, and a brief description of such guarantees and warranties. 
8.  A total life-cycle cost specifying methodology and assumptions of the project or projects and the proposed project start date. Include anticipated commitment of all parties; equity, debt, and other financing mechanisms; and a schedule of project revenues and project costs. The life-cycle cost analysis should include, but not be limited to, a detailed analysis of the projected return, rate of return, or both, expected useful life of facility and estimated annual operating expenses. 
9.  A detailed discussion of assumptions about user fees or rates, and usage of the projects. 
10.  Identification of any known government support or opposition, or general public support or opposition for the project. Government or public support should be demonstrated through resolution of official bodies, minutes of meetings, letters, or other official communications. 
11.  Demonstration of consistency with appropriate local comprehensive or infrastructure development plans or indication of the steps required for acceptance into such plans. 
12.  Explanation of how the proposed project would impact local development plans of each affected local jurisdiction. 
13.  Description of an ongoing performance evaluation system or database to track key performance criteria, including but not limited to, schedule, cash management, quality, worker safety, change orders, and legal compliance. 
14.  Identification of any known conflicts of interest or other factors that may impact Fauquier County's consideration of the proposal, including the identification of any persons known to the proposer who would be obligated to disqualify themselves from participation in any transaction arising from or in connection to the project pursuant to The Virginia State and Local Government Conflict of Interest Act, Chapter 31 (§ 2.2-3100 et seq.) of Title 2.2. 
15.  Detailed analysis of the financial feasibility of the proposed project, including its impact on similar facilities operated or planned by the Town. Include a detailed description of any financing plan for the project, a comparison of that plan with financing alternatives available to the Town, and all underlying data supporting any conclusions reached in the analysis of the selection by the private entity of the financing plan proposed for the project. 
16.  Additional material and information as the Town may reasonably request. 
VI. - Proposal evaluation and selection criteria. 
    The following items, along with the specified information required under V.A and V.B above, shall be considered in the evaluation and selection of P.P.E.A. proposals. The Town reserves the right at all times to reject any proposal at anytime for any reason. 
A.  Qualifications and experience. Factors to be considered in either phase of the Town's review to determine whether the proposer possesses the requisite qualifications and experience will include, along with the specified information required under V.A and V.B above, the following: 
1.  Experience, training and preparation with similar projects; 
2.  Demonstration of ability to perform work; 
3.  Demonstrated record of successful past performance, including timeliness of project delivery, compliance with plans and specifications, quality of workmanship, cost-control and project safety; 
4.  Demonstrated conformance with applicable laws, codes, standards-regulations, and agreements on past projects; 
5.  Leadership structure; 
6.  Project manager's experience; 
7.  Management approach; 
8.  Project staffing plans, the skill levels of proposed workforce, apprenticeship and other training programs offered for the project, and the proposed safety plans for the project; 
9.  Financial condition; and 
10.  Project ownership. 
B.  Project characteristics. Factors to be considered in determining the project characteristics may include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Project definition; 
2.  Proposed project schedule; 
3.  Operation of the project; 
4.  Technology; technical feasibility; 
5.  Conformity to laws, regulations, and standards; 
6.  Environmental impacts; 
7.  Condemnation impacts; 
8.  State and local permits; and 
9.  Maintenance of the project. 
C.  Project financing. Factors to be considered in determining whether the proposed project financing allows adequate access to the necessary capital to finance the project include: 
1.  Cost and cost benefit to the Town; 
2.  Financing and the impact on the debt or debt burden of the Town; 
3.  Financial plan, including overall feasibility and reliability of plan; operator's past performance with similar plans and similar projects; the degree to which the proposer has conducted due diligence investigation and analysis of proposed financial plan and the results of any such inquiries or studies; 
4.  Estimated cost; 
5.  Life-cycle cost analysis; and 
6.  The identity, credit history, past performance of any third party that will provide financing for the project and the nature, amount, and timing of their commitment, as applicable; and 
7.  Such other items as the Town deems appropriate. 
In the event that any project is financed through the issuance of obligations that are deemed to be tax-supported debt of the Town, or if financing such a project may impact the Town's debt rating or financial position, the Town may select its own finance team, source, and financing vehicle. 
D.  Project benefit and compatibility. Factors to be considered in determining the proposed project's compatibility with the Town's comprehensive or development plans and zoning ordinance include, along with the specified information required under V.A and V.B above, the following: 
1.  Community benefits, including the economic impact the project will have on the Town and local community in terms of amount of tax revenue to be generated for the Commonwealth and the Town, the number of jobs generated for Virginia and Town residents and level of pay and fringe benefits of such jobs, the training programs generated by the project and the number and value of subcontracts generated for Virginia and Town subcontractors; 
2.  Community support or opposition, or both; 
3.  Public involvement strategy; 
4.  Compatibility with existing and planned facilities; and 
5.  Compatibility with local, regional, and state economic development efforts. 
E.  Other factors. Other factors that may be considered by a Town in the evaluation and selection of P.P.E.A. proposals include: 
1.  The proposed cost of the qualifying project; 
2.  The general reputation, industry experience, and financial capacity of the private entity; 
3.  The proposed design of the qualifying project; 
4.  Local citizen and government comments; 
5.  Benefits to the public; 
6.  The private entity's compliance with a minority business enterprise participation plan or good faith effort to comply with the goals of such plan; 
7.  The private entity's plans to employ local contractors and residents; and 
8.  Other criteria that the Town deems appropriate. 
VII. - Interim and comprehensive agreement. 
    Prior to developing or operating the qualifying project, the selected private entity shall enter into a comprehensive agreement with the Town. Prior to entering a comprehensive agreement an interim agreement may be entered into that permits a private entity to perform compensable activities related to the project. The Town may designate a working group to be responsible for negotiating any interim or comprehensive agreement. Any interim or comprehensive agreement shall define the rights and obligations of the Town and the selected proposer with regard to the project. 
A.  Interim agreement terms. The scope of an interim agreement may include but is not limited to: 
1.  Project planning and development; 
2.  Design and engineering; 
3.  Environmental analysis and mitigation; 
4.  Survey; 
5.  Ascertaining the availability of financing for the proposed facility through financial and revenue analysis; 
6.  Establish a process and timing of the negotiation of the comprehensive agreement; and 
7.  Any other provisions related to any aspect of the development or operation of a qualifying project that the parties may deem appropriate prior to the execution of a comprehensive agreement. 
B.  Comprehensive agreement terms. The Town Council shall approve any comprehensive agreement entered into pursuant to the P.P.E.A. between the Town and a private provider. The Town shall accept no liability for acquiring, designing, constructing, improving, renovating, expanding, equipping, maintaining, or operating the qualifying project, prior to entering into a properly executed comprehensive agreement. Each comprehensive agreement shall define the rights and obligations of the Town and the selected proposer(s) with regard to the project. 
The terms of the comprehensive agreement shall be tailored to address the specifics of the project and shall include but not be limited to: 
1.  The delivery of maintenance, performance and payment bonds or letters of credit in connection with any acquisition, design, construction, improvement, renovation, expansion, equipping, maintenance, or operation of the qualifying project; 
2.  The review of plans and specifications for the qualifying project by the Town; 
3.  The rights of the Town to inspect the qualifying project to ensure compliance with the comprehensive agreement; 
4.  The maintenance of a policy or policies of liability insurance or self-insurance reasonably sufficient to insure coverage of the project and the tort liability to the public and employees and to enable the continued operation of the qualifying project; 
5.  The monitoring of the practices of the operator by the Town to ensure proper maintenance; 
6.  The terms under which the operator will reimburse the Town for services provided; 
7.  The policy and procedures that will govern the rights and responsibilities of the Town and the operator in the event that the comprehensive agreement is terminated or there is a material default by the operator including the conditions governing assumption of the duties and responsibilities of the operator by the Town and the transfer or purchase of property or other interests of the operator by the Town; 
8.  The terms under which the operator will file appropriate financial statements on a periodic basis. 
9.  The mechanism by which user fees, lease payments, or service payments, if any, may be established from time to time upon agreement of the parties. Any payments or fees shall be set at a level that are the same for persons using the facility under like conditions and that will not materially discourage use for the qualifying project; 
10.  A copy of any service contract shall be filed with the Town. 
11.  A schedule of the current user fees or lease payments shall be made available by the operator to any member of the public upon request. 
12.  Classifications according to reasonable categories for assessment of user fees may be made. 
13.  The terms and conditions under which the Town may contribute financial resources, if any, for the qualifying project; 
14.  The terms and conditions under which existing site conditions will be assessed and addressed, including identification of the responsible party for conducting the assessment and taking necessary remedial action; 
15.  The terms and conditions under which the public entity will be required to pay money to the private entity and the amount of any such payments for the project. 
16.  Other requirements of the P.P.E.A. or other applicable law; and 
17.  A periodic reporting procedure that incorporates a description of the impact of the project on the Commonwealth and the Town; and 
18.  Such other terms as the Town may find necessary and convenient, that are agreed to by the private partner(s). 
C.  Comprehensive agreement provisions relating to construction projects. With respect to construction projects the Town generally anticipates addressing the following in the Comprehensive Agreement. Private entities are encouraged to include a discussion of these matters in proposals relating to construction projects. 
1.  The Town prefers the design-build project delivery system. In design-build construction projects the private entity will be expected to assume single-point responsibility and liability for all design and construction activities. 
2.  To the fullest extent possible, the Town expects the private entity to perform its own geotechnical investigation of subsurface conditions at the project site. The risk of inadequate geotechnical investigation or improper interpretation of the results of the geotechnical investigation will be allocated to the private entity in the comprehensive agreement. The Town will consider assuming part or all of the risk of subsurface conditions that could not reasonably be foreseen notwithstanding the performance of a geotechnical investigation meeting the ordinary standard of care of geotechnical engineers working under similar conditions. 
3.  The Town encourages private entities to propose a formula for the mutual sharing of cost savings realized during construction by virtue of value engineering initiatives, guaranteed maximum price with saving sharing provisions, trade allowances or otherwise. Mutually agreed upon terms for the sharing of such savings will be incorporated in the comprehensive agreement. 
D.  Comprehensive agreement provisions relating to private entity legal structure. The Town is willing to enter comprehensive agreements with private entities that have formed business associations such as joint ventures and limited liability corporations ("LLC"). However, in such cases, the Town will expect one or more of the principal members of the association to provide a performance guaranty of all obligations undertaken in the comprehensive agreement. This requirement is in addition to the statutory requirement for a performance bond. Individuals, corporations and other businesses interested in entering public-private partnerships with the Town under the P.P.E.A. must be willing to provide this security if their proposal is submitted as part of a joint venture, LLC or other business entity that limits the liability of its members, owners or partners. 
Any changes in the terms of the interim or comprehensive agreement as may be agreed upon by the parties from time to time shall be added to the interim or comprehensive agreement only by written amendment. 
The comprehensive agreement may provide for the development or operation of phases or segments of a qualifying project. 
Parties submitting proposals understand that representations, information and data supplied in support of, or in connection with proposals plays a critical role in the competitive evaluation process and the ultimate selection of a proposal by the Town. Accordingly, as part of the Comprehensive Agreement, the prospective operator and its team members shall certify that all material representations, information and data provided in support of or in connection with, a proposal are true and correct. Such certifications shall be made by authorized individuals who have knowledge of the information provided in the proposal. In the event that material changes occur with respect to any representations, information and data provided for the proposal, the prospective operator shall immediately notify the Town of same. Any violation of this section of the Comprehensive Agreement shall give the Town the right to terminate the Agreement, withhold payment or other consideration due, and seek any other remedy available under the law. 
VIII. - Governing provisions. 
    In the event of any conflict between these provisions and the P.P.E.A., the terms of the P.P.E.A. shall control. 
IX. - Notice and posting requirements. 
    In addition to the posting requirements of Section IV. A.2, 30 days prior to entering into an interim or comprehensive agreement, the Town shall provide an opportunity for public comment on the proposals. Such public comment period may include a public hearing in the sole discretion of the Town. After the end of the public comment period, no additional posting shall be required based on any public comment received. 
    Once the negotiation phase for the development of an interim or a comprehensive agreement is complete and a decision to award has been made by the Town Council, the Town shall post the proposed agreement in the following manner: 
1.  Posting shall be on the RPEs' website or by publication, in a newspaper of general circulation in the area in which the contract work is to be performed, of a summary of the proposals and the location where copies of the proposals are available for public inspection. 
2.  In addition to the posting requirements, at least one copy of the proposals shall be made available for public inspection. Trade secrets, financial records, or other records of the private entity excluded from disclosure under the provisions of subdivision 11 of § 2.2-3705.6 shall not be required to be posted, except as otherwise agreed to by the Town and the private entity. 
X. - Definitions. 
    Affected jurisdiction means any county, city, or town in which all or a portion of a qualifying project is located. 
    Comprehensive agreement means the comprehensive agreement between the private entity and the responsible public entity that is required prior to the development or operation of a qualifying project. 
    Conceptual stage means the initial phase of project evaluation when the public entity makes a determination whether the proposed project serves a public purpose, meets the criteria for a qualifying project, assesses the qualifications and experience of a private entity proposer, reviews the project for financial feasibility, and warrants further pursuit. 
    Detailed stage means the second phase of project evaluation where the public entity has completed the conceptual stage and accepted the proposal and may request additional information regarding a proposed project prior to entering into competitive negotiations with one or more private entities to develop an interim or comprehensive agreement. 
    Develop or development means to plan, design, develop, finance, lease, acquire, install, construct, or expand. 
    Interim agreement means an agreement between a private entity and a responsible public entity that provides for phasing of the development or operation, or both, of a qualifying project. Such phases may include, but are not limited to, design, planning, engineering, environmental analysis and mitigation, financial and revenue analysis, or any other phase of the project that constitutes activity on any part of the qualifying project. 
    Lease payment means any form of payment, including a land lease, by a public entity to the private entity for the use of a qualifying project. 
    Lifecycle cost analysis means an analysis that calculates cost of an asset over its entire life span and includes the cost of planning, constructing, operating, maintaining, replacing, and when applicable, salvaging the asset. Although one proposal may have a lower initial construction cost, it may not have the lowest lifecycle cost once maintenance, replacement, and salvage value is considered. 
    Operate means to finance, maintain, improve, equip, modify, repair, or operate. 
    Private entity means any natural person, corporation, general partnership, limited liability company, limited partnership, joint venture, business trust, public benefit corporation, nonprofit entity, or other business entity. 
    Public entity means the Commonwealth and any agency or authority thereof, any county, city or town and any other political subdivision of the Commonwealth, any public body politic and corporate, or any regional entity that serves a public purpose. 
    Qualifying project means: (i) any education facility, including, but not limited to a school building, any functionally related and subordinate facility and land of a school building (including any stadium or other facility primarily used for school events), and any depreciable property provided for use in a school facility that is operated as part of the public school system or as an institution of higher education; (ii) any building or facility that meets a public purpose and is developed or operated by or for any public entity; (iii) any improvements, together with equipment, necessary to enhance public safety and security of buildings to be principally used by a public entity; (iv) utility and telecommunications and other communications infrastructure; (v) a recreational facility; (vi) technology infrastructure and services, including, but not limited to, telecommunications, automated data processing, word processing and management information systems, and related information, equipment, goods and services; (vii) any technology, equipment, or infrastructure designed to deploy wireless broadband services to schools, businesses, or residential areas; or (viii) any improvements necessary or desirable to any unimproved locally- or state-owned real estate. 
    Responsible public entity means a public entity that has the power to develop or operate the applicable qualifying project. 
    User fees mean the rates, fees, or other charges imposed by the private entity of a qualifying project for use of all or a portion of such qualifying project pursuant to the comprehensive agreement pursuant to § 56-575.9. 
(Ord. of 4-12-11) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1981 CODE 
This table gives the location within the Code of those sections of the 1981 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1981 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1981 Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1-1-1-7 1-1-1-7 2-1 2-1 2-2, 2-3 2-2 2-4, 2-5 2-37, 2-38 2-6-2-11 2-51-2-56 2-12 2-39 2-13-2-21 2-71-2-79 2-22, 2-23 2-111, 2-112 2-24, 2-25 2-126, 2-127 2-26-2-30 2-141-2-145 2-31 2-96 2-32 2-36 2-33-2-38 2-161-2-166 3-1-3-9 3-2-3-10 4-1, 4-2 4-16, 4-17 4-3 4-2 4-5 4-18 4-6 4-1 4-13, 4-14 4-31, 4-32 4-15-4-23 4-36-4-44 4-24, 4-25 4-34, 4-35 4-26 4-33 4-27 4-45 6-1 7-23 6-2, 6-3 7-16, 7-17 6-4 7-19 6-5 7-18 6-6-6-8 7-20-7-22 6-9 7-24 7-1-7-4 8-1-8-4 7-5-7-7 8-21-8-23 7-8 8-44 7-9, 7-10 8-24, 8-25 7-11-7-13 8-41-8-43 7-14-7-17 8-61-8-64 8-1 9-1 9-3 8-3 9-4 8-4, 8-5 9-5 8-6 9-6, 9-7 8-7, 8-8 9-8, 9-9 8-9 9-7 8-10-8-31 9-10-9-31 8-32 9-2 8-33 9-46 8-34 9-62 8-36 9-65 8-37 9-64 8-39, 8-40 9-66, 9-67 8-41 9-76 8-42-8-49 9-68-9-75 8-50 9-78 8-51 9-61 8-52, 8-53 9-79, 9-80 8-54 9-82 8-55 9-81 8-56, 8-57 9-83, 9-84 8-58 9-86 8-59 9-85 8-60, 8-61 9-87, 9-88 8-62-8-66 9-101,9-105 8-68 9-106, 9-107 8-69-8-74 9-108,9-113 9-1 10-2 9-1.1 10-3 9-2 10-4 9-3 10-82 9-4-9-6 10-5-10-7 9-7, 9-8 10-83, 10-84 9-8.1 10-85 9-9, 9-10 10-86, 10-87 9-10.1 10-88 9-10.2 10-8 9-11, 9-12 10-29, 10-30 9-13 10-28, 10-29 9-14 10-27 9-15-9-19 10-31-10-35 9-20 10-26 9-21-9-24 10-62-10-65 9-25 10-61 9-26 10-121 9-28-9-34 10-136-10-142 10-1-10-13 11-1-11-13 10-14, 10-15 11-16, 11-17 10-15.1 11-18 10-16-10-19 11-19-11-22 10-20 9-76, 9-77 10-21-10-27 11-23-11-29 10-28, 10-29 11-31, 11-32 10-30 5-11 10-31, 10-32 11-34, 11-35 10-33 11-33 10-34, 10-35 11-51, 11-52 10-38-10-40 11-55-11-57 12-1-12-5 12-1-12-5 12-6, 12-7 12-6 12-8-12-13 12-7-12-12 12-14-12-17 12-31-12-34 13-1, 13-2 13-1 13-3 13-3 13-3.1 13-4 13-4-13-6 13-5-13-7 13-7 13-2 14-1, 14-2 14-36, 14-37 14-3-14-7 14-39-14-43 14-8-14-13 14-1-14-6 14-14 14-38 14-15-14-20 14-7-14-12 14-21 10-88 14-22, 14-23 14-13, 14-14 14-25-14-27 14-15-14-17 14-28-14-32 14-61-14-65 14-33-14-36 14-81-14-84 14-37 14-18 14-85 14-38, 14-39 14-86, 14-87 16-1-16-4 15-1-15-4 16-5 15-26 16-6 15-28 16-6.1 15-29 16-6.2 15-27 16-7 15-46 16-8-16-11 15-48-15-51 16-12 15-47 16-13-16-18 15-66-15-71 17-1 16-1 17-2-17-19 16-3-16-20 17-20-17-34 16-36-16-50 17-35-17-50 16-66-16-81 18-1-18-9 5-1-5-9 18-10-18-12 5-10 19-1 17-1 19-3 17-2 19-4-19-9 17-21-17-26 19-10-19-17 17-41-17-48 19-18-19-20 17-49 19-21-19-37 17-66-17-82 19-38-19-43 17-96-17-101 19-44-19-46 17-121-17-123 19-47-19-49 17-136-17-138 19-50-19-57 17-156-17-163 19-58-19-66 17-176-17-184 19-67-19-71 17-196-17-200 19-72-19-80 17-216-17-224  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
 This table gives the location within the Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1981 Code. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1981 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section  Section 
this Code 1980-9  8- 5-80 5-6-5-11 4-61-4-66 1981-2  2- 3-81 3 1-8 1981-3  3- 3-81 9-35, 9-36 10-106, 10-107 1981-7  7- 7-81 8-75.1 6-1 8-75.2-8-75.9 6-4-6-11 8-75.10 6-3 8-75.11 6-2 1981-9 12- 1-81 11-13-11-15 1982-7 11- 2-82 10-2 1982-8  1- 4-83 2-40-2-43 2-183-2-186 2-46-2-50 2-187-2-191 2-51 2-193 2-51(1) 2-192 2-51(2)-2-51(17) 2-194-2-209 2-51(17a) 2-210 2-51(18)-2-51(23) 2-211-23-216 2-52-2-60 2-217-2-225 2-61-2-68 2-241-2-248 2-69 2-262 2-70 2-261 2-71-2-76 2-263-2-268 2-77 2-182 1983-1  6- 7-83 10-85, 10-86 1983-3  7- 5-83 10-2 1983-8 12- 6-83 3-10 1983-9 12- 6-83 9-69 1984-5  6- 5-84 19-10, 19-11 17-41, 17-42 19-14, 19-15 17-45, 17-46 19-18 17-49 1984-4  6-18-84 10-2 1984-6.1 10- 9-84 10-89 1985-4  6- 4-85 10-2 1985-5  9- 3-85 10-84  6-12-86 16-20 15-86 16-21-16-28 15-90-15-97 16-30, 16-31 15-98, 15-99 16-32 15-88 16-33 15-100 16-34 15-87 16-38 15-121 16-39-16-47 15-125-15-133 16-48 15-123 16-49 15-134 16-50 15-122 16-51 15-124 1986-5  6-12-86 10-2 1986-6  8- 5-86 10-6 11- 6-86 21.1, 21.2 2-21, 2-22 12-16-86 3-2 Char., § 3-2  4- 7-87 21.1, 21.2 2-21, 2-22 1987-2  6- 2-87 10-2 1987-4  1- 5-88 14-19 1988-1  1- 5-88 Adopting Ordinance, p. ix 1988-2  5- 3-88 14-44 1988-3  4- 5-88 10-2 1986-6 10-11-88 10-122 1989-1  5- 2-89       Rpld 10-6(3) 1989-2  5- 2-89 15-67(1), (2) 1989-3  5- 2-89 10-7 1989-4  5- 2-89 10-5(a) 1989-6  6- 6-89 10-2 1989-7 10- 3-89 10-2 1990-1  6-12-90 3-10-3-12 1990-3  6-12-90 10-2 1990-4 10- 9-90 15-5 1990-6 10- 9-90 2-71 1990-7 12-11-90 10-5 1990-8 11-13-90 5-7 1990-9 11-13-90 11-24 1991-1  5-14-91 15-87 1991-2  5-14-91 9-2 1991-3  5-14-91 15-3 1991-4  5-14-91 15-135-15-143 1991-5  5-14-91 11-4 1991-6  6-11-91 4-3-4-9 1991-7  6-11-91 10-2 1991-9  1- 4-91 10-31 1991-12  9-10-91 10-84 1991-14 12-10-91 2-21, 2-22 1991-17  1-14-92 10-26(a) 1992-1  3-10-92 11-10 1992-2  3-10-92 9-8 1992-4  6-27-92 9-107 1992-5  6-17-92 9-112 1992-6  6-17-92 9-24 1992-8  6- 9-92 10-2 1992-11  6-17-92 9-106 1992-12  8-11-92 17-1 1993-13  8-11-92 12-5 1992-14  8-11-92 8-26 1992-16  8-11-92 8-43 1992-17  8-11-92 15-67(1)-(3) 1992-18  8-11-92 15-68 1992-19  8-11-92 15-69 1992-20  8-11-92 15-70 1992-21 10-13-92 9-8 1992-23 10-13-92 17-157 1992-24 10-13-92 17-176 1992-25 10-13-92 11-19(a)-(c) 1992-26 11-10-92 10-29 1992-27 11-10-92 10-32 1992-28 11-10-92 15-2(a) 1992-29 12- 8-92 3-13 1993-2  3- 9-93 10-6(a) 1993-3  3- 9-93 7-16-7-42       Rpld 8-3, 8-4 1993-4  5-11-93 17-155-17-162 17-176-17-187 17-201-17-214 1993-8  8-10-93 14-91-14-100 1993-9  6- 8-93 10-2 1993-18 11- 9-93 2-21, 2-22 1993-21  1-11-94 15-127 1993-22  1-11-94 15-128 1993-23  1-11-94 15-93 1993-24  1-11-94 15-94 1994-8  6-28-94 15-136 1994-9  6-14-94 10-2 1994-11  8- 9-94 8-26, 8-27 8-43 1994-12 10-11-94 2-71, 2-72 1994-14 11- 8-94 3-14-3-21 1994 11- 8-94 4-1-4-9, 4-16, 4-17, 4-31-4-33, 4-61-4-66 1994-17 12-13-94 10-5(a) 1994-18 12-13-94 10-90 1995-1  1-10-95       Rpld 11-12       Added 11-58-11-70 1995-3  3-14-95 15-49 1995-4  4-11-95 11-59       Rpld 11-61 1995-5  5- 9-95 2-2 1995-8  6-13-95 10-2 1995-10  8- 8-95 10-9 1995-13  9-12-95 15-46 15-48 1995-14  9-12-95 15-2       Added 15-6 1995-16  2-13-96 10-83 1995-17 12-12-95       Rpld 9-1-9-31 9-46 9-61-9-88 9-101-9-113       Added 9-1-9-26 9-46 9-61-9-87 9-101-9-115 9-121 1996-1  2-13-96 1-7 1996-6  5-14-96 10-27 1996-14  6-11-96 10-2 1996-16  9-10-96 15-3 1996-21 11-12-96       Rpld 9-1-9-26, 9-46, 9-61-9-75, 9-77-9-87, 9-101-9-115, 9-121       Added 9-1-9-27, 9-46, 9-61-9-71, 9-77-9-87, 9-101-9-115, 9-121 1997-02  3-11-97 Adopting Ordinance, p. ix 1-7 2-163       Rpld 9-75, 9-77, 9-79, 9-83, 9-85, 10-65, 11-14, 11-15, 11-25 12-12 14-162 1997-07  6-10-97 15-67 1997-8  7- 8-97 10-2 1997-14  1-13-98 10-5(a) 1998-1  4-14-98 10-5 1998-2  4-14-98 15-1 1998-3  4-14-98       Added 17-3 1998-08  6- 9-98 2-2 1998-9  7-14-98 10-2 1998-11  8-11-98 15-68 1998-13 10-13-98 10-26-10-35 1998-14 11-10-98 10-90 1998-15 10-13-98 14-1 1998-16 11-10-98 4-17       Added 4-18 1999-5  7-13-99 10-2 1999-6  7-13-99 10-122 1999-8  8-10-99       Added 17-146-17-152 1999-12 11- 9-99 9-121 1999-13 12-14-99 10-2 1999-14 12-14-99 3-10-3-10.3 2000-2  4-27-2000 9-121(1)(2) 2000-04  6-13-2000       Rpld 15-86-15-92       Added 15-86-15-92 2000-05  6-13-2000       Added 10-91 2000-06  7-11-2000 10-2 2000-11  9-12-2000 2-192, 2-193, 2-195, 2-196, 2-200, 2-204, 2-213, 2-221, 2-241-2-244, 2-246, 2-248, 2-249, 2-261-2-263, 2-268-2-272 2000-13 10-10-2000 15-46-15-50, 15-53 2001-7  4-24-2001 10-31 2001-09  5- 8-2001 1-22 App. A(note) 2001-10  5- 8-2001 4-17 2001-11  7-10-2001       Added 12-13 2001-13  7-10-2001 10-2 2001-14  5- 8-2001 1-22       Rpld App. A       Added App. A 2001-18 11-13-2001 10-6(a) 2002-01  1- 8-2002 11-31 2002-02  2-12-2002 2-21, 2-22 2002-03  1- 8-2002 10-5(a) 2002-6  4-22-2002 9-121 2002-08  7- 9-2002 10-2 2002-09 10- 8-2002 2-22 2003-5  5-13-2003 10-31 2003-6  7- 8-2003 10-2 2004-01  2-10-2004 2-21, 2-22 2004-3  5-11-2004 9-121 2004-5  7-13-2004 10-2 2005-01  3- 8-2005 10-5(a)(b) 2005-2  6-14-2005       Added 7-24 2005-06  6-14-2005 10-5(a)(b) 2005-7  7-12-2005 10-2 2006-01  3-14-2006 10-5(a)(b) 2006-02  3-14-2006       Dltd 3-8       Added 3-8 2006-06  6-13-2006 8-27, 8-43 2006-07  7-11-2006 11-71 2006-08  7-11-2006 10-2 2006-09 12-12-2006 2-162 2007-03  7-12-2007 10-2 2007-04 12-11-2007 10-7 2008-03  7- 8-08 10-2 2009-03  7-14-09 10-2 2009-04 11-10-09 15-135-15-143       Added 15-144-15-150 2010-03  8-10-10 10-2  4-12-11       Added App. B 2011-03  8- 9-11 10-2 2011-04 12-13-11 2-21, 2-22 2012-3  9-11-12 10-2 2013-3  8-13-13 10-2 2013-04  8-13-13 10-83 2014-03  8-12-14 10-2 2014-04 12- 9-14       Added 2-23 2014-05 12- 9-14       Added 17-215-17-220 2015-01(a)  3-10-15 7-42 2015-03  8-11-15 10-2 2015-04  8-11-15       Added 10-10 2016-01  1-12-16       Added 15-171-15-175, 15-191-15-195, 15-211-15-215 2016-05  7-12-16 10-2 2016-07 10-11-16 10-6(a)(9) 2016-08  9-13-16 9-69(d) 2016-09  6-14-16 8-63 2017-01  2-14-17 15-67(1), (3) 2017-02  3-14-17 3-11 2017-06  5- 9-17 11-72-11-77 2017-07  5- 9-17 13-1-13-7       Added 13-8 2017-08  9-12-17 17-68 2017-09  9-12-17 10-2 2018-03  6-12-18 15-136 2018-06  8-14-18 10-2 2018-07  8-14-18 10-26-10-31       Rpld 10-32-10-35 2018-08 12-11-18 17-47 2019-01  1- 8-19 10-5(b)  
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE 
 This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 
Virginia Constitution 
Article Section  Section 
this Code I 12 2-54 IV 7 2-51 VII 7 2-71 Ch. 15  
Code of Va. Section 
this Code 1-13.1 1-2 1-13.1:1 1-2 1-13.1-1-15 1-2 1-13.3 1-2 1-13.3:1 1-2 1-13.5-1-13.7 1-2 1-13.9 1-5 1-13.13 1-2 1-13.15, 1-13.16 1-2 1-13.19 1-2 1-13.23 1-2 1-13.26 1-2 1-13.28, 1-13.29 1-2 1-13.32, 1-13.33 1-2 1-13.39:2 10-2 1-15 1-2 1-16 1-8 1-17 2-79 1-17.1 1-4 2.1-21 7-22 2.1-234.8 2-2 2.1-340 et seq. Char., § 4-4 Ch. 2 2-194 2.1-341 Char., § 4-4 2.1-343 Char., § 4-2 2-39 2-55 2.1-344 Char., § 4-4 2.1-359 et seq. 2-2 2.1-359, 2.1-360 2-1 2.1-363 2-2 2.1-366, 2.1-367 2-2 2.1-368 2-1 2.1-370 2-2 2.1-639.1 et seq. Char., § 4-6 2-261 2-263 2.1-639.11 2-263 2.1-639.2 2-268 2.2-3100 et seq. App. B 2.2-3705(A)(56) App. B 2.2-3705.6, subdiv. 11 App. B 2.2-4301 App. B 3.1-296.11 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. III 3.1-723 et seq. Ch. 3 3.1-742 et seq. 3-9 3.1-796.66 et seq. Ch. 3 3-10 3.1-796.68 et seq. 3-3 3.1-796.77 3-10 3.1-796.93 3-10 3.1-796.931(C)(1) 10.1 3.1-796.100 3-10 3.1-796.104 et seq.       3-2 3.1-796.116 et seq.       3-10 3.1-796.122 3-3 3.1-796.122 et seq.       Ch. 3 3.1-796.127 Ch. 3 3-10 3.1-796.128 Ch. 3 3.1-1011 et seq. Ch. 3 3.2-6539 3-11 4-1 et seq. 9-62 4-2 9-62 4-25 11-10(c)(1) 4-38 9-62 4-74 et seq. 16-47 4-78 11-10 4-96 11-10 4-99 11-10, 11-10(c)(2) 4.1-100 9-62 4.1-205 9-62 4.1-233 9-62 6.1-244 et seq. 9-86 6.1-254 et seq. 9-86 8.01-44 11-73 8.01-296 3-10.3 8.01-446 11-72 9-179 et seq. 12-4 10-31.1 et seq. Ch. 7 10-263 et seq. Ch. 8 10-264 8-1 3-13 10-277 et seq. 8-2 11-35 2-216 11-35 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI 11-35(D), (E) 2-183 11-37 2-181 11-40 2-191 11-41 2-192 2-193 2-221 11-41(A) 2-192 11-41(F) 2-192 11-41.1 2-193 11-42 2-202 11-46 2-196 11-46(B) 2-196(f) 11-49 2-181 2-198 11-51 2-195 11-52 2-194 11-53 2-206 11-54 2-204 11-55, 11-56 2-211, 2-212 11-57 2-200 11-58-11-61 2-213-2-216 11-62 2-201 11-63 2-241 11-64 2-242 11-65 2-243 11-66 2-244 11-68 2-246 11-70 2-248 11-71.1 2-249 11-72 2-262 11-72 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI, Div. 3 11-73 2-261 11-74-11-79.2 2-263-2-271 11-80 2-182 2-270 13.1-501 9-2 Tit. 15.1 Ch. 2 3-13 15.1-11 Ch. 8 Ch. 8, Art. III 15.1-11.1(a), (b) 10-84, 10-85 15.1-11.2 Ch. 4 Ch. 4, Art. IV Ch. 7 15.1-11.4 Ch. 4 Ch. 4, Art. I, Div. 2 4-4 15.1-13 Ch. 1 Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 3 3-13 15.1-14 Ch. 7 Ch. 10 Ch. 14 15.1-14(5) Ch. 3 11-20, 11-21 15.1-14(7) Ch. 5 15.1-14(9) 10-8 15.1-15 Ch. 7 15.1-15(1) Ch. 4 Tit. 15.1, Ch. 18 Char., § 2-7 15.1-21 15-137 15.1-28.02, 15.1-28.03 Ch. 8 15.1-28.1 Ch. 8 15.1-28.2 11-70(d) 15.1-28.4 Ch. 8, Art. III 15.1-29.1:1 Ch. 3 3-3 15.1-29.4 11-4 15.1-29.12, 15.1-29.13 11-19 15.1-29.15 9-82 Ch. 11, Art. II 15.1-33.2 11-70 15.1-37 et seq. Ch. 17, 17-1 15.1-37.3 1-1 1-9, 1-10 15.1-37.3:1 Ch. 13 13-2 15.1-37.3:2 Ch. 13 13-6 13-7 15.1-37.4 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 15.1-38 12-3 15.1-74 et seq. 12-6 15.1-131 12-34 15.1-131 et seq. Ch. 12 12-6 15.1-131.1 12-34 15.1-131.7 12-1 15.1-131.8 12-4 15.1-133 Ch. 10, Art. V, Div. 2 15.1-135.1 12-33 12-33(7) 15.1-136.1 et seq. Ch. 12 15.1-137 et seq. Ch. 12 15.1-138 12-6 15.1-159.2 et seq. 12-5 15.1-159.8 Char., § 7-1 15.1-160 et seq. Char., § 7-2 15.1-167 Char., § 8-1 15.1-170 et seq. Char., Art. VII 15.1-235.1 Ch. 2, Art. II 15.1-239 et seq. Ch. 14 Ch. 17, Art. IV, Div. 2 15.1-275 Ch. 2, Art. VI 15.1-292 Ch. 2, Art. VI 15.1-292 et seq. Ch. 17 15.1-316 11-24 15.1-317 et seq. Ch. 17, 17-1 15.1-332.1 et seq. Ch. 17, 17-1 15.1-363 et seq. Ch. 14 15.1-376 7-36 14-36, 14-37 15.1-392 et seq. 17-1 15.1-427 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 15.1-427.1 2-161 15.1-427.1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 15.1-428 2-166 15.1-437 2-162-2-165 15.1-439 et seq. 2-166 15.1-792 et seq. Ch. 2 15.1-795 Char., Art. VI 15.1-796 12-6 15.1-826 Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 2 Ch. 15 15.1-826 et seq. Ch. 2 15.1-827 Char., § 5-3 15.1-827.1 Char., § 3-4 15.1-830 Char., § 3-2 15.1-835-15.1-907 Char., § 2-7 15.1-841 Ch. 15 15.1-846 Ch. 4 15.1-848 Ch. 2, Art. VI 2-185 15.1-854 et seq. Ch. 17, 17-1 15.1-855, 15.1-856 17-158 15.1-857 Ch. 8 15.1-860 Ch. 5 11-6 15.1-865 Ch. 11, Art. II 15.1-867 Ch. 4 15.1-869 Ch. 4 15.1-870 Ch. 3 3-3-3-5 15.1-872 Ch. 7 7-31, 7-32 15.1-875 Ch. 17, 17-1 Ch. 17, Art. III, Div. 2 15.1-876 Ch. 17, 17-1 15.1-883 Ch. 5 15.1-888 et seq. Ch. 14 15.1-892 9-87 15.1-893 14-44 15.1-901, 15.1-902 1-7 15.1-905 1-7 15.2-908 11-72 15.2-2001 10-91 15.2-2241 4-18 16.1-70.1 Char., Art. IX 16.1-253 11-31 16.1-253.1 11-31 16.1-278 et seq. 10-2 16.1-278.2-16.1-278.6 11-31 16.1-278.8 11-31 16.1-278.14 11-31 16.1-278.15 11-31 16.1-279 11-31 16.1-279.1 11-31 Tit. 18.2 3-8(b) Ch. 11 Tit. 18.2, Ch. 7 10-2 Tit. 18.2, Ch. 7, Art. 2 10-107(a) 18.2-9 1-7 Tit. 18.2, Ch. 10, Arts. 2, 3 2-262 18.2-11-18.2-13 1-7 18.2-27 11-3 18.2-46.1 11-72 18.2-51.1 12-10 18.2-57 11-2 18.2-119, 18.2-120 11-31, 11-32 18.2-121 11-34 18.2-125 Ch. 5 5-11 18.2-126 Ch. 5 18.2-127 Ch. 5 5-6 5-12 18.2-128 11-33 18.2-130 11-35 18.2-132-18.2-136 11-31 18.2-137 11-8 18.2-138 11-23 18.2-175 12-12 18.2-179 11-7 18.2-212 Ch. 7 18.2-266 et seq. 10-2 18.2-279 et seq. Ch. 11, Art. II 18.2-280 11-52 18.2-284 11-57 18.2-309 11-56 18.2-311 11-55 18.2-323 Ch. 3 3-9 18.2-324 14-14 18.2-325 9-61 18.2-325 et seq. 11-13 18.2-326 11-13 18.2-333 et seq. 11-13 18.2-334.2 11-13 18.2-340.1- 18.2-340.3 11-14 18.2-340.6, 18.2-340.7 11-15 18.2-387 11-16 18.2-388 11-11 18.2-403.1 et seq. Ch. 3 18.2-415 11-9 18.2-427-18.2-430 11-27-11-30 18.2-432 9-75 18.2-433 9-75 18.2-438 et seq. 2-262 18.2-446 et seq. 2-262 18.2-460 11-26 12-10 18.2-461 12-8 18.2-498.1 et seq. 2-262 18.2-510 3-9 18.2-3408 11-14 19.2-8 Ch. 4 19.2-12 et seq. 12-6 19.2-14 5-3 19.2-71 et seq. 12-7 19.2-73 15-100 15-134 19.2-76 15-134 19.2-76.2 Ch. 8 19.2-128 15-100 15-134 19.2-152.8 11-31 19.2-152.9 11-31 19.2-152.10 11-31 19.2-305.1 11-72 20-103 11-31 Ch. 23 2-2 Tit. 24.1 Ch. 2, Art. II 24.1-1 13-1 24.1-36 et seq. 2-21 24.1-40.7 et seq. 2-21 24.1-90 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 24.1-92 2-22 24.1-93 Ch. 2, Art. II 24.1-96.1 11-19 24.2, Ch. 9.3 2-23 24.2-945 2-23 Tit. 27 Ch. 7 27-5 7-36 27.6-1 et seq. 7-16 27-30 et seq. 7-18 27-54.5 Ch. 7 27-63 et seq. Ch. 4 14-39 27-94 et seq. Ch. 7, Art. II 27-95 7-46 Tit. 29.1 Ch. 3 32.1-163 et seq. Ch. 17, 17-1 33.1-47.1 14-8 33.1-209 Ch. 8, Art. III 33.1-345 11-8 33.1-346 Ch. 8 33.1-346.1 Ch. 8 33.1-347 Ch. 8 34-26 Ch. 5 34-28 Ch. 5 36-70 et seq. Ch. 4 36-97 4-16 36-97 et seq. Ch. 4 17-177 36-98 Ch. 4 36-99 4-4 4-17 36-99.1 Ch. 4 Ch. 4, Art. I, Div. 2 36-105 Ch. 4 4-2 Ch. 4, Art. IV 36-106 4-1 Tit. 38.2 13-2 40.1-76 13-1 40.1-79.1 7-24 40.1-83 11-1 40.1-103 7-24 40.1-117 et seq. Ch. 4 46.1-353 9-87 Tit. 46.2 Ch. 10 10-2 10-107 46.2-100 10-7 10-26 10-84 46.2-113 10-1 46.2-310 Ch. 16 Ch. 16, Art. III 46.2-378 16-6 46.2-380 16-6 46.2-381 16-6 46.2-600 10-91 46.2-617 10-85 46.2-663 10-28 46.2-683 10-27 46.2-694 Ch. 16 46.2-711 Ch. 16 46.2-731 10-89 46.2-739 10-89 46.2-750 10-28 46.2-752 Ch. 10, Art. III 10-28 10-31 46.2-755 Ch. 10, Art. II 10-28 46.2-874 10-5 46.2-875 10-5 46.2-878 10-5 46.2-904 10-122 46.2-908 Ch. 10, Art. V, Div. 2 46.2-941 10-81 46.2-1216 10-87 46.2-1217 10-87 46.2-1219 10-107 46.2-1220 7-33 7-34 10-3 10-26 46.2-1237 10-89 46.2-1238 10-89 46.2-1300 Ch. 10 10-1 10-2 46.2-1301 10-3 46.2-1302 Ch. 10, Art. III 46.2-1313 10-2 Tit. 48 11-20 49-1 12-3 49-4 1-2 54-1.1 9-5 9-7 54-1.2 9-5 9-7 54-42 et seq. 2-111 54-113 et seq. Ch. 4 9-104 54-145.2 9-104 54-273(2) 9-107(11) 54-825 et seq. 9-70 54-826, 54-827 9-70 54-829 9-71 54-841 9-80 54-859.15 Ch. 6 6-1 54-859.16- 54-859.23 6-4-6-11 54-859.24 6-3 54-859.25 6-2 54-859.26 Ch. 6 54-859.28 6-3 54.1-102 9-7, 9-9 54.1-1100 9-104 54.1-1117 9-104 54.1-2900 9-108(11) 54.1-4000 9-80 54.1-4001 9-80 55-202 et seq. Ch. 3 3-4 56-274 Ch. 16 56-274(2) 16-3 56-291.1 et seq. Ch. 16 56-291.3:1 16-4 56-291.3:5 16-2 56-594 15-46 56-299 et seq. 16-3 56-300 16-3(a) 56-575.1 et seq. App. B 56-575.9 App. B 57-22 et seq. Ch. 5 57-25, 57-26 Ch. 5 57-35.1 5-1 57-35.1 et seq. 5-8 57-36 et seq. 5-9 57-39.8 5-1 57-48 et seq. 11-5 Ch. 13 57-63 Ch. 13 57-63(d) 13-2 Tit. 58.1 Ch. 9 9-46 Ch. 15 58.1-1 9-1 Tit. 58.1, Ch. 12 15-28(a) 15-29(a) 58.1-15 15-27 Tit. 58.1, Ch. 30 et seq. Ch. 15 Tit. 58.1, Ch. 39 9-25, 9-26 58.1-373(B)(13) Ch. 16, Art. III 58.1-382(9) 15-137 58.1-600 et seq. 15-88 58.1-1200 et seq. Ch. 15, Art. II 58.1-1201 15-26 58.1-1204 15-28(a) 58.1-1205 15-26 58.1-1207 15-29(a), (b) 58.1-1209 Ch. 15, Art. II 15-28 58.1-1211 15-28(b) 15-29(b) 58.1-1212 15-29(b) 58.1-1216 15-27 58.1-2600 et seq. Ch. 15, Art. III 58.1-2901 15-48 15-49 58.1-3005 et seq. Ch. 15 58.1-3007 15-1 58.1-3128.1 9-8 58.1-3200 et seq. Ch. 15 58.1-3210 et seq. Ch. 15, Art. IV 58.1-3211 15-67 58.1-3212 15-67 58.1-3213 15-68 58.1-3214 15-67 58.1-3215 15-69 58.1-3217 15-66 15-68 58.1-3511 10-26 58.1-3518 15-2 58.1-3700 9-6, 9-7 58.1-3700 et seq. Ch. 9 581.3701 9-4 58.1-3703(B)(4) 9-106 58.1-3703(B)(13) 9-87 58.1-3703 C 10 15-46 58.1-3704 9-113 58.1-3705 9-44 58.1-3706 9-73 9-104 9-113 9-121 58.1-3708 9-18 58.1-3709 9-18(b) 58.1-3710 9-23 58.1-3712 9-121(2) 58.1-3712.1 9-121(2) 58.1-3713 9-121(2) 58.1-3714 9-2 9-104 58.1-3714(B) 9-103(34) 58.1-3715 9-2 9-6(a) 9-18(a)(1) 9-104 58.1-3716 9-72 9-114 9-121(5) 58.1-3717 9-6(a) 9-70 9-81 9-121(7) Ch. 13 38.1-3718 9-6(a) 9-81(b) 38.1-3719 9-69 9-81(b) 58.1-3719.1 9-121(j) 58.1-3720 9-73 58.1-3721 9-74 58.1-3724 9-65 58.1-3726 9-68 58.1-3727 9-121(h) 58.1-3728 9-6(a) 9-67 58.1-3729 9-101 58.1-3730 9-84 58.1-3731 9-6(a) 9-109 9-110 9-111 58.1-3732 9-2 58.1-3734 9-113 58.1-3812 15-46, 15-47 58.1-3812 et seq. Ch. 15, Art. III 58.1-3813 15-48, 15-49 58.1-3814 15-46, 15-48, 15-49 58.1-3814J 15-49 58.1-3840 Ch. 15, Art. V, Ch. 15, Art VI 58.1-3850 15-171 58.1-3851 15-191 58.1-3853 15-211 15-215 58.1-3900 et seq. 9-9 9-26 581.3916 9-6 9-9 9-21 15-2 15-3 15-93 15-127 58.1-3916.1 9-2 Ch. 15, Art. V. 58.1-3919 10-31 58.1-3921 et seq. 15-4 58.1-3924 15-4 58.1-3937 15-4 58.1-3938 15-4 58.1-3940 2-145 58.1-3980 9-26(1) 59.1-137 et seq. Ch. 7 59.1-142 et seq. 7-42 59.1-144 7-42 59.1-146 7-24 59.1-147 7-24 59.1-148 7-42 62.1-44.2 et seq. Ch. 17, 17-1 62.1-44.3 17-155  

TOWN OF WARRENTON
ZONING ORDINANCE
ADOPTED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL
February 14, 2006
Updated December 10, 2019
i - 1 Updated April 2019
Town of Warrenton Zoning Ordinance
Contents
Article 1 Title, Purpose and Authority
1-1 Title
1-2 Authority
1-3 Purpose
1-4 Legislative Intent
1-5 Applicability
1-6 Validity of Ordinance
1-7 Conflicting Ordinances
1-8 Severability
1-9 Amendments
1-10 Effective Date
Article 2 General Provisions
2-1 Application and Prohibition
2-2 Compliance with Chapter Required
2-3 Exemptions
2-4 Public Facilities Manual
2-5 Zoning of Annexed Territory
2-6 Calculation of Density
2-7 Authorization for Constructing Public Facilities
2-8 Provisions Are Minimum Requirements
2-9 Interpretation of Terms
2-10 Uses Not Permitted are Prohibited
2-11 Adding Unspecified Uses
2-12 Zoning Map and District Boundaries
2-13 Methods of Measuring Lots, Yards and Related Terms
2-14 Lots and Yard Requirements
2-15 Relationship to Private Agreements
2-16 Conditional Zoning
2-17 Condominium Conversion
2-18 Encroachments in Required Yards
2-19 Fences and Walls
2-20 Height Regulations
2-21 Obstruction to Vision at Intersections Prohibited
2-22 Removal of Top Soil [see also Erosion and Sediment Control]
2-23 Districts Established
Article 3 Zoning Districts and Map
3-1 Zoning Districts Established
3-1.1 Base Districts
3-1.2 Overlay Districts
3-2 Zoning Map
3-3 Zoning District Boundaries
3-4 Requirements for Base Zoning Districts
3-4.1 R-15 Residential District
3-4.2 R-10 Residential District
3-4.3 R-6 Residential District
i - 2 Updated April 2019
3-4.4 RT Residential Townhouse District
3-4.5 RMF Residential Multifamily District
3-4.6 R-40 Residential District
3-4.7 R-E Residential District
3-4.8 RO Residential Office District
3-4.9 PSP Public Semi Public Institutional District
3-4.10 C Commercial District
3-4.11 CBD Central Business District
3-4.12 I Industrial District
3-5 Requirements for Overlay Zoning Districts
3-5.1 FPD - Floodplain District
3-5.2 PUD - Planned Unit Development District
3-5.3 HD - Historic District
Article 4 Site Conservation Manual [Erosion and Sediment Control]
4-1 Title and Purpose
4-1.1 Title
4-1.2 Authority
4-1.3 Intent
4-1.4 Purpose
4-1.5 Conflicting Content with other Codes and Ordinances
4-1.6 Certain State Erosion and Sediment Control Provisions Adopted
4-2 Recordation of Riparian Setback Areas
4-3 Application Procedure
4-3.1 Applicant
4-3.2 Agreement in Lieu of SCP
4-3.3 SCP Authority
4-3.4 Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Approving Authority
4-3.5 Responsible Land Disturber
4-4 Definitions
4-5 Exceptions
4-5.1 Erosion and Sediment Control Exemptions
4-5.2 Riparian Buffer and Setback Exceptions
4-6 Riparian Buffer and Setback Area
4-6.1 Riparian Buffers
4-6.2 Riparian Setback Area
4-6.3 Riparian Areas of Special Concern
4-7 Permits
4-7.1 Land Disturbance Permit
4-7.2 Building Permit
4-8 Program Standards/Procedures
4-8.1 Plan Contents
4-8.2 Operation and Maintenance of Storm Water Management Facilities
4-8.3 Approval Process
4-8.4 Bond Requirements
4-8.5 Multi-jurisdiction Requirements
4-8.6 Erosion Impact Areas
4-8.7 Preconstruction Meeting
4-8.8 Inspection Process
4-9 Fees
4-10 Variances
i - 3 Updated April 2019
4-11 Violations, Remedies, Public Notice
4-11.1 Informal Contact/Verbal Warning
4-11.1.2 Notice to Comply
4-11.1.3 Stop Work Order
4-12 Criminal and Civil Penalties
4-13 Appellate Process
4-13.1 Appeals of items regulated by the Zoning Ordinance
4-13.2 Appeals to the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Laws
4-13.3 Appeal of a Stop Work Order
4-14 Duration of Approval
Article 5 Stormwater Management
5-1 Purpose and Authority (Section 9VAC25-870-20, 9VAC25-870-40)
5-2 Definitions (9VAC25-870-10)
5-3 Stormwater Permit Requirement; Exemptions
5-4 Stormwater Management Program Established; Submission and Approval of Plans; Prohibitions
5-5 Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan; Contents of Plans
5-6 Stormwater Management Plan; Contents of Plan
5-7 Pollution Prevention Plan; Contents of Plans
5-8 Review of Stormwater Management Plan
5-9 Technical Criteria for Regulated Land Disturbing Activities
5-10 Adequate Drainage
5-10.1 – Minimum Requirements
5-11 Long-Term Maintenance of Permanent Stormwater Facilities
5-12 Monitoring and Inspections
5-13 Hearings
5-14 Appeals
5-15 Enforcement
5-16 Fees
Table 1: Fees for permit issuance
Table 2: Fees for the modification or transfer of registration statements for the General Permit for
Discharges of Stormwater from Construction Activities
Table 3: Permit Maintenance Fees
5-17 Performance Bond (9VAC25-870-104.D and Code § 603.8(A))
5-18 Adoption, Amendments, and Repeal
Article 6 Sign Regulations
6-1 General Provisions
6-1.1 Legislative Intent
6-1.2 Applicability
6-1.3 Sign Permit Required
6-1.4 Signs for Which a Permit is Not Required
6-1.5 Signs Permitted in All Districts
6-1.6 Signs Prohibited in All Districts
6-1.7 Measurement of Signs
6-1.8 Illumination
6-1.9 Setback
6-1.10 Obstruction of Vision
6-1.11 Landscaping and Lighting [see Articles 8 and 9]
6-2 Sign Regulations By Use, Sign Type And District
6-2.1 General Regulations for All Signs in Any District
i - 4 Updated April 2019
6-2.2 Summary of Sign Regulations
6-2.3 Sign Regulations for the R 40, R-E, R 15, R 10, R 6 Residential Districts
6-2.4 Signs Regulations for the RT, RMF, and PUD Districts
6-2.5 Signs Regulations for the RO, PSP and CBD Districts
6-2.6 Signs Regulations for the C District
6-2.7 Signs Regulations for the I District
6-2.8 Signs Regulations for the HD District
6-2.9 Signs Regulations for the FPD District
6-3 Administrative Provisions
6-3.1 Sign Permits and Application Process
6-3.2 Construction, Maintenance and Removal
6-3.3 Nonconforming Signs
Article 7 Off-Street Parking and Loading
7-1 Legislative Intent
7-2 General Standards
7-3 Standards for Residential Uses
7-4 Standards for Institutional and Community Service Uses
7-5 Standards for Recreational Uses
7-6 Standards for Commercial Uses
7-7 Standards for Industrial, Trade, Warehouse, and Utility Uses
7-8 Uses Not Specifically Covered By This Schedule
7-9 Special Parking Considerations for the CBD District
7-10 Space on Same Lot
7-11 Alternate Location by Special Use Permit
7-12 Cooperative Parking
7-13 Proximity to Municipal Parking Lots
7-14 Safe and Convenient Access
7-15 Design Requirements for Residential Parking Lots
7-16 Design Requirements for Industrial and Commercial Parking Lots
7-17 Parking Space Size
7-18 Required Off Street Loading and Unloading Space
7-19 Handicapped Parking
7-20 Minimum Stacking Space Requirements
Article 8 Landscaping Requirements
8-1 Legislative Intent
8-2 Applicability
8-2.1 Site Development Plans
8-2.2 Parking Lots and Streets
8-3 Review Procedures
8-4 Landscape Plan Requirements
8-4.1 Landscape Plan Required
8-4.2. Information Required on Landscape Plan
8-5 Street Tree Planting
8-5.1 Street Tree Planting Required
8-5.2 Responsibility for Planting and Maintenance
8-5.3 Location of Street Trees
8-5.4 Where Parking Lots abut public street rights of way
8-5.5 Street Tree Standards
8-5.6 Street Tree Specifications
i - 5 Updated April 2019
8-5.7 Planting Space Requirements
8-6 Parking Lot Landscaping
8-6.1 Perimeter Parking Lot Landscaping
8-6.2 Interior Parking Lot Landscaping
8-6.3 Parking Lot Planting Specifications
8-7 Tree Species
8-7.1 Acceptable Tree Species
8-7.2 Unacceptable Species
8-7.3 Plantings within Stormwater Facilities and Drainage Structures
8-7.4 Noxious and Invasive Species
8-8 Screening and Buffer Yards
8-8.1 Application
8-8.2 Visual Screening
8-8.3 Buffer Yards, General Requirements
8-8.4 Uses Requiring Buffer Yards
8-8.5 Screening and Buffer Yard Specifications [table]
8-9 Conservation of Heritage and Specimen Trees
8-9.1 Registry of Heritage and Specimen Trees
8-9.2 Exemptions
8-9.3 Removal of Heritage and Specimen Trees
8-10 Retention and Replacement of Trees
8-10.1 Exemptions
8-10.2 Retention of Existing Trees
8-10.3 Tree Replacement Requirements
8-10.4 Tree Protection Zones
8-10.5 Trees Permitted to be Removed are not Considered as Existing Trees
8-10.6 Site Development Procedures
8-11 Planting Procedures
8-12 Maintenance Responsibilities
8-13 Penalties for Unauthorized Removal
Article 9 Supplemental Use Regulations
9-1 Accessory Structures and Uses; Parcel Limitations
9-2 Additional Regulations Where a Grouping or More than One Use is Planned for a Tract
9-3 Affordable Dwelling Unit Provisions
9-4 Apartment Buildings, Special Regulations
9-5 Bed and Breakfast Facilities
9-6 Cluster Development Provisions
9-7 Home Occupations and Home Businesses
9-8 Lighting
9-9 Manufacturing Buildings, Special Regulations
9-10 Mobile Homes (Manufactured Homes)
9-11 Office and Other Business Buildings, Special Regulations
9-12 Open Space
9-13 Outdoor Display
9-14 Performance Standards for All Non-Residential Uses
9-15 Recycling Facilities
9-16 Residential Use Limitations
9-17 Steep Slopes
9-18 Telecommunications Facilities
9-19 Temporary Uses
i - 6 Updated April 2019
9-20 Traditional Neighborhood Development Option (TND)
9-21 Utility Lots
9-22 Yard and Garage Sales
9-23 Massage Therapy, Establishment of Provisions for Therapists and Businesses
9-24 Mobile Food Vendors
Article 10 Site Development Plans
10-1 Purposes and Intent
10-2 Development or Land Use Requiring a Site Development Plan
10-3 Presubmission Meeting Required
10-4 Site Development Plan - Information Required
10-5 Site Development Plan - Preparation Procedure and Specific Items to be Shown
10-6 Minimum Standards and Improvements Required
10-7 Administration and Procedures for Processing Site Development Plans
10-8 Required Bonds and Surety
10-9 As-Built Site Plans Required
Article 11 Administration, Procedures and Enforcement
11-1 Administration
11-2 Board of Zoning Appeals
11-2.1 General Provisions (Purpose, Authority and Membership)
11-2.2 Rules and Regulations
11-2.3 Powers and Duties
11-3 Procedures for Application Review and Approval
11-3.1 Types of Permit Applications
11-3.2 Public Hearing Procedures
11-3.3 Land Disturbance Permit
11-3.4 Zoning Permits
11-3.5 Building Permits
11-3.6 Occupancy Permit
11-3.7 Site Development Plan
11-3.8 Commission Permit (“2232 Review”)
11-3.9 Zoning Amendments
11-3.10 Special Use Permits
11-3.11 Variances
11-3.12 Appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals
11-4 Non-Conforming Uses and Structures
11-5 Enforcement and Penalties
Article 12 Definitions
Article 1 Title, Purpose and Authority
Contents (Sections)
1-1 Title
1-2 Authority
1-3 Purpose
1-4 Legislative Intent
1-5 Applicability
1-6 Validity of Ordinance
1-7 Conflicting Ordinances
1-8 Severability
1-9 Amendments
1-10 Effective Date
1-1 Title.
This Ordinance, and the official Zoning Map which is a part thereof, shall be known as and may be
cited and referred to as, the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Warrenton, Virginia.
1-2 Authority.
By act of the General Assembly of Virginia as provided in § 15.2-2280 of the Code of Virginia, any
locality may, by ordinance, classify the territory under its jurisdiction or any substantial portion
thereof into districts of such number, shape and size as it may deem best suited to carry out the
purposes of this article, and in each district it may regulate, restrict, permit, prohibit, and determine
the following:
1. The use of land, buildings, structures and other premises for agricultural, business, industrial,
residential, flood plain and other specific uses;
2. The size, height, area, bulk, location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
maintenance, razing, or removal of structures;
3. The areas and dimensions of land, water, and air space to be occupied by buildings, structures and
uses, and of courts, yards, and other open spaces to be left unoccupied by uses and structures,
including variations in the sizes of lots based on whether a public or community water supply or
sewer system is available and used; or
4. The excavation or mining of soil or other natural resources.
1-3 Purpose.
The Town Council of the Town of Warrenton, Virginia, hereby ordains that for the purpose of
promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of the public, and of further accomplishing the
objectives of § 15.2-2283 of the Code of Virginia, that Chapter 20 of the Code of the Town of
1 - 1
Warrenton entitled "Zoning Ordinance" be amended. In accord with the State Code, this Ordinance
has been designed:
1.3.1. to provide adequate light, air, convenience of access, and safety from fire, flood, crime and
other dangers;
1.3.2. to reduce or prevent congestion in the public streets;
1.3.3. to facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive, and harmonious community;
1.3.4. to facilitate the provision of adequate police and fire protection, disaster evacuation, civil
defense, transportation, water, sewerage, flood protection, schools, parks, forests,
playgrounds, recreational facilities, airports, and other public requirements;
1.3.5 to protect against destruction of or encroachment upon historic areas;
1.3.6. to protect against the overcrowding of land, undue density in population in relation to the
community facilities existing or available, obstruction of light and air, danger and congestion
in travel and transportation, or loss of life, health, or property from fire, flood, panic, or other
dangers;
1.3.7. to encourage economic development activities that provide desirable employment and
enlarge the tax base.
1.3.8. to provide for the preservation of lands of significance for the protection of the natural
environment; and
1.3.9. to promote the creation and preservation of affordable housing suitable for meeting the
current and future needs of the locality as well as a reasonable proportion of the current and
future needs of the planning district within which the locality is situated.
1-4 Legislative Intent.
The fundamental intent of the Town of Warrenton's Zoning Ordinance is to implement the purposes set
forth in Section 1-3 of this Ordinance as well as the adopted Comprehensive Plan for the Town of
Warrenton, Virginia. It is the Town Council’s intent that physical development within the Town
proceed according to the regulations outlined in the subsequent articles.
1-5 Applicability.
The regulations and restrictions in this Ordinance shall apply to all buildings, structures, land, water
and uses within the incorporated area of the Town of Warrenton, Virginia, excepting those areas
determined by law to be under the sole and sovereign control of the United States of America or the
Commonwealth of Virginia.
1-6 Validity of Ordinance.
Should any section of provisions of this Ordinance be decided by the Courts to be unconstitutional or
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other
than the part so decided to be unconstitutional or invalid.
1 - 2
1-7 Conflicting Ordinances.
It is not intended by this Ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul, or interfere with any existing
ordinance or enactment, or with any rule, regulation, or permit adopted or issued thereunder, except
insofar as the same may be inconsistent or in conflict with any of the provisions of this Ordinance,
provided that where this Ordinance imposes greater restriction upon the use of buildings or land, or
upon the height and bulk of buildings, or prescribes larger open spaces than are required by the
provisions of such ordinance, enactment, rule, regulation, or permit, then the provisions of this
Ordinance shall control.
1-8 Severability.
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be decided by the courts to be unconstitutional or
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity or application of the remainder of the Ordinance as
a whole or any part thereof.
1-9 Amendments.
1-9.1 All conflicting ordinances or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this
Ordinance are hereby repealed.
1-9.2 At the effective date of this Ordinance, the previously existing Town of Warrenton Zoning
Ordinance is hereby amended as contained in the amendments adopted, and this Ordinance
replaces it in its entirety. Further, all property in the Town of Warrenton shall retain its
zoning district classification, , except as amended and otherwise adopted in conjunction with
the Ordinance amendments adopted on the effective date.
1-10 Effective Date.
The “effective date” of the Ordinance shall be from the adoption of the comprehensive amendments on
February 14, 2006, 12:01 a.m., and these provisions shall be in force thereafter until repealed.
1 - 3
2 - 1 Updated December 2019
Article 2 General Provisions
Amended by Town Council: December 9, 2014
December 11, 2018
April 9, 2019
December 10, 2019
Table of Contents
2-1 Application and Prohibition
2-2 Compliance with Chapter Required
2-3 Exemptions
2-4 Public Facilities Manual
2-5 Zoning of Annexed Territory
2-6 Calculation of Density
2-7 Authorization for Constructing Public Facilities
2-8 Provisions Are Minimum Requirements
2-9 Interpretation of Terms
2-10 Uses Not Permitted are Prohibited
2-11 Adding Unspecified Uses
2-12 Zoning Map and District Boundaries
2-13 Methods of Measuring Lots, Yards and Related Terms
2-14 Lots and Yard Requirements
2-15 Relationship to Private Agreements
2-16 Conditional Zoning
2-17 Condominium Conversion
2-18 Encroachments in Required Yards
2-19 Fences and Walls
2-20 Height Regulations
2-21 Obstruction to Vision at Intersections Prohibited
2-22 Removal of Top Soil [see also Articles 4 and 5]
2-23 Districts Established
2 - 2 Updated December 2019
Article 2 General Provisions
2-1 Application and Prohibition
2-1.1 General Application
All buildings and structures erected hereafter, all uses of land, water or buildings
established hereafter, all structural alterations or relocations of existing buildings
occurring hereafter, and all enlargements of, additions to, changes in and relocations of
existing uses occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this Ordinance
which are applicable to the zoning districts in which such buildings, structures, uses or
land are located. Existing buildings, structures and uses which comply with the
regulations of this Ordinance shall likewise be subject to all regulations of this
Ordinance.
Existing lawful buildings, structures and uses which do not comply with regulations
herein shall be subject to Section 11-4 of this Ordinance relating to nonconformities.
2-1.2 General Prohibition
No building or structure, no use of any building, structure or land, and no lot of record
now or hereafter existing shall hereafter be established, altered, moved, diminished,
divided, eliminated or maintained in any manner except in conformity with the provisions
of this Ordinance.
2-2 Compliance with Chapter Required
2-2.1 Compliance with chapter generally
1 No building, structure or land shall be used or occupied, and no building or structure
or part thereof shall be constructed, except in conformity with all of the regulations
specified in this Ordinance for the district in which it is located.
2 No building or other structure shall be erected or altered:
1) To exceed the height or bulk specified in this Ordinance.
2) To accommodate or house a greater number of families than permitted by this
Ordinance.
3) To occupy a greater percentage of lot area than specified in this Ordinance.
4) To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open
space than required by this Ordinance.
5) In any other manner contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance.
2 - 3 Updated December 2019
2-2.2 Compliance with Ordinance in issuance of permits and licenses
All departments, officials and public employees of the Town vested with the duty or
authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the provisions of this Ordinance.
They shall issue permits or licenses for uses, buildings or purposes only when they are in
harmony with the provisions of this Ordinance. Any such permit or license, if issued in
conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance, shall be null and void.
2-3 Exemptions
The following are exempt from this Ordinance:
2-3.1 Electrical transmission lines of 150 kV or more, approved by the State Corporation
Commission.
2-3.2 Poles, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, valves, meters or any other similar
equipment when used for the purpose of distributing service to individual customers
within an approved or established service area, but not including telecommunications
towers, plants or substations.
2-3.3 The height limitations of this Ordinance shall not apply to cupolas, barns, silos, farm
buildings, chimneys, flag poles, water tanks, and monuments and necessary mechanical
appurtenances not exceeding in height the distance therefrom to the nearest lot line.
2-4 Public Facilities Manual
2-5.1 The Town of Warrenton Public Facilities Manual, as amended by Town Council of the
Town of Warrenton, is hereby incorporated herein by reference in the Zoning and
Subdivision Ordinances as though set out in full herein.
2-5.2 All utility systems shall be designed and constructed in accord with the Town of
Warrenton Public Facilities Manual.
2-5 Zoning of Annexed Territory
2-5.1 Any property annexed or boundary adjusted into the corporate limits, hereinafter referred
to as the “annexed property”, which was zoned in Fauquier County for a density more
intense than one (1) dwelling unit per acre, after the effective date of the Zoning
Ordinance shall immediately upon the effective date of such annexation or boundary
adjustment be reclassified to the R-15 Zoning District pursuant to Article 3 of the Zoning
Ordinance.
2-5.2 Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the annexed property was zoned in Fauquier County
2 - 4 Updated December 2019
with a density equal to or less intense than one (1) dwelling unit per acre, the annexed
property shall immediately upon the effective date of such annexation or boundary
adjustment be reclassified to the R-E Zoning District, pursuant to Article 3 of this Zoning
Ordinance.
2-5.3 Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2-5.1 and 2-5.2, if the annexed property was
zoned in Fauquier County to a commercial district, the annexed property shall
immediately upon the effective date of such annexation or boundary adjustment be
reclassified to the C Zoning District pursuant to Article 3 of the Zoning Ordinance.
2-5.4 The Planning Commission shall prepare and present a recommended zoning classification
of any annexed property to the Town Council within twelve (12) months of the effective
date of such annexation or boundary adjustment.
2-6 Calculation of Density
2-6.1 Maximum Density. The maximum density specified in this Ordinance for a given zoning
district shall not be exceeded. Calculations of development density, including lot, lot
area, parent tract, net and gross density for residential development and other such terms,
shall be made in accord with the formulas provided within the definitions of those terms
in Article 12 of this Ordinance.
2-7 Authorization for Constructing Public Facilities
No public facility shall be constructed, established or authorized unless and until it has been
reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission as provided by Section 15.2-2232 of the
Virginia Code, as being in substantial accord with the Town’s adopted Comprehensive Plan.
Repair, reconstruction, improvement and normal, minor service extensions of public facilities or
public corporation facilities, unless involving a change in the location or extent of a street or
public area shall be deemed to be in accordance with Section 15.2-2232 of the Virginia Code.
For purposes of this section, widening, extension, enlargement or change of use of public streets,
public facilities or public areas shall not be excepted from the requirement of review for
Comprehensive Plan conformity.
2-8 Provisions Are Minimum Requirements
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be the minimum requirements to promote and the public
health, safety and general welfare.
2-9 Interpretation of Terms
For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain words and terms are to be interpreted as defined in
2 - 5 Updated December 2019
Article 12.
In case of any dispute over the meaning of a word, phrase or sentence, whether defined in this
Ordinance or not, the Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized to make a definitive
determination thereof, being guided in such determination by the purposes and intent of this
Ordinance, as set forth in Article 1; provided, that an appeal may be taken from any such
determination as provided in Article 11 of this Ordinance.
2-10 Uses Not Permitted are Prohibited
For the purpose of this Ordinance, permitted uses are listed for the various districts. Unless it is
otherwise clear from the context of the lists or other regulations of this Ordinance, uses not
specifically listed are prohibited.
In case of any dispute as to whether a use is permitted in any district, the Zoning Administrator is
hereby authorized to make a definitive determination thereof, being guided in such determination
by the purposes and intent of this chapter, as set forth in Article 10 and by the purposes and intent
of the particular district, provided that an appeal may be taken from any such determination as
provided in Article 11 of this Ordinance.
2-11 Adding Unspecified Uses
Uses other than those allowed in the applicable district may be added to a district only upon
adoption of a text amendment approved by the Town Council, pursuant to the amendment
procedures set forth in Article 11 of this Ordinance.
2-12 Zoning Map and District Boundaries
2-12.1 The Town is divided into the Zoning Districts set forth in Article 2, and defined in
Articles 3 of this Ordinance, and as shown on the map entitled “Zoning Map, Town of
Warrenton, Virginia”, together with all explanatory matters thereon.
2-12.2 The Zoning Map shall be located in the office of the Zoning Administrator and shall be
the final authority as to the current zoning classification of land and water areas,
buildings and other structures in the Town except for subsequent amendments enacted by
the Town Council and not yet officially recorded on said map.
2-12.3 No changes of any kind shall be made to the Zoning Map except in conformity with the
procedures and requirements of this Ordinance.
2-12.4 Determination of district boundaries
Unless district boundary lines are fixed by dimensions or otherwise clearly shown or
2 - 6 Updated December 2019
described, and where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the
districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
2-12.4.1 Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following or being
at right angles to the center lines of streets, highways, alleys or railroad main
tracks, such center line of the right-of-way or prescriptive easement or lines
at right angles to such center lines shall be construed to be such boundaries,
as the case may be.
2-12.4.2 Where a district boundary is indicated to follow the shoreline of a river,
creek, branch, pond, lake or other body of water, such boundary shall be
construed to follow the shoreline at low water or at the limit of the
jurisdiction, and if there is a change in the shoreline, such boundary shall be
construed as moving with the actual shoreline. Where a district boundary is
indicated to follow the centerline of a river, creek, branch or other body of
water, such boundary shall be construed to follow the centerline at low water
or at the limit of the jurisdiction, and if there is a change in the shoreline,
such boundary shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline.
2-12.4.3 Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be
construed as following such lot lines.
2-12.4.4 If no distance, angle, curvature description or other means is given to
determine a boundary line accurately and the foregoing provisions do not
apply, the zoning district shall be determined by the use of the scale shown
on the zoning map.
2-12.4.5 If uncertainties continue to exist after the other provisions of this section are
exhausted, the question of the property’s zoning district shall be presented to
the Zoning Administrator for interpretation and be so noted on the Map. In
case of subsequent dispute, the matter may be appealed to the Board of
Zoning Appeals in accord with the procedures set forth in Article 11.
2-13 Methods of Measuring Lots, Yards and Related Terms
2-13.1 Regular lots, width measurements
The width of a regular lot shall be determined by measurement across the lot at the depth
of the required front yard or building setback line. The distance between side lot lines at
the points where they intersect with a street line (front lot line) shall be not less than
eighty percent of the required width of the lot.
However, in cases where lots front on curved or circular (cul-de-sac) streets, the radii of
2 - 7 Updated December 2019
which do not exceed ninety feet, the distances between side lot lines where they intersect
with the street line (front lot line) may be reduced to sixty percent of the required lot
width, measured in a straight line between the points where side lot lines extended
intersect the street line.
2-13.2 Regular lots, determination of front yard
2-13.2.1 On regular interior lots, the front shall be construed to be the portion nearest
the street or access road.
2-13.2.2 On regular corner lots, the front shall be construed to be the shortest
boundary fronting on a street. If the lot has equal frontage on two or more
streets, the front lot shall be determined and shown on the subdivision plat or
site plan.
2-13.2.3 On regular through corner lots, the front shall be construed to be the shorter
boundary fronting the street, provided that if the shortest boundary fronting
on a street is eighty percent or more of the length of the longest boundary
fronting on a street, the applicant may select either frontage providing the lot
width requirements are met.
2-13.2.4 On regular through lots, the front shall be construed to be the shorter
boundary fronting on a street. If the lot has equal frontage on two streets, the
front of the lot shall be determined and shown on all subdivision plats and
site plans by the prevailing building pattern, or the prevailing lot pattern if a
building pattern has not been established.
2-13.3 Regular lots, yards adjacent to street
2-13.3.1 Front yards of at least the depth required by setback requirements in the
district shall be provided across the entire frontage of a regular lot.
2-13.3.2 Other yards adjacent to streets shall be provided across or along the entire
portion of the lot adjacent to the street.
2-13.3.3 Rear yards on interior regular lots
Rear yards on interior regular lots shall be provided of at least the depth
required for the district, and shall run across the full width of the lot at the
rear. Depth of a required rear yard shall be measured in such a manner that
the yard is a strip of land with minimum depth required by district
regulations with its inner edge parallel with its outer edge.
2-13.3.4 Side yards on regular lots
2 - 8 Updated December 2019
Side yards on regular lots are defined as extending from the required front
yard line (setback line) to the required rear yard line. On regular through lots
the required side yard shall run from the required front yard line to the
second required front yard line. On corner lots the required side yards shall
run from the point where side yard lines intersect, to the required front yard
lines.
2-13.4 Irregular lots, dimensional requirements
An irregular lot, as defined herein, shall be required to meet the dimensional
requirements of the district.
2-13.5 Irregular lots, yard requirements
All yards shall meet the yard requirements of the district.
2-13.6 Setback Measurement from streets
All setbacks from public streets shall be measured from the front property line, which is
the same as the street line or the front right-of-way.
2-13.7 The depth of required yards adjacent to streets shall be measured perpendicular or
radially to such street lines, and the inner line of such required yards shall be parallel to
the outer line.
2-13.8 If no dedicated right-of-way exists, if no construction plans are approved for the road, or
if less than the minimum right-of-way exists, the right-of way shall be assumed to be the
edge of the existing travel way.
2-13.9 For corner lots, the front lot line shall be deemed to be the shortest of the two (2) sides
fronting on streets.
2-13.10 For corner lots, the side yard setback adjacent to the side street shall be not less than the
average of the side and front setbacks required for the lot.
2-13.11 For corner lots, the lot width along the side street shall be in conformity with the
minimum lot width requirements for the respective use.
2-14 Lots and Yard Requirements
2-14.1 Frontage Regulations
Except as provided elsewhere in this Ordinance with respect to townhouses, cluster
2 - 9 Updated December 2019
developments, and Planned Unit Developments, no lot shall be used in whole or in part
unless such lot abuts upon a public street in accord with the minimum frontage
regulations of this Ordinance. No lot or parcel of land abutting the terminus of a public
street shall be deemed to comply with the frontage regulations unless such lot abuts on an
approved permanent cul-de-sac.
2-14.2 Location on a Lot Required
Every building hereafter erected, reconstructed, converted, moved, or altered, other than
accessory buildings as defined and other than townhouses, cluster developments, and
Planned Unit Developments, shall be located on a lot of record and in no case shall there
be more than one principal building on one lot unless otherwise provided for in this
Ordinance. Uses otherwise provided for include multiple-family housing, commercial
and office centers and complexes, industrial uses, and institutional complexes.
2-14.3 Lot Access Requirements
All structures requiring a building permit shall be erected on lots which have frontage on
a public road, unless otherwise specified or provided for herein, or in the Subdivision
Ordinance.
2-14.4. Definitions of Lots and Yards
All types of lots and yards shall be defined as provided in Articles 3 and 12 herein.
2-14.5. Principal Use
Only one principal use or structure shall be permitted on a lot unless otherwise
specifically provided for herein. Additional buildings may be permitted, but shall be
designated as secondary or subordinate to the principal use.
2-14.6 Required yards and other areas
No part of a yard or other open space, area, or off-street parking or loading space,
required in connection with any building or use for the purpose of complying with this
Ordinance shall be included as part of a yard, open space area or off-street parking or
loading space similarly required for any other building or use, unless otherwise
specifically provided for in this Ordinance.
2-14.7. Reductions below minimum requirements of chapter
No lot, area, or yard existing prior to the adoption of this Ordinance shall be reduced in
dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth in this Ordinance. Any lot,
2 - 10 Updated December 2019
area, or yard created after the adoption of this Ordinance shall meet at least the minimum
requirements established by this Ordinance.
2-15 Relationship to Private Agreements
This Ordinance is not intended to abrogate, annul or otherwise interfere with any easement,
covenant or other private agreement or legal relationship, provided, however, that where the
regulations of this Ordinance are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than
such private agreements or legal relationships, the regulations of this Ordinance shall govern.
The Town bears no responsibility for enforcing any private easements, covenants or other such
agreements to which the Town is not a party.
2-16 Conditional Zoning
As part of a petition to rezone property and amend the official zoning maps, the property owner
may include voluntary proffers in writing placing certain conditions and restrictions on the use
and development of such property. If a petition to rezone is approved, the Zoning Administrator
is vested with all necessary authority to administer and enforce such conditions and restrictions,
all in accordance with Sections 15.2-2296 et seq., of the Code of Virginia, and such sections are
incorporated herein as a part hereof to the same extent and purpose as though such sections were
herein fully set out at length.
2-17 Condominium Conversion
In all zoning districts, a structure or use may convert to condominium ownership only if all
requirements of this Ordinance, the Subdivision Ordinance, the comprehensive plan, and all other
applicable ordinances are met.
2-18 Encroachments in Required Yards
The following features, and no others, may extend into required minimum yard areas, but only as
qualified below.
2-18.1 Cornices, canopies, awnings, eaves, or other such similar feature, all of which are at least
ten (10) feet above grade, may extend three (3) feet into any required setback but not
nearer to any lot line than a distance of two (2) feet. This provision shall not apply to
permanent canopies over gasoline pump islands which have supports located on the pump
island. Such canopies may extend into minimum required front yards, providing they do
not overhang travel lanes or, if no travel lanes exist, they shall not be located closer than
twenty-two (22) feet from the right-of-way line.
2-18.2 Sills, headers, belt courses, and similar ornamental features may extend twelve (12)
inches into any required setback.
2 - 11 Updated December 2019
2-18.3 Bay windows, oriels, balconies, and chimneys not more than ten (10) feet in width may
extend three (3) feet into any required front or side setback, ten (10) feet into any
required rear setback, but not nearer to any lot line than a distance of five (5) feet.
2-18.4 An outside stairway, unenclosed above and below its steps, may extend four (4) feet into
any required side or rear setback, but not nearer to any side lot line than a distance of six
(6) feet.
2-18.5 Decks may not project into any required front yard or side yard, but may project into rear
yards by not more than one-half of the required rear yard setback, provided that no deck
extends closer than 10 feet to any rear property line. Decks built within such
encroachments may not be covered or enclosed. Decks or patios of a height of 18 inches
or less as measured from the point of lowest grade are not subject to any setbacks.
2-18.6 Open fire escapes of noncombustible material may project into side or rear yards by not
more than four (4) feet and no closer to any property line than five (5) feet.
2-18.7 Front porches may project into any required front yard by not more than six feet into the
required yard setback, not more than three feet into required side yard setback and into
not more than ten feet into the required rear yard setback.
2-19 Fences and Walls
2-19.1 Fences and walls may be erected up to a height of six (6) feet in all zoning districts,
except for fences or walls that extend within the required front setback, unless otherwise
restricted by the ARB within the Historic District. Within the area bounded by the front
setback and the side lot lines, fences and walls shall not exceed four (4) feet in height,
unless otherwise restricted by the provisions of this Ordinance. Excluded are walls or
fences encompassing swimming pools or other uses which are required by law.
2-19.2 Fences along the side yard of a corner lot shall meet the side yard setback requirements
within the front setback.
2-19.3 In residential developments of five (5) or more dwelling units, fencing should be uniform
throughout the development and shall be in accord with Article 8 of this Ordinance.
2-19.4 Retaining Walls shall not exceed a height of six (6) feet in any zoning district unless
approved by the Planning Director. Any wall exceeding that height that is accessible to
residential or pedestrian areas must have a safety railing along the top of the wall.
2 - 12 Updated December 2019
2-20 Height Regulations
Buildings may be erected up to the maximum height as allowed in the Zoning District within
which it is located, except that:
- The height limit for dwellings may be increased up to forty-five (45) feet and up to three (3)
stories provided that front, side, and rear yard setbacks increase one (1) foot for each
additional foot of building height over thirty-five (35) feet.
- A public or semi-public building such as a school, church, or library may be erected to a
height of sixty (60) feet from grade provided that required front, side, and rear yards shall be
increased one (1) foot for each foot in height over thirty-five (35) feet.
- Church spires, belfries, cupolas, municipal water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles, and
television antennae are exempt. Parapet walls may be up to four (4) feet above the height of
the building on which the walls rest.
- No accessory building which is within twenty (20) feet of any party lot line shall be more
than fifteen (15) feet high. All accessory buildings shall be less than the main building in
height.
- No signs, nameplate, or advertising device of any kind shall be installed upon or attached to
any chimney, tower, tank, or structure of like kind which is permitted to extend above the
height limits of the district in which it is located.
2-21 Obstruction to Vision at Intersections Prohibited
No shrubbery, sign, fence or other similar obstruction to vision between the heights of two and
one half (2.5) and ten (10) feet from the ground level shall be permitted within the distance
required to provide adequate sight distance to meet Virginia Department of Transportation
requirements and included in Article 6.
2-22 Removal of Top Soil [see also Articles 4 and 5]
The retention of adequate top soil on the land within the Town is considered necessary for the
general welfare of the Town. The permanent removal of topsoil from the land within the Town
shall be regulated, as set forth in the Town’s Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance and Site
Conservation Manual, incorporated as Article 4 of the Zoning Ordinance. Urban Best
Management Practices shall be utilized to stabilize disturbed areas and reduce runoff volumes and
sedimentation.
A land disturbance permit is required when disturbing or clearing an area in excess of 2,000
square feet for any purpose, including, but not limited to, structures, borrow pits, ponds, and
2 - 13 Updated December 2019
driveways, except as exempted in Articles 4 and 5 of this ordinance.
These activities are regulated in accordance with Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Laws
§§ 62.1-44.2 through 62.1-44.34:28; Virginia Water Quality Management Planning Regulations
9VAC25-720, and Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations 9VAC25-840, as adopted
by the Virginia Water Control Board and administered by the Virginia Department of
Environmental Quality (DEQ). All of these laws and regulations and any future updates of the
aforementioned sections are also adopted as a part of this Ordinance.
2-23 Districts Established
For the purposes of this chapter, the Town is hereby divided into the following districts:
Regular (Base) Districts:
R-15 Residential District
R-10 Residential District
R-6 Residential District
RT Residential Townhouse District
RMF Residential Multifamily District
R-40 Residential District
R-E Residential District
RO Residential Office District
PSP Public-Semi-Public Institutional District
C Commercial District
CBD Central Business District
I Industrial District
Overlay and Special Districts:
FPD Flood Plain District
PUD Planned Unit Development District
HD Historic District
3 - 1 Updated December 2020
Article 3 Zoning Districts and Map
Amended by Town Council: March 11, 2008
February 12, 2013
April 12, 2016
June 14, 2016
August 9, 2016
December 11, 2018
August 11, 2020
Contents (Sections)
3-1 Zoning Districts Established
3-1.1 Base Districts
3-1.2 Overlay Districts
3-2 Zoning Map
3-3 Zoning District Boundaries
3-4 Requirements for Base Zoning Districts
3-4.1 R-15 Residential District
3-4.2 R-10 Residential District
3-4.3 R-6 Residential District
3-4.4 RT Residential Townhouse District
3-4.5 RMF Residential Multifamily District
3-4.6 R-40 Residential District
3-4.7 R-E Residential District
3-4.8 RO Residential Office District
3-4.9 PSP Public-Semi-Public Institutional District
3-4.10 C Commercial District
3-4.11 CBD Central Business District
3-4.12 I Industrial District
3-5 Requirements for Overlay Zoning Districts
3-5.1 FPD - Floodplain District
3-5.2 PUD - Planned Unit Development District
3-5.3 HD - Historic District
3 - 2 Updated December 2020
Article 3 Zoning Districts and Map
3-1 Zoning Districts Established
3-1.1 Base Districts
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the incorporated area of Warrenton, Virginia, is
divided into the following base zoning districts. It is not required that every district be
shown on the Zoning Map at any given time. Districts will be shown on the Zoning Map
in accord with map amendments adopted by the Town Council.
R-15 Residential District
R-10 Residential District
R-6 Residential District
RT Residential Townhouse District
RMF Residential Multifamily District
R-40 Residential District
R-E Residential District
RO Residential Office District
PSP Public-Semi-Public Institutional District
C Commercial District
CBD Central Business District
I Industrial District
3-1.2 Overlay Districts
The following overlay zoning districts are established:
FPD Flood Plain District
PUD Planned Unit Development
HD Historic District
3-2 Zoning Map
The boundaries of the districts listed in Section 3-1 shall be as delineated upon the map entitled,
"Zoning Map: Town of Warrenton, Virginia" which is a part of this Ordinance. The map and all
notations, references, and other data shown thereon shall be made part of this Ordinance, as if the
matters and data shown by the map were fully described herein.
3 - 3 Updated December 2020
3-3 Zoning District Boundaries
The boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise indicated, either the center line of streets,
lanes, alleys, or railroads; shorelines of streams, watercourses, reservoirs, or other bodies of
water; property lines; and the center line of right-of-ways of power lines and other public utilities.
Where uncertainly exists as to the location of any district boundaries as shown on the Zoning
Map, the following rules shall apply:
3-3.1 Where a district boundary is indicated as approximately following the center line of a
lake or watercourse, or the right-of-way of a street, lane, power line or other public
utility, the center line or right-of-way boundary shall be construed to be the district
boundary.
3-3.2 Where a district boundary is indicated as approximately following a lot line or other
property line, such lot line or property line shall be considered the district boundary.
3-3.3 Where a district boundary divides a lot or runs through individual property, the location
of such boundary, unless otherwise specified by figures on the Zoning Map, shall be
determined by the use of the scale appearing on the Zoning Map.
3-3.4 Where figures are shown on the Zoning Map between a street and a district boundary,
they shall indicate that the district boundary runs parallel to the street line at a distance
therefrom equivalent to the number of feet so indicated, unless specified. In the event
scale distances do not agree with such figures, the figures shall control.
3-4 Requirements for Base Zoning Districts
3-4.1 R-15 Residential District
3-4.1.1 Legislative Intent
This district is composed of low density, single-family dwellings and other uses
which are customarily incidental to them. This district is designed to implement
the Town’s Comprehensive Plan and stabilize and protect the essential lowdensity
residential characteristics of the district, by encouraging a suitable
environment for family life and by prohibiting all activities of a commercial
nature except home occupations.
To these ends, development is limited to relatively low densities and permitted
uses are limited to single-family dwellings, plus certain compatible uses by
special use permit. In order to provide flexibility in adapting new development
3 - 4 Updated December 2020
to the natural constraints of a site, provisions are allowed for residential units to
be clustered in return for the preservation of additional open space on the site.
3-4.1.2 Permitted Uses (by-right)
- Accessory buildings.
- Group Homes of eight (8) residents or less
- Home occupations.
- Off-street parking for permitted uses subject to Article 7.
- Open space subject to Article 9.
- Public utilities and their facilities, including poles, wires, transformers,
underground pipelines or conduits but not those facilities listed as requiring a
special use permit.
- Signs subject to Article 6.
- Single-family detached dwelling units.
- Yard sale or garage sale
3-4.1.3 Permissible Uses (by special use permit approved by the Town Council, in
accord with Article 11)
- Accessory dwelling units [moved]
- Active and passive recreation and recreational facilities.
- Bed and breakfast facility or tourist home.
- Churches
- Cluster Development (see Section 9-6)
- Community buildings.
- Day care center.
- Family care homes or foster homes.
- Golf courses, swim, and tennis clubs.
- Group Homes of more than eight (8) residents
- Home business
- Hospitals and clinics.
- Inn.
- Libraries.
- Nursing or convalescent homes.
- Parks and playgrounds.
- Schools.
- Treatment plants, water storage tanks, major transmission lines or pipelines,
pumping or regulator stations, communications towers, storage yards and
substations, and cable television facilities and accessory buildings.
3 - 5 Updated December 2020
3-4.1.4 Lot and Yard Regulations
Use
Minimum Minimum Maximum Minimum Setbacks
Lot Size
(sq. ft.)
Lot Frontage
(at front setback)
Lot Coverage
(impervious surfaces)
Front Side Rear
Single-Family Dwelling 15,000 90 ft. 65% 25 ft. 12 ft. 35 ft.
Cluster Development 7,500 65 ft. 65% 25 ft. 10 ft. 25 ft.
Other Permitted Uses 15,000 90 ft. 65% 25 ft. 15 ft. 35 ft.
3-4.1.5 Building Regulations
3-4.1.5.1 Building Height
Use Maximum Height
Single-Family Dwellings 35 ft.*
Cluster Development 35 ft.*
Other Permitted Uses 35 ft.**
* The height limit for dwellings may be increased up to forty-five (45)
feet and up to three (3) stories provided that front, side, and rear yard
setbacks increase one (1) foot for each additional foot of building
height over thirty-five (35) feet. This may be achieved in part by
setting back the second and/or third stories of the building a greater
amount than the first story.
** A public or institutional building or church may be erected to a
height of sixty (60) feet from grade provided that required front, side,
and rear yards shall be increased one (1) foot for each foot in height
over thirty-five (35) feet.
3-4.1.5.2 Garages
Front-loaded garages shall be setback at least 15 feet behind the front
building line of the primary structure. Side-loaded garages shall be
no nearer the front lot line than the front edge of the primary
structure. Rear-loaded garages (accessed from an alley or other
street) shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the rear lot line.
3-4.2 R-10 Residential District
3-4.2.1 Legislative Intent
This district is composed of certain low concentrations of residential uses, plus
certain open areas where similar development would be consistent with the
3 - 6 Updated December 2020
provisions of the Town’s Comprehensive Plan. The regulations for this district
are designed to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of the district
and to promote and encourage suitable environment for single-family residential
units and to prohibit all activities of a commercial nature, except neighborhood
professional businesses. To these ends, development is limited to low density
single-unit dwellings, plus certain compatible uses by special use permit. In
order to increase the supply of affordable housing and to recognize the changes
in demography of a neighborhood while continuing to maintain the character of
the district, accessory dwelling units are permitted by special use permit.
An alternative to the precise requirements of this district may be employed,
known as cluster development. The purpose of cluster development is to provide
a more creative and flexible approach to the use of the land, to provide for the
more efficient and economical provision of streets and utilities and to create a
pedestrian-oriented, human scale streetscape.
3-4.2.2 Permitted Uses (by-right)
- Accessory buildings.
- Group Homes of eight (8) residents or less
- Home occupations.
- Off-street parking for permitted uses subject to Article 7.
- Open space subject to Article 9.
- Public utilities including poles, wires, transformers, underground pipelines or
conduits but not those facilities listed as requiring a special use permit.
- Signs subject to Article 6.
- Single-family detached dwelling units.
- Yard sale or garage sale
3-4.2.3 Permissible Uses (by special use permit approved by the Town Council, in
accord with Article 11)
- Accessory dwelling units
- Active and passive recreation and recreational facilities.
- Assisted living facilities
- Cemeteries
- Cluster Development (See Section 9-6)
- Child care center, day care center, or nursery school
- Churches
- Community buildings
- Family care homes or foster homes
- Golf courses, swim, and tennis clubs
- Group Homes of more than eight (8) residents
3 - 7 Updated December 2020
- Home business
- Hospitals and clinics.
- Inn, bed and breakfast facility, or tourist home
- Libraries
- Neighborhood professional business
- Nursing or convalescent homes
- Parks and playgrounds
- Schools
- Traditional Neighborhood Developments
- Treatment plants, water storage tanks, major transmission lines or pipelines,
pumping or regular stations, communications towers, storage yards and
substations, and cable television facilities and accessory buildings
3-4.2.4 Lot and Yard Regulations
Use
Minimum Minimum Maximum Minimum Setbacks
Lot Size
(sq. ft.)
Lot Frontage
(at front setback)
Lot Coverage
(impervious surfaces)
Front Side Rear
Single-Family Dwelling 10,000 75 ft. 65% 25 ft. 10 ft. 20 ft.
Cluster Development 6,000 55 ft. 65% 25 ft. 8 ft. 15 ft.
Other Permitted Uses 10,000 75 ft. 65% 25 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft.
3-4.2.5 Building Regulations
3-4.2.5.1 Building Height
Use Maximum Height
Single-Family Dwellings 35 ft.*
Cluster Development 35 ft.*
Other Permitted Uses 35 ft.**
* The height limit for dwellings may be increased up to forty-five (45)
feet and up to three (3) stories provided that front, side, and rear yard
setbacks increase one (1) foot for each additional foot of building
height over thirty-five (35) feet. This may be achieved in part by
setting back the second and/or third stories of the building a greater
amount than the first story.
** A public or institutional building or church may be erected to a
height of sixty (60) feet from grade provided that required front, side,
and rear yards shall be increased one (1) foot for each foot in height
over thirty-five (35) feet.
3 - 8 Updated December 2020
3-4.2.5.2 Garages
Front-loaded garages shall be setback at least 15 feet behind the front
building line of the primary structure.
Side-loaded garages shall be no nearer the front lot line than the front
edge of the primary structure.
Rear-loaded garages (accessed from an alley or other street) shall be
set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the rear lot line.
3-4.2.5.3 Open Space Requirements
Every site that is rezoned to R-10 or subject to subdivision or site
plan approval consisting of a total of twelve (12) or more residential
units shall have at least one green to serve as open space for and the
focal point and organizing visual element of the neighborhood or
subdivision. Greens in cluster subdivisions shall be not less than
6,000 square feet each and in conventional subdivisions shall be not
less than 10,000 square feet each. An average of one green for each
10 acres of gross site area within the subdivision shall be provided.
3-4.3 R-6 Residential District
3-4.3.1 Legislative Intent
This district is composed of medium to high concentrations of predominantly
residential uses, generally intended to encompass and preserve those residential
structures which have developed over the years along the traffic arteries serving
the Central Business District. The regulations of this district are designed to
stabilize and protect these areas while at the same time allowing compatible
changes to occur in an effort to ensure that the use of these areas is economically
feasible and to implement the Comprehensive Plan.
3-4.3.2 Permitted Uses (by-right)
- Accessory buildings
- Churches
- Community buildings
- Group Homes of eight (8) residents or less
- Home occupations
- Off-street parking for permitted uses subject to Article 7
- Open space subject to Article 9.
- Signs subject to Article 6
- Single-family detached dwelling units
3 - 9 Updated December 2020
- Utilities related to and necessary for services within the Town, including
poles, wires, transformers, telephone booths, and the like for electrical power
distribution or communication service, and underground pipelines or
conduits for local electrical, gas, sewer, or water service, but not those
facilities listed as requiring a special use permit
3-4.3.3 Permissible Uses (by special use permit upon approval of Town Council)
- Active and passive recreation and recreational facilities.
- Bed and breakfast.
- Child care center, day care center or nursery school.
- Clubs
- Dwellings in an accessory building.
- Dwelling units, Two-family
- Dwellings, three or four family structures
- Family care homes or foster homes
- Hospitals and clinics.
- Libraries.
- Nursing Homes
- Offices, business and professional.
- Parks and playgrounds.
- Schools.
- Swim and tennis clubs.
- Tea rooms.
- Traditional Neighborhood Developments
- Treatment plants, water storage tanks, major transmission lines or pipelines,
pumping or regular stations, communications towers, storage yards and
substations, and cable television facilities and accessory structures.
3-4.3.4 Lot and Yard Regulations
Use
Minimum Minimum Maximum Minimum Setbacks
Lot Size
(sq. ft.)
Lot Frontage
(at front setback)
Lot Coverage
(impervious surfaces)
Front Side Rear
Single-Family Dwelling 6,000 55 ft. 65% 20 ft. 8 ft. 20 ft.
Two-Family Dwelling 9,000 65 ft. 75% 20 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft.
Three-Family Dwelling 12,000 75 ft. 80% 20 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft.
Four-Family Dwelling 15,000 85 ft. 80% 20 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft.
Other Permitted Uses 6,000 55 ft. 65% 20 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft.
3 - 10 Updated December 2020
3-4.3.5 Building Regulations
3-4.3.5.1 Building Height
Use Maximum Height
Single-Family Dwellings 35 ft.*
Other Permitted Uses 35 ft.**
* The height limit for dwellings may be increased up to forty-five (45)
feet and up to three (3) stories provided that front, side, and rear yard
setbacks increase one (1) foot for each additional foot of building
height over thirty-five (35) feet. This may be achieved in part by
setting back the second and/or third stories of the building a greater
amount than the first story.
** A public or institutional building or church may be erected to a
height of sixty (60) feet from grade provided that required front, side,
and rear yards shall be increased one (1) foot for each foot in height
over thirty-five (35) feet.
3-4.3.5.2 Garages
Front-loaded garages shall be setback at least fifteen (15) feet behind
the front building line of the primary structure.
Side-loaded garages shall be no nearer the front lot line than the front
edge of the primary structure.
Rear-loaded garages (accessed from an alley or other street) shall be
set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the rear lot line.
3-4.3.5.3 Open Space Requirements
Every site that is rezoned to R-6 or subject to subdivision or site plan
approval consisting of a total of twelve (12) or more residential units
shall have at least one green to serve as open space for and the focal
point and organizing visual element of the neighborhood or
subdivision. Greens shall be not less than 6,000 square feet each.
An average of one green for each 10 acres of gross site area within
the subdivision shall be provided.
3 - 11 Updated December 2020
3-4.4 RT Residential Townhouse District
3-4.4.1 Legislative Intent
This district is composed of certain medium concentrations of residential use,
often located between lower density residential and commercial areas, plus
certain open areas where similar development is appropriate based on the
Comprehensive Plan. The regulations for this district are designed to stabilize
and protect the residential character of the district, and to promote and encourage
a suitable environment of medium to high density residential uses, while
achieving a pedestrian-oriented streetscape.
3-4.4.2 Permitted Uses (by-right)
- Accessory buildings.
- Dwellings, Single-family detached
- Dwellings, Two-family
- Dwellings, Townhouses
- Home occupations
- Off-street parking for permitted uses subject to Article 7.
- Open space subject to Article 9.
- Playgrounds and recreation area, when developed as part of the townhouse
development.
- Signs subject to Article 6.
- Utilities related to and necessary for service within the Town, including
poles, wires, transformers, telephone booths, and the like for electrical power
distribution or communication service, and underground pipelines or
conduits for local electrical, gas, sewer, or water service, but not those
facilities listed as requiring a special use permit.
- Yard sale or garage sale
3-4.4.3 Permissible Uses (by special use permit upon approval of the Town Council)
- Active and passive recreation and recreational facilities.
- Child care center, day care center, or nursery school
- Churches
- Clinics
- Community buildings
- Family care homes, foster homes, or group homes serving physically
handicapped, mentally ill, mentally retarded, or other developmentally
disabled persons
- Golf courses, swim, and tennis clubs
- Home business
3 - 12 Updated December 2020
- Libraries
- Nursing or convalescent homes
- Offices, professional and business if immediately adjacent to a commercial
zoning district
- Schools
- Traditional Neighborhood Developments
- Treatment plants, water storage tanks, major transmission lines or pipelines,
pumping or regulator stations, communications towers, and cable television
facilities and accessory buildings
3-4.4.4 Lot and Yard Regulations
Use
Maximum Minimum Minimum Maximum Minimum Setbacks
Density
(dwellings per
gross acre)
Lot Size
(sq. ft.)
Lot Frontage
(at front setback)
Lot Coverage
(impervious surfaces) Front Side Rear
Single-Family
Dwelling
4.3 10,000 75 ft. 65% 25 ft. 10 ft. 20 ft.
Two-Family
Dwelling
7.0 12,000 70 ft. 50% 25 ft. 15 ft. 25 ft.
Townhouse 7.0 2,000 per unit
20 ft. interior unit
30 ft. end unit
50% 25 ft. 20 ft. 25 ft.
Other
Permitted
Uses
n/a 10,000 none 80% 25 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft.
3-4.4.5 Building Regulations
3-4.4.5.1 Building Height
Use Maximum Height
Single-Family Dwellings 35 ft.*
Other Permitted Uses 35 ft.**
* The height limit for dwellings may be increased up to forty-five (45)
feet and up to three (3) stories provided that front, side, and rear yard
setbacks increase one (1) foot for each additional foot of building
height over thirty-five (35) feet. This may be achieved in part by
setting back the second and/or third stories of the building a greater
amount than the first story.
** A public or institutional building or church may be erected to a
height of sixty (60) feet from grade provided that required front, side,
3 - 13 Updated December 2020
and rear yards shall be increased one (1) foot for each foot in height
over thirty-five (35) feet.
3-4.4.5.2 Garages
3-4.4.5.2.1 Single Family Dwellings
Front-loaded garages shall be setback at least 15 feet behind the
front building line of the primary structure.
Side-loaded garages shall be no nearer the front lot line than the
front edge of the primary structure.
Rear-loaded garages (accessed from an alley or other street) shall be
set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the rear lot line.
3-4.4.5.2.2 Townhouses
Front-loaded and side-loaded garages shall no nearer the front lot
line than the front edge of the primary structure.
Rear-loaded garages (accessed from an alley or other street) shall be
set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the rear lot line.
3-4.4.5.3 Maximum Grouping of Townhouses
No more than six (6) townhouse units shall be grouped contiguous
to each other.
Groups of townhouses shall be separated by at least (twenty) 20 feet
of open space unless rear vehicle access is provided to the units, in
which case minimum separation shall be (ten) 10 feet.
3-4.4.6 Open Space Requirements
Any rezoning or subdivision or site plan approval within the district consisting of
a total of twelve (12) or more residential units shall provide one or more common
open space greens of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet each and totaling
at least four hundred (400) square feet per unit. Such greens shall be located so
as to provide a focal point for the units, with the units fronting the green (s) or
fronting streets that border the green(s).
3 - 14 Updated December 2020
3-4.5 RMF Residential Multifamily District
3-4.5.1 Legislative Intent
This district is composed of certain higher concentrations of residential uses
recommended for those sections of town which are in proximity to the central
business district; which are adjacent to existing intensive land uses; which can be
used as a transitional area between commercial and lower density residential
areas; or which are in need of revitalization. The regulations for this district are
designed to stabilize and protect the residential character of the district, to
promote and encourage a suitable environment for multiple-family residential
units, to implement the Comprehensive Plan, and to encourage streetscape
environments that are safe and efficient for pedestrians.
3-4.5.2 Permitted Uses (by-right)
- Accessory buildings.
- Dwellings for the elderly and handicapped.
- Home Occupation
- Multi-family dwellings at a maximum ten (10) units per gross acre.
- Off-street parking for permitted uses subject to Article 7.
- Open space subject to Article 9.
- Playgrounds and recreation areas, when developed as part of the apartment
development.
- Signs subject to Article 6.
- Single-family dwellings
- Townhouses, duplex units, triplexes, and quadriplexes
- Two-family dwellings
- Utilities related to and necessary for service within the Town, including
poles, wires, transformers, telephone booths, and the like for electrical power
distribution or communication service, and underground pipelines or
conduits for local electrical, gas, sewer, or water service, but not those
facilities listed as requiring a special use permit.
- Yard sale or garage sale
3-4.5.3 Permissible Uses (by special use permit upon approval of Town Council)
- Active and passive recreation and recreational facilities
- Affordable Dwelling Units (ADU) yielding total densities of up to twelve
dwelling units per gross acre or twenty (20) dwelling units per net acre
through a density bonus in accord with Section 3-4.5.5.
- Business and professional offices generally if immediately adjacent to a
commercial zone
3 - 15 Updated December 2020
- Churches
- Clinics
- Community buildings
- Family care homes, foster homes, or group homes serving physically
handicapped, mentally ill, mentally retarded, or other developmentally
disabled persons
- Golf courses, swim, and tennis clubs
- Health and Fitness Facilities
- Home business
- Libraries
- Live-work Units
- Nursing or convalescent homes
- Parking garages
- Public use sites with a density bonus in accord with Section 3-4.5.7.
- Schools
- Traditional Neighborhood Developments (TND) yielding total densities of
up to twelve dwelling units per gross acre or twenty (20) dwelling units per
net acre through a density bonus in accord with Section 3-4.5.6.
- Treatment plants, water storage tanks, major transmission lines or pipelines,
pumping or regulator stations, communications towers, storage yards and
substations, and cable television facilities and accessory buildings
3-4.5.4 Lot and Yard Regulations
Use
Maximum Minimum Minimum Maximum Minimum Setbacks
Density
(dwellings per
gross acre)
Lot Size (sq. ft.) Lot Frontage
(at front setback)
Lot Coverage
(impervious
surfaces)
Front Side Rear
Single-Family
Dwelling 7.3 6,000 55 ft. 65% 25 ft. 8 ft. 15 ft.
Two-Family
dwelling 7.0 12,000 70 ft. 50% 25 ft. 15 ft. 25 ft.
Three-Family
and
Four-Family
7.0 6,000 per unit 70 ft. 50% 25 ft. 15 ft. 25 ft.
Townhouses
and Live-Work
Units
7.0 2,000 per unit
20 ft. interior unit
30 ft. end unit
50% 25 ft. 20 ft. 25 ft.
Triplex 7.0 2,000 per unit
20 ft interior unit
30 ft end unit
50% 25 ft. 20 ft. 25 ft.
Quadriplex 7.0 2,000 per unit
20 ft interior unit
30 ft end unit
50% 25 ft. 20 ft. 25 ft.
Apartments,
Generally 10.0 10,000 150 ft. 50% 25 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft.
3 - 16 Updated December 2020
Use
Maximum Minimum Minimum Maximum Minimum Setbacks
Density
(dwellings per
gross acre)
Lot Size (sq. ft.) Lot Frontage
(at front setback)
Lot Coverage
(impervious
surfaces)
Front Side Rear
Apartments,
with Density
Bonus
12 (20 net) 10,000 150 ft. 50% 25 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft.
Apartments,
Elderly or
handicapped
25
6,000 sq. ft. for first
unit, plus
3,000 sq. ft. for
second unit, plus
1000 sq. ft. per
3rd-8th units, plus
500 sq. ft. per 9th-
20th units
150 ft. 85% 25 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft.
Other Permitted
Uses n/a 10,000 none 80% 25 ft. 15 ft. 25 ft.
3-4.5.5 Density Bonus for Affordable Dwelling Units
3-4.5.5.1. A density bonus is offered to encourage private sector development
of Affordable Dwelling Units (ADUs), in accord with the provisions
of Article 9, Section 9-3.
3-4.5.5.2. The density bonus provisions provided in Sections 3-4.5.3 and 3-
4.5.4 shall be permitted in conjunction with the provision of ADUs.
The maximum density shall not exceed twenty (20) dwelling units
per net acre for any project site.
3-4.5.6 Density Bonus for Traditional Neighborhood Developments
3-4.5.6.1. A density bonus is offered, in accord with the provisions of Article 9,
Section 9-20, and Section 3-5.2.11, to encourage private sector
provision of new development that is consistent with the features and
functions of the traditional design and development patterns that
have created the human scale and historic character of Warrenton’s
built environment, including features such as:
• relatively narrow street widths
• a grid of interconnected streets
• sidewalks along the streets
• a mix of lot widths (some narrow, some wide)
• on-street parallel parking
• buildings located relatively close to the front street
• two and three story buildings that frame the street
3 - 17 Updated December 2020
• rear access via alleys
It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to explain the design
elements believed to justify approval of density increase.
3-4.5.6.2 Density bonuses shall not result in a gross density in excess of
twelve (12) units per gross acre, nor a net density in excess of twenty
(20) units per net acre.
3-4.5.7 Density Bonus for Public Use Sites
3-4.5.7.1 The Planning Commission may recommend and the Town Council
may permit increases in the number of dwelling units otherwise
permitted where an applicant dedicates public sites for such facilities
as schools, parks, and public buildings if such sites are consistent
with and located in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan.
3-4.5.7.2 Density bonuses may result in a total gross density not to exceed
twenty (20) units per net acre. In no case shall the use of one or
more density bonus provisions result in any densities exceeding
twenty (20) units per net acre
3-4.5.8 Building Regulations
Use Maximum Height
All dwellings except Multi-Family Dwellings 35 ft.*
Multi-family dwellings 45 ft.
Other Permitted Uses 45 ft.**
* The height limit for dwellings may be increased up to forty-five (45) feet and up
to three (3) stories provided that front, side, and rear yard setbacks increase one
(1) foot for each additional foot of building height over thirty-five (35) feet. This
may be achieved in part by setting back the second and/or third stories of the
building a greater amount than the first story.
** A public or institutional building or church may be erected to a height of sixty
(60) feet from grade provided that required front, side, and rear yards shall be
increased one (1) foot for each foot in height over thirty-five (35) feet.
3-4.5.9 Open Space Requirements
3-4.5.9.1 For apartments generally: Five hundred (500) square feet of usable
common open space for each dwelling unit. Open space area shall
3 - 18 Updated December 2020
be in the form of common greens of at least five thousand (5,000)
square feet each. Such greens shall be located so as to provide a
focal point for the units, with the units fronting the green (s) or
fronting streets that border the green(s).
3-4.5.9.2 For dwellings for the elderly and handicapped: Two hundred (200)
square feet of usable common open space for each dwelling unit.
3-4.5.9.3 For ADU developments: A developer can increase lot coverage to
eighty (80) percent if the proposed development is within six
hundred (600) feet of public active recreation and open space, and
residents do not have to cross a roadway that has a speed limit of
greater than thirty-five (35) miles per hour, or that is more than two
(2) lanes in width, to reach such space.
3-4.5.9.4 The minimum distance between main buildings shall be thirty (30)
feet.
3-4.5.9.5. Additional Open Space. All land in or encompassed by a
development within this district which is a part of the same tract and
is not actually used or planned for development shall be maintained
as open space to be enjoyed by the residents, either under the
provisions of Article 9 or it may be maintained by a homeowners
association or the developer and/or management in the case of rental
properties, on a permanent basis.
3-4.5.10 Recreational Facilities
3-4.5.10.1. Townhouse and multifamily developments of thirty-five (35)
dwelling units or more shall provide improved active recreational
space for the private use of townhouse residents.
3-4.5.10.2. The amount of required recreational space and facilities for
townhouse and multifamily developments shall be computed
according to the occupancy figures provided below. Occupancy
figures will be computed for the total number of dwelling units in the
development:
One (1) Bedroom: Two (2) adults
Two (2) Bedroom: Two (2) adults and one (1) child
Three (3) Bedroom: Two (2) adults and two (2) children
Four (4) Bedrooms: Two (2) adults and three (3) children
3 - 19 Updated December 2020
3-4.5.10.3. Based upon the number of occupants computed above, each of the
following three (3) types of activity space shall be provided, in the
amounts determined by the following schedule:
- Child Use Space: Twenty (20) square feet for each child.
- Mixed Use Space: Twenty-five (25) square feet for each child
and adult.
- Adult Space: One hundred (100) square feet for each adult.
3-4.5.10.4. Required activity space shall be occupied by the following types of
facilities. All playground equipment shall meet commercial grade
playground standards for intensive or extended use.
- Child Use Space: Tot lot, intermediate playground, nursery day
care, or similar facility.
- Mixed Use Space: Swimming pool, handball or racquetball
court, tennis courts, basketball courts, meeting and activity
rooms, volleyball court, or similar facility.
- Adult Space: Health club, weight room or gymnasium, terrace
or landscaped passive recreation area, or other similar facility.
Mixed use spaces may be substituted for child use spaces if, in
the opinion of the Planning Director and Planning Commission,
they are more appropriate for the development in question.
The nature and proportion of recreational spaces and facilities
may be altered if, in the opinion of the Planning Director and
Planning Commission, an alternative proposal is presented and
considered more appropriate for the development in question.
3-4.5.10.5. For townhouse or multifamily developments of fifty (50) units or
more, at least twenty-five (25) percent of the total required recreation
space will be provided indoors so as to be usable year round.
3-4.5.10.6. The following general design standards shall apply to required
activity spaces:
- Required activity spaces shall be located in such a fashion as to
be accessible by foot by all residents, using either sidewalks, or
paths within common open space, or a combination thereof, that
eliminates the necessity of traveling within roadways or travel
lanes to gain access to such areas.
3 - 20 Updated December 2020
- Activity spaces for children shall be designed and placed to
facilitate visibility from adjacent dwelling units, roadways, travel
lanes, sidewalks, or adjacent common areas. Shade trees should
be provided but shrubbery or fence materials that provide an
opaque screen adjacent to the activity area are not appropriate.
Benches or seats should be provided for use by parents.
- Activity areas for children located within fifty (50) feet of a
travel lane, or within seventy-five (75) feet of a two (2) lane
public roadway or one with a posted speed limit of thirty-five
(35) miles per hour or less, or within one hundred (100) feet of a
roadway greater than two (2) lanes or with a posted speed limit
of greater than thirty-five (35) miles per hour, should be fenced
to discourage the movement of children towards the roadway or
travel lane.
3-4.6 R-40 Residential District
3-4.6.1 Legislative Intent
This district is comprised of low density, single family dwellings, and other
selected uses which are compatible with the low density residential character of
the district. The established regulations for this district are designed to
implement the Comprehensive Plan and to promote and encourage an
environment for family life, and thus, all commercial activities are prohibited.
Densities shall not exceed one dwelling unit per acre. In order to provide and
encourage innovative designs in residential developments so that open lands may
be developed both efficiently and with imagination, cluster developments or
traditional developments are encouraged.
3-4.6.2 Permitted Uses (by-right)
- Accessory buildings
- Agricultural uses existing at the effective date here of
- Group Homes of eight (8) residents or less
- Home occupations
- Off street parking for permitted uses subject to Article 7
- Open space subject to Article 9
- Signs subject to Article 6
- Single-family detached dwelling units
- Utilities related to and necessary for service within the Town, including
poles, wires, transformers, telephone booths, and the like for electrical power
distribution or communication service, and underground pipelines or
3 - 21 Updated December 2020
conduits for local electrical, gas, sewer, or water service, but not those
facilities listed as requiring a special use permit
- Yard sales or garage sale for the disposal of used household items, provided
such sales are not held more frequently than once a year on the same lot, are
not conducted for more than three days and include items assembled only
from households adjoining neighbors
3-4.6.3 Permissible Uses (by special use permit upon approval of the Town Council)
- Accessory dwelling units
- Active and passive recreation and recreational facilities
- Bed and breakfast facility
- Churches
- Cluster development (see Article 9-6)
- Community buildings
- Family care home
- Golf courses
- Group Homes of eight (8) residents or more
- Home business
- Parks and playgrounds
- Schools
- Swim clubs, Tennis clubs
- Treatment plants, water storage tanks, major transmission lines or pipelines,
pumping or regulator stations, communications towers, storage yards and
substations, and cable television facilities and accessory buildings
3-4.6.4 Lot and Yard Regulations
Use
Minimum Minimum Maximum Minimum Setbacks*
Lot Size
(sq. ft.)
Lot Frontage
(at front setback)
Lot Coverage
(impervious surfaces) Front Side Rear
Single-Family Dwelling 40,000 135 ft. 65% 60 ft. 25 ft. 35 ft.
Single- Family Cluster 25,000 90 ft. 65% 50 ft. 20 ft. 25 ft.
Other Permitted Uses 40,000 90 ft. 65% 50 ft. 30 ft. 35 ft.
* Front setbacks shall be equal to the average setbacks for all buildings on the same side of the street
within 500 feet, but in no case shall they be less than the minimum described above.
3-4.6.5 Building Regulations
Use Maximum Height
All dwellings 35 ft.*
Other Permitted Uses 35 ft.**
3 - 22 Updated December 2020
* The height limit for dwellings may be increased up to forty-five (45) feet and
up to three (3) stories provided that front, side, and rear yard setbacks increase
one (1) foot for each additional foot of building height over thirty-five (35)
feet. This may be achieved in part by setting back the second and/or third
stories of the building a greater amount than the first story.
** A public or institutional building or church may be erected to a height of sixty
(60) feet from grade provided that required front, side, and rear yards shall be
increased one (1) foot for each foot in height over thirty-five (35) feet.
3-4.7 R-E Residential District
3-4.7.1 Legislative Intent
This district is comprised of low density, single family dwellings, and other
selected uses which are compatible with the open and rural character of the
district. The established regulations for this district are designed to implement
the Comprehensive Plan and to promote and encourage an environment for
family life and thus, all commercial activities are prohibited.
In order to provide and encourage innovative designs in residential developments
so that open lands may be developed both efficiently and with imagination,
cluster developments or traditional developments are encouraged.
3-4.7.2 Permitted Uses (by-right)
- Accessory buildings
- Agricultural uses existing at the effective date here of.
- Group Homes of eight (8) residents or less
- Home occupations
- Off street parking for permitted uses subject to Article 7
- Open space subject to Article 9
- Signs subject to Article 6
- Single-family detached dwelling units
- Utilities related to and necessary for service within the Town, including
poles, wires, transformers, telephone booths, and the like for electrical power
distribution or communication service, and underground pipelines or
conduits for local electrical, gas, sewer, or water service, but not those
facilities listed as requiring a special use permit
- Yard sales or garage sale for the disposal of used household items, provided
such sales are not held more frequently than once a year on the same lot, are
not conducted for more than three days and include items assembled only
from households of adjoining neighbors
3 - 23 Updated December 2020
3-4.7.3 Permissible Uses (by special use permit upon approval of Town Council)
- Accessory dwelling units [moved]
- Active and passive recreation and recreational facilities.
- Bed and breakfast facility
- Churches
- Cluster development (in accord with Section 9-6)
- Community buildings
- Family care home
- Golf courses
- Group Homes of eight (8) residents or more
- Home business
- Parks and playgrounds
- Schools
- Swim clubs, Tennis clubs
- Treatment plants, water storage tanks, major transmission lines or pipelines,
pumping or regulator stations, communications towers, storage yards and
substations, and cable television facilities and accessory buildings.
3-4.7.4 Lot and Yard Regulations
Use
Minimum Minimum Maximum Minimum Setbacks
Lot Size
(sq. ft.)
Lot Frontage 200 ft.
(at front setback)
Lot Coverage 65% 
(impervious surfaces) Front 75 ft. Side 25 ft. Rear 35 ft.
Single-Family Dwelling Minimum lot size 5 acres    
Single- Family Cluster 30,000 90 ft. 65% 50 ft. 20 ft. 25 ft.
Other Permitted Uses 40,000 90 ft. 65% 50 ft. 30 ft. 35 ft.
Regardless of minimum lot size as provided herein, overall densities for any
development site shall not exceed one dwelling unit per 5 acres.
Front setbacks shall be equal to the average setbacks for all buildings on the same
side of the street within 500 feet, but in no case shall they be less than the
minimum described above.
3-4.7.5 Building Regulations
Use Maximum Height
All dwellings 35 ft.*
Other Permitted Uses 35 ft.**
* The height limit for dwellings may be increased up to forty-five (45) feet and up
to three (3) stories provided that front, side, and rear yard setbacks increase one
3 - 24 Updated December 2020
(1) foot for each additional foot of building height over thirty-five (35) feet. This
may be achieved in part by setting back the second and/or third stories of the
building a greater amount than the first story.
** A public or institutional building or church may be erected to a height of sixty
(60) feet from grade provided that required front, side, and rear yards shall be
increased one (1) foot for each foot in height over thirty-five (35) feet.
3-4.8 RO Residential Office District
3-4.8.1 Legislative Intent
Legislative Intent. This district is designed to provide for business and
professional offices and certain personal service uses in attractive surroundings
with types of uses limited and signs and building features limited so as to be
compatible with residential use and to implement the Comprehensive Plan. The
district can be applied to large or small areas if development standards are
complied with. The district may also be applied as a transition area between a
commercial area and a residential area.
3-4.8.2 Permitted Uses (by-right)
- Accessory uses customarily incidental to permitted uses
- Home occupations
- Offices, business and professional
- Off-street parking subject to Article 7
- Open space subject to Article 9
- Personal Service Establishments not to exceed 3,500 square feet in gross
floor area.
- Signs subject to Article 6
- Single-family detached dwelling units
- Studios for artists, photographers, and sculptors
- Utilities related to and necessary for service within the Town, including
poles, wires, transformers, telephone booths, and the like for electrical power
distribution or communication service, and underground pipelines or
conduits for local electrical, gas, sewer, or water service, but not those
facilities listed as requiring a special use permit
- Yard sale or garage sale
3-4.8.3 Permissible Uses (by special use permit upon approval of Town Council)
- Active and passive recreation and recreational facilities
- Assisted living facilities
3 - 25 Updated December 2020
- Banks and savings and loan offices
- Churches
- Child care center, day care center, or nursery school
- Clubs, lodges, and assembly halls.
- Community buildings
- Institutional uses
- Townhouses and duplexes subject to all RT requirements and regulations in
Article 3
- Treatment plants, water storage tanks, major transmission lines or pipelines,
pumping or regulator stations, communications towers, storage yards and
substations, and cable television facilities and accessory buildings
3-4.8.4 Lot and Yard Regulations
3-4.8.4.1 Lot Requirements
Use
Minimum Minimum Maximum
Lot Size
(sq. ft.)
Lot Frontage
(at front setback)
Lot Coverage
(impervious surfaces)
All Uses 10,000 75 ft. 75%
3-4.8.4.2 Yard Requirements
Front Setbacks
From right-of-way
of local street
having right of way
of 50 feet or less
From right-of-way of
major thoroughfare or
collector street having
right of way greater
than 50 feet
From rightof-
way of a
service
drive
From any
interior
private or
public
accessway
Accessory
Buildings
40 feet 60 feet 40 feet 20 feet
Not permitted
forward of the
setback line.
Side Yard Setbacks* Rear Yard Setbacks*
Adjacent to any C, I or
RO District
Adjacent to any R
District
Adjacent to any C
or I District
Adjacent to any R
District
10 feet 25 feet 15 feet 25 feet
* Accessory buildings over fifteen (15) feet in height shall be at least ten (10) feet
from any lot line.
3 - 26 Updated December 2020
3-4.8.5 Building Regulations
Use Maximum Height*
Office Buildings,
banks and service
establishments
45 feet except limited to two stories and 35 feet for any
part of structure within 70 feet of a residential district
Accessory buildings Shall be less than the main building in height.
Other Buildings 45 feet
* A public or institutional building or church may be erected to a height of sixty
(60) feet from grade provided that required front, side, and rear yards shall be
increased one (1) foot for each foot in height over forty-five (45) feet.
3-4.9 PSP Public-Semi-Public Institutional District
3-4.9.1 Legislative Intent
This district is intended to provide for major public, semi-public, and institutional
uses, to facilitate future growth of such uses within the district in accordance with
the objectives, policies, and proposals of the Comprehensive Plan, including the
encouragement of convenient and safe nearby residential neighborhoods, and to
provide evidence on the Zoning map of the nature of land use planned for this
district.
3-4.9.2 Permitted Uses (by-right)
- Accessory buildings and uses, including dwellings accessory to a permitted
use
- Cemeteries
- Child care center, day care center, or nursery school
- Churches
- Community buildings
- Fairgrounds, showgrounds, or exhibition center
- Family care homes, foster homes, or group homes
- Hospitals, nursing homes, and clinics
- Institutional uses
- Mobile Food Vendors in public parks subject to Article 9-24
- Offices for business or professional use
- Off-street parking for permitted uses subject to Article 7
- Open space subject to Article 9
- Parks and playgrounds
- Public or governmental buildings
3 - 27 Updated December 2020
- Rescue squad or volunteer fire company
- Schools
- Senior citizen center
- Signs subject to Article 6
- Utilities related to and necessary for service within the Town, including
poles, wires, transformers, telephone booths, and the like for electrical power
distribution or communication service, and underground pipelines or
conduits for local electrical, gas, sewer, or water service, but not those
facilities listed as requiring a special use permit
- Yard sale or other special sale or event conducted on the premises of and for
the benefit of a permitted use in the district
3-4.9.3 Permissible Uses (by special use permit upon approval of the Town Council)
- Emergency housing
- Gift Shops
- Health and Fitness Facilities
- Museums
- Single Family Dwellings
- Visitor Centers
- Active and passive recreation and recreational facilities.
- Treatment plants, water storage tanks, major transmission lines or pipelines,
pumping or regulator stations, communications towers, storage yards and
substations, and cable television facilities and accessory buildings
3-4.9.4 Lot and Yard Regulations
Use
Minimum Minimum Maximum Minimum Setbacks
Lot Size
(sq. ft.)
Lot Frontage
(at front
setback)
Lot Coverage
(impervious
surfaces)
Front Side Rear
All
Permitted
and
Permissible
Uses
No
Minimum
50 ft. 85%
None when
adjacent and
across from
C, CBD or I
Districts;
25’ when
adjacent or
across from
R Districts*
None when
adjacent to
C, CBD or I
Districts;
15’ when
adjacent to
R Districts*
None when
adjacent to
C, CBD or I
Districts;
35’ when
adjacent to
R Districts*
3 - 28 Updated December 2020
*When adjacent to the PSP Zoning District, setbacks shall be determined by the nearest non-PSP
District along each side of the parcel. See example figure below:
3-4.9.5 Building Regulations
Use Maximum Height*
All buildings 35 feet
Accessory buildings Within 20 feet of any lot line shall
not exceed 15 feet in height.
All accessory buildings shall be less
than the main building in height.
* A public or institutional building or church may be erected to a height of sixty
(60) feet from grade provided that required front, side, and rear yards shall be
increased one (1) foot for each foot in height over thirty-five (35) feet.
3-4.10 C Commercial District
3-4.10.1 Legislative Intent
The intent of this district shall be to encourage the logical and timely
development of land for a range of commercial purposes in accordance with the
objectives, policies, and proposals of the Comprehensive Plan; to prohibit any
use which would create undue impacts on surrounding residential areas; and to
assure suitable design to protect the residential environment of adjacent and
nearby neighborhoods. It is further declared to be the intent of this district to
limit traffic congestion, overcrowding of land, noise, glare, and pollution, so as to
lessen the danger to the public safety, and to ensure convenient and safe
pedestrian access to and from commercial sites as well as between adjacent
commercial sites. The protective standards contained in this Article are intended
3 - 29 Updated December 2020
to minimize any adverse effect of the commercial district on nearby property
values and to provide for safe and efficient use of the commercial district itself.
3-4.10.2 Permitted Uses (by-right)
Any of the following uses provided that no one-business establishment exceeds
50,000 square feet of gross floor area on the lot or on the tract.
- Accessory uses customarily incidental to these uses.
- Apartments located above ground floor retail or office uses
- Banks and other financial institutions.
- Broadcasting stations.
- Churches
- Cleaning and pressing shops
- Clinics (medical and dental)
- Community buildings.
- Convenience store
- Funeral Homes
- Health and Fitness Facilities
- Hotels and motels
- Household Pet Grooming
- Institutional uses.
- Laundromat.
- Lawn and garden equipment
- Lumber and building supply with no outdoor storage
- Medical Centers and Laboratories
- Mobile Food Vendors subject to Article 9-24
- Non-fee parking lots and structures.
- Offices for business or professional use.
- Off-street parking subject to Article 7.
- Open space subject to Article 9.
- Personal and Business Services
- Plumbing and electrical supply (without outdoor storage)
- Rental service without outdoor storage
- Restaurant, carryout
- Restaurants without drive-through facilities
- Retail Sales, including stores and shops
- Service stations with no outside car vehicle storage and without vehicle
repair
- Signs subject to Article 6.
- Shopping centers
- Studios and trade schools.
- Taxidermist
- Trade school, studio
3 - 30 Updated December 2020
- Utilities related to and necessary for service within the Town, including
poles, wires, transformers, telephone booths, and the like for electrical power
distribution or communication service, and underground pipelines or
conduits for local electrical, gas, sewer, or water sewer service, but not those
facilities listed as requiring a special use permit.
- Vending machines and Laundromats
3-4.10.3. Permissible Uses (by special use permit upon approval of the Town Council)
- Active and passive recreation and recreational facilities
- Animal kennels
- Any use listed as permitted by right in Section 3-4.10.2 that exceeds 50,000
square feet of gross floor area
- Automobile sales, truck sales and service repair garages, automobile body
shops, and tire recapping and retreading. (All vehicles must be parked on
paved surfaces)
- Carnivals, fairs, and other similar uses of a temporary nature
- Car Washes
- Car wash, Self-service
- Clubs, lodges, and assembly halls
- Commercial parking lots and garages
- Commercial recreational establishments
- Crematories
- Day care centers
- Drive-through service facility of any kind
- Farmers markets
- Farm equipment, motorcycle, boat, and sport trailer sales and service
- Frozen food lockers.
- Grain and feed supply stores
- Heliports
- Lumber and building supply with undercover storage
- Monument sales
- Plumbing and electrical supply with undercover storage
- Restaurant with drive-through facility
- Taxicabs stands
- Temporary fair and show grounds
- Theaters [indoor]
- Transitional housing
- Treatment plants, water storage tanks, major transmission lines or pipelines,
pumping or regulator stations, communications towers, storage yards and
substations, and cable television facilities and accessory buildings
- Veterinary hospitals
- Wholesale establishments but not warehouses generally
3 - 31 Updated December 2020
3-4.10.4 Lot and Yard Regulations
Use
Minimum Minimum Maximum
Lot Size
(sq. ft.)
Lot Frontage
(at front setback)
Lot Coverage
(impervious surfaces)
All Uses 6,000 50 ft. 85%
Front Setbacks
From right-ofway
of local
street having
right of way of
50 feet or less*
From right-of-way of
major thoroughfare
or collector street
having right of way
greater than 50 feet *
From rightof-
way of a
service drive*
From any
interior private
or public
accessway
Accessory
Buildings
40 feet 60 feet 40 feet 20 feet
Not permitted
forward of the
setback line.
* Front setback may be reduced by 20 feet if no parking or loading areas are
located between the structure and the front lot line.
Side Yard Setbacks* Rear Yard Setbacks*
Adjacent to any C
or I District
Adjacent to any R
District
Adjacent to any
C or I District
Adjacent to any R
District
10 feet 25 feet 15 feet 25 feet
* Accessory buildings over fifteen (15) feet in height shall be at least ten (10)
feet from any lot line.
3-4.10.5 Building Regulations
Use Maximum Height*
Accessory buildings shall be less than the main building in height.
Other Buildings 45 feet
** A public or institutional building or church may be erected to a height of sixty
(60) feet from grade provided that required front, side, and rear yards shall be
increased one (1) foot for each foot in height over forty-five (45) feet.
3-4.11 CBD Central Business District
3-4.11.1 Legislative Intent
Legislative Intent. The intent of this district is to provide for orderly
development, infill and revitalization of the central business and commerce area
3 - 32 Updated December 2020
of the Town of Warrenton in accordance with objectives, policies, and proposals
of the Comprehensive Plan of the Town; and for the logical and timely
development of the land for primarily business purposes providing for higher
density residential development, especially on the upper floors of structures on
Main Street and encouraging a lively retail environment at the street level of
Main Street. The district is designed to encourage the following:
- Re-use of existing buildings in ways that are compatible with and supportive
of the purposes of the district and of the Comprehensive Plan.
- Preservation of the unified, historic character of the district and its function
as the retail and service center for Town citizens and visitors.
- The creation and reinforcement of the street as a public space, defined by
buildings fronting the street, to create a harmonious pedestrian environment
for Town citizens and visitors.
- Mixed uses within the district, including mixed uses within single structures.
- A uniformity of design to ensure the orderly arrangement of buildings, land
uses, and parking areas, and all construction hereafter proposed for this area.
- A cohesive interrelationship of buildings in order to ensure a harmonious
environment, allowing a degree of variety in building design provided said
variety is within the overall historic, human-scale design framework of the
district.
- Maximization of a beneficial interrelationship between vehicular facilities
(streets and parking lots), pedestrian facilities (sidewalks, malls and plazas),
and commercial establishments, with a particular focus on pedestrian,
convenience and safety.
- The provision of adequate, appropriately located off-street parking facilities.
- The architectural design and arrangement of buildings and spaces so as to
conform to the general character and plans of the district.
3-4.11.2 Permitted Uses (by-right)
- Accessory buildings
- Apartments
- Banks and other financial institutions, but not drive-in facilities
- Broadcasting stations
- Churches
- Cleaning and pressing shops limited to six (6) pressing machines, and four
(4) dry cleaning machines
- Clinics - outpatient care only
- Community buildings
- Historic shrines and museums
- Institutional buildings
- Medical and dental offices/clinics
3 - 33 Updated December 2020
- Mixed Use structures
- Mobile Food Vendors subject to Article 9-24
- Offices for business or professional use
- Off-street parking and load subject to Article 7
- Open space subject to Article 9
- Parking lots, in accord with supplemental regulations in Article 9 and
parking lot standards, Article 7
- Personal service stores not exceeding three thousand (3,000) square feet in
gross area, or within an existing space legally used for such purposes within
the previous five years.
- Restaurants, without drive-in facilities
- Retail service stores not exceeding three thousand (3,000) square feet in
gross area, or within an existing space legally used for such purposes within
the previous five years
- Signs subject to Article 6
- Single-family detached dwelling units
- Studios and Trade Schools
- Theaters
- Townhouses and duplexes
- Utilities related to and necessary service within the Town, including poles,
wires, transformers, telephone booths, and the like for electrical power
distribution of communication service, and underground pipelines or
conduits for local electrical, gas, sewer, or water service, but not those
facilities listed as requiring a special use permit
- Vending machines
3-4.11.3 Permissible Uses (by special use permit upon approval of the Town Council)
- Active and passive recreation and recreational facilities
- Child care center, day care center, or nursery school
- Clubs and lodges
- Commercial parking lots and garages
- Commercial recreational establishments
- Drive-through facilities for banks and financial institutions
- Emergency housing
- Farmers markets
- Funeral homes
- Health and Fitness Facilities
- Hotels and motels, not exceeding seventy-five (75) rooms
- Hotels, Inns, Bed & Breakfasts, and Tourist Homes
- Medical centers and laboratories
- Parks and playgrounds.
- Printing establishments in excess of 3,000 square feet in gross area
3 - 34 Updated December 2020
- Rental service establishments, with no outside equipment storage.
- Retail, personal or business services, office, or restaurants in dwellings or
apartment buildings
- Schools, including trade schools
- Small equipment sales and/or service operations
- Taxicab stands
- Water storage tanks, major transmission lines or pipelines, pumping or
regulator stations, communications towers, and substations, and cable
television facilities and accessory buildings
3-4.11.4. Lot and Yard Regulations
Use
Minimu
m Minimum Maximum Minimum Setbacks
Lot Size
(sq. ft.)
Lot Frontage
(at front
setback)
Lot
Coverage
(impervious
surfaces)
Front Side Rear
Commercial
Uses
3,000 none none none
None to C or I
District; 25 ft.
to R District
None to C or I
District; 25 ft.
to R District
Other
Permitted and
Permissible
Uses
None none none none
None to C or I
District; 25 ft.
to R District
None to C or I
District; 25 ft.
to R District
Mixed-use
structures
None none none none none
None to C or I
District; 20 ft.
to R District
Apartments
(if stand-alone,
non-mixed-use
structure)
None none 85% none
None to C or I
District; 20 ft.
to R District
None to C or I
District; 20 ft.
to R District
Single Family
Dwellings
none 50 ft. none none
None to C or I
District; 20 ft.
to R District
None to C or I
District; 20 ft.
to R District
3-4.11.5 Building Regulations
Use Maximum Height* Yards
All main
buildings
45 feet by right
75 feet by Special Use Permit
3 - 35 Updated December 2020
Accessory
buildings
Within 10 feet of any lot line shall not
exceed 15 feet in height.
All accessory buildings shall be less
than the main building in height
All non-residential
accessory buildings
shall satisfy setback
requirements
* Side and rear yards adjacent to any other C or I district shall be increased one (1)
additional foot of building height above thirty-five (35) feet;
* Side and rear yards adjacent to any R district shall be increased two (2)
additional feet for each one (l) foot of building height above thirty-five (35)
feet.
3-4.11.6 Use Limitations
1. Apartments are a permitted use in the district; however, apartments are
prohibited on the ground floor except by Special Use Permit.
2. Apartment densities shall not exceed twenty-five (25) dwelling units per
gross acre.
3-4.12 I Industrial District
3-4.12.1 Legislative Intent
It is the intent of this district to implement the Town’s Comprehensive Plan by
providing for a variety of light manufacturing, fabricating, processing, wholesale
distributing, and warehousing uses appropriately located for access by highways
and providing a controlled environment within which signing is limited, uses are
to be conducted generally within completely enclosed buildings, and a moderate
amount of landscaping is required. In order to preserve the land for industry, to
reduce extraneous traffic, and avoid future conflicts between industry and other
uses, business and service uses are limited primarily to those which will be useful
to employees in the district and future residential uses are restricted.
3-4.12.2 Permitted Uses (by-right)
- Accessory buildings
- Active and Passive Recreation and Recreational Facilities
- Banks and savings and loan offices
- Broadcasting studios and offices
- Business and office supply establishments
- Cabinet, upholstery, and furniture shops
- Cafeteria or snack bar for employees
- Clinics, medical or dental
3 - 36 Updated December 2020
- Commercial uses constituting up to 15% of permitted site or building area
- Conference Centers
- Contractor’s office and warehouse without outdoor storage
- Crematory
- Dwellings for resident watchmen and caretakers employed on the premises
- Employment service or agency
- Flex Office and Industrial uses
- Health and Fitness Facilities
- Institutional buildings
- Janitorial service establishment
- Laboratories, research, experimental or testing, but not testing explosives,
rockets, or jet engines
- Light manufacturing uses which do not create danger to health and safety in
surrounding areas and which do not create offensive noise, vibration, smoke,
dust, lint, odor, heat, glare, or electrical impulse than that which is generally
associated with light industries
- Mobile Food Vendors subject to Article 9-24
- Monument sales establishments with incidental processing to order but not
including shaping of headstones
- Motion picture studio
- Nurseries and greenhouses
- Offices- business, professional, or administrative
- Off-street parking and loading subject to Article 7
- Open space subject to Article 9
- Printing, publishing, and engraving establishment; photographic processing;
blueprinting; photocopying; and similar uses
- Private club, lodge, meeting hall, labor union, or fraternal organization or
sorority
- Rental service establishment
- Retail or wholesale sales and service incidental to a permitted manufacturing,
processing, storing, or distributing use
- Rug and carpet cleaning and storage with incidental sales of rugs and carpets
- Security service office or station
- Sign fabricating and painting
- Signs, subject to Article 6
- Studios
- Transmission and receiving towers of height not exceeding one hundred
twenty-five (125) feet
- Utilities related to and necessary for service within the Town, including
poles, wires, transformers, telephone booths, and the like for electrical power
distribution or communication service, and underground pipelines or
conduits for local electrical, gas, sewer, or water service, but not those
facilities listed as requiring a special use permit
3 - 37 Updated December 2020
- Wholesale establishment, storage warehouse, or distribution center. furniture
moving
3-4.12.3 Permissible Uses (by special use permit upon approval of the Town Council)
- Automobile body shop
- Automobile and truck repair and service
- Commercial Kennels
- Contractor’s storage yard
- Farm equipment, motorcycle, boat and sport trailer sales and service
- Fuel, coal, oil distribution storage yards
- Lumber and building supply with undercover storage.
- Maintenance and equipment shops with screened outside storage
- Outdoor storage of any kind
- Plumbing and electrical supply with undercover storage
- Restaurant or cafeteria, drive-thru or otherwise
- Self-service mini-warehouse
- Temporary fair and show grounds
- Tire and battery sales and service, tire recapping and retreading
- Transmission and receiving towers of height greater than one hundred
twenty-five (125) feet.
- Treatment plants, water storage tanks, major transmission lines or pipelines,
pumping or regulator stations, communications towers, storage yards and
substations, and cable television facilities and accessory buildings
3-4.12.4 Lot and Yard Regulations
Use
Minimum Minimum Maximum
Lot Size
(sq. ft.)
Lot Frontage
(at front
setback)
Lot Coverage
(impervious surfaces and
accessory buildings)
All principal
manufacturing and
processing uses in
industrial parks
One (1) acre 100 ft. 75%
Other uses, including
permitted retail and
service establishments
10,000
square feet
100 ft. 75%
3 - 38 Updated December 2020
Minimum Setbacks
Use Front Side Rear
All principal
manufacturing and
processing uses in
industrial parks
Fifty (50) feet from the
right-of-way of a local street
having a right-of-way of fifty
(50) feet or less.
Sixty-five (65) feet from the
right-of-way of a major
thoroughfare or collector street
having a right-of-way greater
than fifty (50) feet.
Forty (40) feet from the
right-of-way of a service drive.
Accessory buildings shall not be
permitted forward of the setback
line.
Twenty-five (25) feet
on an interior lot or
adjacent to any C or I
district including
accessory buildings
or parking structures,
ten (10) feet for
parking lots.
Fifty (50) feet
adjacent to any R
district including
accessory buildings
or parking structures,
thirty (30) feet for
parking lots.
Forty (40) feet on an
interior lot or
adjacent to any C or
I district including
accessory buildings
or parking
structures, ten (10)
feet for parking lots.
Sixty-five (65) feet
adjacent to any R
district including
accessory buildings
or parking
structures, fifty (50)
feet for parking lots.
Other uses, including
permitted retail and
service establishments
same same same
3-4.12.5 Building Regulations
Use Maximum Height
All buildings 35 feet
Accessory buildings Within 20 feet of any lot line
shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
All accessory buildings shall be
less than the main building in height.
3-4.12.6 Special Regulations for Manufacturing and Commercial Buildings
3-4.12.6.1 Enclosed Buildings. All uses shall be conducted within a completely
enclosed building of permanent and durable construction, with no
open storage of raw, in process, or finished material and supplies or
waste material. Finished or semi-finished products manufactured on
the premises may be stored in the open if screened from the street or
from a residence district by landscaping, fences, or walls.
3-4.12.6.2 Landscaping. In general, where approval of a site plan is required,
the landscape plan shall be designed to promote harmonious
3 - 39 Updated December 2020
relationships with adjacent and nearby residential properties,
developed or undeveloped, and to this end may provide effective
screening along side and rear property lines by means of fences,
walls, hedges, planting screen, or natural vegetation as outlined in
Article 8, General Provisions for Landscaping.
3-4.12.6.3 Fencing. All fencing shall have a uniform and durable character and
shall be properly maintained.
3-5 Requirements for Overlay Zoning Districts
3-5.1 FPD - Floodplain District
3-5.1.1 Legislative Intent
The Floodplain District is created to prevent:
1. The loss of property and life,
2. The creation of health and safety hazards,
3. The disruption of commerce and governmental services,
4. The extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood
protection and relief, and
5. The impairment of the tax base.
These special regulations are designed to achieve the pertinent purposes of zoning
as set forth in the Code of Virginia, Title 15.2-2283, and to implement the
Comprehensive Plan, and ensure good planning practices that:
1. regulate uses, activities, and development which, acting alone or in
combination with other existing or future uses, activities, and development,
will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights, velocities and frequencies;
2. restrict or prohibit certain uses, activities, and development from locating
within districts subject to flooding;
3. require all uses, activities, and developments that do occur in flood-prone
districts to be protected and/or flood-proofed against flooding and flood
damage; and
4. Protect individuals from buying land and structures which are unsuited for
intended purposes because of flood hazards.
3-5.1.2 Applicability
3 - 40 Updated December 2020
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all lands within the Town and
identified as being within the One Hundred-Year Floodplain by the Federal
Insurance Administration.
3-5.1.3 Establishment of Floodplain Districts
3-5.1.3.1 Description of Flood Districts
1. The Town of Warrenton contains four (4) floodplain districts which shall
include areas subject to inundation by waters of the one hundred (100) year
flood. The basis for the delineation of these districts shall be the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) and the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for the Town
of Warrenton prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA), Federal Insurance Administration (FIM), dated February 6, 2008 as
amended.
2. The Floodway District is delineated for purposes of this Ordinance using the
criteria that a certain area within the floodplain must be capable of carrying the
waters of the one hundred (100) year flood without increasing the water surface
elevation of that flood more than one (1) foot at any point.
3. The Flood-Fringe District shall be that area of the one hundred (100) year
floodplain not included in the Floodway District. The basis for the outermost
boundary of this District shall be the one hundred (100) year flood elevations
contained in the flood profiles of the above referenced Flood Insurance Study
and as shown on the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
4. The Special Floodplain District shall be those areas identified as an AE (Zone
A with Elevations) Zone on the maps accompanying the Flood Insurance Study
for which one hundred (100) year flood elevations have been provided but for
which no floodway has been delineated.
5. The Approximated Floodplain District shall be that floodplain area for
which no detailed flood profiles or elevations are provided, but where a
one hundred (100) year floodplain boundary has been approximated. Such
areas are shown as Zone A on the maps accompanying the Flood Insurance
Study.
5.1 For these areas, the one hundred (100) year flood elevations and
floodway information from federal, state, and other acceptable sources
shall be used, when available. Acceptable Sources include but are not
limited to: US Army Corps of Engineers Floodplain Reports and US
Geological Survey Food-Prone Quadrangles
5.2 Where the specific one hundred (100) year flood elevation cannot be
determined for this area then the applicant for the proposed use,
development, and/or activity shall determine this elevation in
3 - 41 Updated December 2020
accordance with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques.
Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currentlyaccepted
technical concepts.
5.3 Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient
detail to allow a thorough review by the Town Council for submission
and approval by FEMA.
5.3 The Town shall require that all new subdivision proposals and other
proposed developments greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the
lesser, include within such proposals base flood elevation data [Code
of Federal Regulations 44CFR 60.3(b) section (3)].
6. The Floodplain Districts described above shall be overlays to the existing
underlying districts as shown on the Official Zoning Ordinance Map, and
as such, the provisions for the floodplain districts shall serve as a
supplement to the underlying district provisions.
7. In the event any provision concerning a Floodplain District is declared
inapplicable as a result of any legislative or administrative actions or judicial
discretion, the basic underlying district provisions shall remain applicable.
3-5.1.3.2 District Boundaries
The boundaries of the Floodplain Districts are established as shown on Flood
Insurance Rate Maps which is declared to be a part of this ordinance.
3-5.1.3.3 District Boundary Changes
The delineation of any of the floodplain districts may be revised by the Town
Council where natural or man-made changes have occurred and/or more
detailed studies conducted or undertaken by the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers
or other qualified agency or individual documents the notification for such
change. However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from
the Federal Insurance Administration.
3-5.1.3.4 Interpretation of District Boundaries
Initial interpretation of the boundaries of the Floodplain Districts shall be made
by the Planning Director. Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of
any of the Districts, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall make the necessary
determination.
3 - 42 Updated December 2020
3-5.1.4 District Provisions and Procedures
3-5.1.4.1 District Provisions
No land shall hereafter be developed and no structure shall be located, relocated,
constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, or structurally altered except in compliance
with the terms and provisions of this Ordinance and any other applicable
ordinances and regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this
Ordinance.
Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any channels or floodways of any
watercourse, stream, etc., within the town, a regulatory floodway shall be
designated. Applicable permits shall be obtained from the US Corps of Engineer,
the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality, and the Virginia Marine
Resources Commission. For the applicant’s convenience, a joint permit application
is available from any of these organizations.
Further notification of the proposal shall be given, by the applicant, to all affected
adjacent jurisdictions, the Town Zoning Administrator, the Department of
Conservation and Recreation (Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management)
and the Federal Insurance Administration.
Under no circumstances shall any use, activity, and/or development adversely affect
the capacity of the channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any
other drainage facility or system.
3-5.1.4.2 Permit Requirements
All uses, activities, and development occurring within any floodplain area shall be
undertaken only upon the issuance of a Floodplain permit from the Zoning
Administrator. Such development shall be undertaken only in strict compliance
with the provisions of the Ordinance and with all other applicable codes and
ordinances, such as the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. Prior to the
issuance of any such permit, the Zoning Administrator shall require all applications
to include compliance with all applicable state and federal laws.
3-5.1.4.3 Floodway District
In the Floodway District no development shall be permitted except where the effect
of such development on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying
improvements which have been approved by all appropriate federal, local, and/or
state authorities as required. The placement of any manufactured home, except in
3 - 43 Updated December 2020
an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, within the Floodway District is
specifically prohibited.
3-5.1.4.4 Permitted Uses in the Floodway district
In the Floodway District the following uses and activities are permitted provided
that they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying district and are not
prohibited by any other ordinance and provided that they do not require structures,
fill, or storage of materials and equipment:
1. Public and private recreational uses and activities such as parks, day
camps, picnic grounds, and golf courses.
2. Accessory residential uses such as yard areas, gardens, play areas, and
pervious loading areas.
3. Accessory industrial and commercial uses such as yard areas, pervious
parking and loading areas, airport landing strips, etc.
4. Public utilities including poles, wires, transformers, underground pipelines
or conduits but not those facilities listed as requiring a special use permit.
Site Plan Review is required.
3-5.1.4.5 Permissible Uses in the Floodway District
The following uses and activities may be permitted by the Town Council by special
use permit, subject to the provisions of Article 11, provided that they are in
compliance with the provisions of the underlying district and are not prohibited by
this or any other Ordinance and that all uses, activities, and structural developments
shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the flood-proofing provisions
contained in all other applicable codes and ordinances:
1. Active and passive recreation and recreational facilities
2. Inside/Outside storage of materials and equipment provided that they are
not buoyant, flammable, or explosive, and are not subject to major damage
by flooding, or provided that such material and equipment is firmly
anchored to prevent flotation or movement, and/or can be readily removed
from the area within the time available after flood warning.
3. Structures, except for manufactured homes, accessory to the uses and
activities in Section 3-5.1.4.4 above.
4. Temporary uses such as circuses, carnivals, and similar activities
5. Utilities and public facilities and improvements such as railroads, streets,
bridges, transmission lines, pipe lines, water and sewage treatment plants,
and other similar or related uses.
3 - 44 Updated December 2020
6. Other similar uses and activities provided they cause no increase in the one
hundred (100) year flood heights and/or velocities.
3-5.1.4.6 Flood-Fringe District
1. In the Flood-Fringe District the development and/or use of land shall be
permitted in accordance with the regulations of the underlying district provided
that all such uses, activities, and/or development shall be undertaken in strict
compliance with the flood-proofing and related provisions contained in the
Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and all other applicable codes and
ordinances.
3-5.1.4.7 Standards for the Special Floodplain District:
The following provisions shall apply within the Special Floodplain District:
Until a regulatory floodway is designated (See Section 3-5.1.4.1), by the developer
no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including
fill) shall be permitted within the areas of special flood hazard, designated as
Special Floodplain Districts on the Flood Rate Insurance Map, unless it is
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the
community.
Development activities in Zone AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map which increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than
one foot may be allowed provided that the developer or applicant first applies –
with the community’s endorsement – for a conditional Flood Insurance Rate
Map revision, and receives the approval of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
3-5.1.4.8 Standards for Approximated Floodplain
When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, the
applicant shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and
floodway data available from a federal, state, or any other source, in order to
administer the provisions of Article 4. When such base flood elevation data is
utilized, the permit shall contain:
1. the elevation (in relation to the mean sea level) of the lowest floor
(including the basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
and,
3 - 45 Updated December 2020
2. If the structure has been flood-proofed in accordance with the requirements
of Article 4, Section 4.3 (B) of this ordinance, the elevation in relation to
the mean sea level to which the structure has been flood-proofed.
When the data is not available from any source as in 3-5.1.3.1.4, the lowest
floor of the structure shall be elevated to no lower than three above the highest
adjacent grade.
3-5.1.4.9 Site Plans and Permit Applications
All applications for development in the Floodplain District and all building permits
issued for the Floodplain shall incorporate the following information:
1. For structures to be elevated, the elevation of the lowest floor, including
basement or cellar.
2. For structures to be flood-proofed (nonresidential only), the elevation to
which the structure will be flood-proofed.
3. The elevation of the one hundred (100) year flood.
4. Topographic information showing existing and proposed ground
elevations.
3-5.1.4.10 Manufactured Homes
All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved must be elevated
on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
elevated to or above the base floor elevation and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist floatation, collapse and lateral
movement. Foundations shall meet the building code standards required of
conventional stick-built single-family dwellings.
3-5.1.4.11 Recreational Vehicles
Recreational vehicles placed on sites shall either
1. Be on the site for fewer than one hundred (180) consecutive days, and
2. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
3. Meet the permit requirements for placement and the elevation and
anchoring requirements for manufactured homes as contained in the
Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. A recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and
has no permanently attached additions.
3 - 46 Updated December 2020
3-5.1.4.12 Existing Structures in Floodplain Districts
A structure or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed before the
enactment of these provisions, but which is not in conformity with these provisions,
may be continued subject to the following conditions:
1. Existing structures and/or uses located in the Floodway District shall not be
expanded or enlarged
2. Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to a structure and/or use located in any floodplain district to an extent
or amount of less than fifty (50) percent of its market value, shall be
elevated and/or flood-proofed.
3. The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to a structure and/or use regardless of its location in a floodplain
district to an extent or amount of fifty (50) percent or more of its market
value shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of the
Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code.
4. Uses of adjuncts thereof which are, or become, nuisances shall not be
permitted to continue.
3-5.1.5 Design Criteria for Utilities and Facilities
3-5.1.5.1 Sanitary Sewer Facilities
All new or replacement sanitary sewer facilities and private package sewage
treatment plants, including all pumping stations and collector systems, shall be
designed to minimize the infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges
from the systems into the flood waters. In addition, they should be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage and impairment.
3-5.1.5.2 Water Facilities
All new or replacement water facilities shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration or flood waters into the system and be located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damages
3-5.1.5.3 Drainage Facilities
All storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of surface waters
without damage to persons or property. The systems shall ensure drainage away
from buildings and on-site waste disposal sites.
3 - 47 Updated December 2020
The Town Council may require a primarily underground system to
accommodate frequent floods and a secondary surface system to accommodate
larger, less frequent floods. Drainage plans shall be consistent with local and
regional drainage plans. The facilities shall be designed to prevent the
discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
3-5.1.5.4 Utilities
All utilities, such as gas lines, electrical, and telephone systems, being placed in
flood-prone areas should be located, elevated where possible, and constructed to
minimize the chance of impairment during a flood occurrence.
3-5.1.5.5 Streets and Sidewalks
Streets and sidewalks should be designed to minimize their potential for increasing
and aggravating the levels of flood flow. Drainage openings shall be required to
sufficiently discharge flood flows without unduly increasing flood heights.
3-5.1.6 Liability
The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this Ordinance is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable
engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and
bridge openings restricted by debris. This Ordinance does not imply that areas
outside the Floodplain District or that land uses permitted within such districts will
be free from flooding or flood damages.
This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Warrenton
or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder.
3-5.1.7 Validity and Severability
Where there happens to be any conflict between the provisions or requirements of
any of the Floodplain Districts and those of any underlying district, the more
restrictive provisions and/or those pertaining to the floodplain districts shall apply.
As Federal and State guidelines are amended the more restrictive provisions
shall apply
3-5.1.8 Variances
3 - 48 Updated December 2020
Applications for Variances require a Special Use Permits in accordance with
Section 11-3.10 of the Zoning Ordinance and shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator for consideration by the Planning Commission and Town Council. In
the review process, Planning Commission and Town Council shall consider at least
the following in their decision making process:
1. That the applicant has considered all relevant requirements and procedures
specified in the Zoning Ordinance prior to requesting a variance.
2. The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities
caused by encroachments; the danger that materials may be swept on to
other lands or downstream to the injury of others.
3. The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the
proposed use.
4. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these
systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions.
5. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage
and the effect of such damage on the individual owners.
6. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community.
7. The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
8. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
9. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for the area.
10. The safety of access by ordinary and emergency vehicles to the property in
time of flood.
11. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
12. The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that
the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
13. Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this ordinance.
The Town Council may refer any application and accompanying documentation
pertaining to any request for a variance to any engineer or other qualified person or
agency for technical assistance in evaluating the proposed project in relation to
3 - 49 Updated December 2020
flood heights and velocities, and the adequacy of the plans for flood protection and
other related matters.
1. Variances shall be issued only after the Town Council has determined that
the granting of such will not result in (a) unacceptable or prohibited
increases in flood heights, (b) additional threats to public safety, (c)
extraordinary public expense; and will not (d) create nuisances, (e) cause
fraud or victimization of the public, or (f) conflict with local laws or
ordinances.
2. No variance shall be granted for any proposed use, development, or
activity within any Floodway District that will cause any increase in the
one hundred (100) year flood elevation.
Variances shall be issued only after the Town Council has determined that
variance will be the minimum required to provide relief from hardship to the
applicant.
The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing, that the
issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the one hundred (100)
year flood elevation (a) increases the risks to life and property and (b) will
result in increased premium rates for flood insurance.
A record shall be maintained of the above notification as well as all variance
actions, including justification for the issuance of the variances. Any variances
that are issued shall be noted in the annual or biennial report submitted to the
Federal Insurance Administrator
3-5.2 PUD - Planned Unit Development District
3-5.2.1 Legislative Intent
It is the intent of this Article is to encourage innovations in residential and nonresidential
development so that the growing demands of Warrenton may be met by greater variety in type,
design and layout of buildings and housing types and to achieve the purposes set out in Section
15.2-2283 of the Code of Virginia, the Town's Comprehensive Plan, and the following specific
purposes of:
3-5.2.1.1 Residential Planned Unit Development (R-PUD)
1. Providing increased flexibility in the laws governing the development of those
areas in Warrenton which are now substantially open land and encouraging such
development in directions that will recognize both the changes in design and
technology in the building industry and the new demands in the housing market;
2. Ensuring that the uniform regulations appropriate to previously developed
residential neighborhoods do not operate to discourage efficient and imaginative
3 - 50 Updated December 2020
development of said substantially open areas consistent with the reasonable
enjoyment of neighboring properties;
3. Encouraging the more efficient allocation and maintenance by private initiative of
Common Open Space ancillary to new residential areas;
4. Encouraging the more efficient use of those public facilities required in
connection with new residential development;
5. Encouraging the creation of human-scaled development with pedestrian-friendly
streets, in a traditional neighborhood pattern;
6. Encouraging compatible infill development; and
7. Encouraging the development of affordable housing for local residents.
3-5.2.1.2 Commercial or Industrial Planned Unit Development
1. Increasing economic opportunities through planned communities that include light
industrial and/or commercial business parks with on-site residential development
conducive to implementing the Goals and Objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.
2. Developing gateway communities to maintain and convey a sense of the Town's
unique character by utilizing mixed-use development compatible with
Warrenton's historic environment.
3. Discouraging stereotypical "strip development" and encouraging creative urban
design though zoning and subdivision regulations that incorporate flexible design
standards, incentives and bonuses. Therefore, the PUD process shall permit a
freer placement of buildings within the project area than the conventional
subdivision system. In consideration of the unified development concept, the total
project parcel shall be the unit of regulation and density shall be calculated on a
project-wide basis to permit the clustering of buildings to create open space and
preserve natural site features.
4. Maintaining and encouraging efficient land use patterns that integrate residential,
commercial, public and employment in planned neighborhoods.
5. Targeting and recruiting new private sector employers in specific commercial and
industrial uses to maintain and enhance a balanced tax base through the expansion
of employment opportunities that complement and support Main Street.
6. Promoting professional offices and their contributions to a balanced mix of
employment opportunities.
7. Balancing multi-modal transportation needs including motor vehicles, bicycles
and pedestrians.
8. Reducing vehicular traffic by locating employment and housing within one
development.
3-5.2.2 Applicability
The PUD Overlay District is hereby established as an overlay district, as shown on the Town's
Official Zoning Map. All regulations of the applicable underlying regular base zoning district
shall apply to each parcel within the overlay district, except as modified by the provisions of the
overlay district and any proffers or other limitations associated with the approval of a specific
3 - 51 Updated December 2020
overlay district application by the Town. Hereinafter, the term PUD shall refer to residential and
business planned unit developments; residential planned unit developments may be referenced as
R-PUD and business developments may be further characterized as C-PUD (those PUDs with an
underlying commercial zoning designation) or I-PUD (those PUDs with an underlying industrial
base zoning district).
3-5.2.3 General Planning Considerations
3-5.2.3.1 Residential Planned Unit Development (R-PUD)
In considering an application for a Residential Planned Unit Development (R-PUD) with
a primary residential component, the Town Council may request information which will
aid in determining that:
1. The population density of the R-PUD is consistent with the recommended
population density embodied in the Comprehensive Plan and zoning for that area.
2. The incorporation of the development with existing land use and the proposed
land uses adjacent to the site has been attempted.
3. The conditions and availability of adjacent streets to efficiently and safely afford
movement of the volume of vehicles to be generated by development have been
met.
4. Additional community facilities made necessary by the proposed development
will be provided in accord with the Town's plans and policies.
5. Additional public services made necessary by the proposed development will be
provided or funds reserved for them in accord with the Town's plans and policies.
6. The adequacy of utility services is sufficient for the proposed uses.
7. The amount and relationship of the various types of dwellings proposed by the
development are documented.
8. The ratio of dwelling units to be owner occupied and rental is documented.
9. The amount, location, and proposed use of permanent open space achieved by the
development are illustrated.
10. The preservation of trees, groves, watercourses, scenic points, historic spots, and
other community assets and landmarks will be incorporated.
11. Streets and sidewalks that are safe and convenient for pedestrian activity are
provided within the development and connected to existing or proposed networks
adjoining the development.
3 - 52 Updated December 2020
3-5.2.3.2 Commercial and Industrial Planned Unit Developments (C-PUD/IPUD)
In considering an application for a Commercial or Industrial Planned Unit Development
(C-PUD or I-PUD) with a primary commercial and/or industrial component, the Town
Council may request information which will aid in determining that:
1. The pattern of development within the respective PUD is consistent with the
features of the Town's traditional design and development patterns and expands the
opportunity for a Live-work environment as identified in the Warrenton
Comprehensive Plan.
2. Existing and proposed land uses adjacent to the site have been considered.
3. The PUD is established in an area adjacent to an arterial highway and is served by
a road network of minor arterial highways or higher as designated in the Warrenton
Comprehensive Plan to efficiently and safely afford movement of the volume of
vehicles generated by the development.
4. Additional community facilities made necessary by the proposed development will
be provided in accord with the Town's plans and policies.
5. Additional public services made necessary by the proposed development will be
provided or funds will be reserved in accordance with the Town's plans and
policies.
6. The adequacy of utility services is sufficient for the proposed uses.
7. The amount and relationship of the various types of industrial, commercial, and
residential uses proposed by the development are documented.
8. The amount, location, and proposed uses of permanent open space achieved by the
development are illustrated.
9. The preservation of trees, groves, watercourses, scenic points, historic spots, and
other community assets and landmarks will be incorporated.
10. Development is designed to promote quality lifestyles by encouraging pedestrian
movement and reducing automobile movement. Therefore, connections shall be
provided from the development to any adjacent existing and/or proposed sidewalks
or trails.
3-5.2.4 Standards and Criteria for Planned Unit Developments
This Article is formulated according to the principle that the PUD is an innovative departure
from the traditional concept of zoning. In providing guidance for a PUD, the following standards
and criteria are outlined in order to present respective minimum and maximum regulations.
3-5.2.4.1 General Criteria
3 - 53 Updated December 2020
Uses within the R-PUD shall emphasize residential uses permitted in the underlying
base zoning district. Uses within the C-PUD and I-PUD shall emphasize commercial or
industrial uses, depending upon the underlying base zoning district and subject to the
development standards set forth in the chart below:
PUD Development Standards:
Category
R-PUD
Underlying base
residential zoning
district
C-PUD
Underlying base
commercial zoning
district
I-PUD
Underlying base
industrial zoning
district
Minimum total land area
required.
25A 25A 25A
Maximum Density (FAR) 0.40 0.50 0.60
Land Use Mix *
Industrial
Maximum 15%
(limited to Office only)
Maximum 35% Minimum 50%
Commercial Maximum 35% Minimum 50% Maximum 30%
Residential Minimum 50% Maximum 15% Maximum 20%
Mixed Use Residential
Minimum 5%
Maximum 15%
Minimum 5%
Maximum 35%
Open Space Min. 25% Min. 25% Min. 20%
Open Space Bonus
(Healthy Lifestyle,
Amenities and/or Civic
Greens)
25% 15% 15%
Open Space for Stand-alone
Multi-Family
**(included in min.)
500 Sq Ft/unit;
min. 10,000 Sq Ft Area
500 Sq Ft/unit;
min. 10,000 Sq Ft Area
min. 10,000 Sq Ft
Area
Height **
Residential, except
multifamily
35 NA NA
Multi-Family Residential 55 45 45
Mixed Use 55 55 45
All Other Uses 35 45 45
* The proposed Land Use Mix and FAR are based on the total land area within each
PUD (e.g.: no more than 35% of the allowable uses in the C-PUD may be industrial, and
in any event development may be at a density no greater than the maximum permitted
3 - 54 Updated December 2020
coverage expressed as FAR). The Land Use Mix may be modified pursuant to § 3-
5.2.4.3.
** Heights are further subject to criteria set forth in § 3-5.2.8, however, height limits for
mixed use buildings with residential uses may be increased up to 65 feet with Town
Council approval; multifamily dwellings are subject to a Special Use Permit in the CPUD.
3-5.2.4.2 Other Criteria for Residential Planned Unit Developments
1. The applications and provisions of this Article shall be applied only to an area of
not less than twenty-five (25) adjacent and/or contiguous acres within any R
district.
2. The Plan shall include maps and narrative text that describe the location of and
relationships between all residential and commercial development, public
facilities, roadways, open space and recreation areas, and other proposed major
facilities.
3. The Plan shall provide for at least two dwelling types.
4. A Mixed Use Residential bonus system is offered to encourage private sector
development of affordable dwelling units (ADU), in accord with Article 9,
Section 9-3.
5. Not more than fifty (50) percent of the total number of dwelling units shall be
provided in multi-family units.
6. No building designed or intended to be used, in part or in whole, for commercial
purposes shall be constructed prior to the completion of not less than twenty (20)
percent of the dwelling units proposed in the Plan. The Council shall further have
the authority to waive or modify the criteria established in this section, if, in the
opinion of the Council it shall determine that the grant of such waiver or
modification (i) shall advance the legislative intent and general planning
considerations underlying the Planned Unit Development District and this
Ordinance, (ii) shall be in general conformity with the adopted Comprehensive
Plan, and (iii) shall not create an adverse effect on adjacent land uses.
7. Residential and open space uses shall be incorporated into each phase or stage of
development in the manner prescribed by the Plan. Applicable recreational
facilities shall be completed prior to construction of the next phase.
8. Town Council reserves the right to disapprove any sub area (net) densities that
are in excess of that which would otherwise be allowed for the same dwelling
type under this Ordinance.
9. The applicant shall designate geographic sections and identify the number and
type of dwellings of the entire parcel to be developed as a Planned Unit
Development.
10. The unique nature of a proposal for Planned Unit Development may require that
the specifications for the width and surfacing of streets and highways, alleys,
ways for public utilities, for curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lights, public parks
3 - 55 Updated December 2020
and playgrounds, school grounds, storm water drainage, water supply and
distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage collection and treatment shall be subject
to modification from the specifications established in the provisions of the Town
of Warrenton Public Facilities Manual. The Council may therefore waive or
modify the specifications otherwise applicable for a particular public facility
where the Council finds that such specifications are not required in the interest of
the residents of the Planned Unit Development and that the modifications of such
specifications are not inconsistent with the interests of the Town. Proposed
specifications and standards that are contrary to those required under the
prevailing Town regulatory codes shall be termed acceptable upon approval by
the Zoning Administrator.
3-5.2.4.3 Other Criteria for Commercial and Industrial Planned Unit
Developments
1. The applications and provisions of this Article shall be applied only to an area
equal to or greater than twenty-five (25) adjacent and/or contiguous acres within an
Industrial or Commercial District.
2. A Master Plan shall be required to guide the development. This Plan shall include
(i) a general development plan incorporating land bays and land uses as set forth
in the Development Standards (§ 3-5.2.4.1) and Use Regulations (§ 3-5.2.6) and
(ii) a narrative text that describes phasing, the location of and relationships
between all development types, public facilities, roadways, open space and
recreation areas, and other proposed major facilities. The Plan shall provide for
integrated development of all of the proposed uses and the coordination of
infrastructure as a cohesive entity, rather than separate components or independent
cells of land use.
3. Residential development within the I-PUD shall be limited to mixed commercial
and/or industrial uses with dwellings having ten (10) or more dwelling units that
may be designed as mixed-use developments.
4. Phasing. No dwelling units designed or intended to be used solely for residential
purposes shall be constructed prior to the completion of not less than thirty five
(35) percent of commercial and/or industrial uses, except mixed-use buildings
constructed with a residential component shall not be subject to this threshold
requirement.
5. The Town Council shall, upon recommendation of the planning commission, have
the authority to modify (making the criteria more, less or equally restrictive) or
waive, the criteria established §3-5.2 et seq. for Commercial or Industrial Planned
Unit Development, if in the opinion of Town Council it shall determine that such
modification or waiver:
a. Shall advance the legislative intent and general planning considerations
underlying the PUD and this Ordinance,
b. Shall be in general conformity with the adopted Comprehensive Plan, and
3 - 56 Updated December 2020
c. Shall not create an adverse effect on adjacent land uses.
6. The unique nature of a proposal for the PUD may require that the specifications
for the width and surfacing of streets and rights-of-way; use of alleys; easements
for public utilities; curbs, gutters, and sidewalks; street lights; public parks and
playgrounds; school grounds; storm water drainage; water supply and distribution;
sanitary sewers and sewage collection; shall be subject to modification from, or
waiver of, the specifications established in the provisions of the Town of
Warrenton Public Facilities Manual. The Council may, upon recommendation of
the planning commission, waive or modify the specifications otherwise applicable
for a particular public facility as noted above, where the Council finds that such
specifications are not required in the interest of the occupants of the PUD and that
the modifications of such specifications are not inconsistent with the interests of
the Town. Said waivers or modifications may also include waivers of
modifications of the requirements of Article 6 – Sign Regulations, such that the
applicant may create a comprehensive sign package for a proposed development.
7. Multilevel Parking Facilities shall be allowed as a by-right use within the
Commercial and Industrial Planned Unit Development for a maximum of three
stories above grade. Multilevel parking facilities should be encouraged as a
means of centralizing parking and reducing overall impervious surfaces within the
PUD area. The Town recognizes the need for a centralized parking area that may
be considered part of the common ownership of the project area. Multilevel
Parking Facilities may also exist as an accessory structure to a primary use, either
above or below grade. The square footage of the multilevel parking facility shall
be excluded from the overall Floor Area Ratio for the project.
3-5.2.5 Use Regulations - Residential Planned Unit Developments (R-PUD)
A building may be erected, altered, or used, and a lot or premises may be used or
occupied, for any of the following purposes, and no other, in addition to those permitted
by right within the underlying zoning district.
3-5.2.5.1 Uses Permitted by Right:
Residential Uses
1. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to permitted uses
2. Apartment Building
3. Foster homes
4. Group Homes of eight or less serving physically handicapped, mentally ill,
mentally retarded, or other developmentally disabled persons
5. Home occupations
6. Senior/Disability Housing
7. Single-family detached dwelling units
8. Townhouse
3 - 57 Updated December 2020
9. Two, Three-, and Four-Family dwelling units
Commercial Uses
1. Banks without drive-thru facilities
2. Community Buildings
3. Church
4. Dental Offices
5. Family Care Facilities
6. Live/work dwellings
7. Medical Offices
8. Mixed-use residential/commercial/industrial-office units
9. Mobile Food Vendors subject to Article 9-24
10. Off-street parking for permitted uses subject to Article
11. Pet Grooming
12. Personal Service Establishments
13. Professional and Business Offices
14. Restaurants without drive-thru facilities.
15. Retail Shops
16. Senior Citizens Centers
Industrial Uses
1. Professional and Business Offices
3-5.2.5.2 Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit
The following uses may be permitted upon authorization of the Town Council subject to
Article 11, in addition to those permitted by Special Use Permit within the underlying
zoning district:
Residential
1. Active recreation and recreational facilities
2. Affordable Dwelling Units (ADU), within areas designated for multifamily
development, at bonus densities of up to twenty (20) dwelling units per net acre
3. Assisted living/care facilities
4. Family care homes
5. Group homes of more than eight serving physically handicapped, mentally ill,
mentally retarded, or other developmentally disabled persons
6. Home Business [see revised definition]
Commercial Uses
1. Banks with Drive-through Facilities
2. Health and Fitness Facilities
3 - 58 Updated December 2020
3. Institutions, Education and Philanthropic, including Museums, Art Galleries and
Libraries.
4. Restaurants with Drive-through Facilities
5. Swim and Tennis Club
6. Traditional Neighborhood Developments as provided for in Section 3-5.2.11
Industrial Uses
1. None in the R-PUD
3-5.2.6 Use Regulations – Commercial and Industrial Planned Unit
Developments
A building may be erected, altered, or used, and a lot or premises may be used or
occupied, for any of the following purposes, and no other.
3-5.2.6.1. C-PUD Uses Permitted by Right
The following principal uses shall be permitted subject to approval of the Master
Development Plan and subject to the use limitations set forth below in Sections 3-5.4.5.3
and 3-5.4.6:
Residential Uses
1. Home Occupations
2. Mixed Use Residential dwellings (apartments located above ground floor retail
and/or offices)
Commercial Uses
Any of the following uses provided that no one-business establishment exceeds 50,000
square feet of gross floor area on the lot or on the tract, unless covered by an approved
Master Plan as approved by the Town Council.
1. Accessory Buildings and uses customarily incidental to permitted uses
2. Active and Passive Recreation and Recreation Facilities
3. Banks and other financial institutions without drive-thru facilities
4. Community buildings
5. Convenience Stores
6. Dentist Offices
7. Family Care Facilities
8. Health and Fitness Facilities
9. Hotels and motels
10. Laundromat
11. Medical and Dental Clinics
12. Medical Offices
3 - 59 Updated December 2020
13. Mixed Use Commercial (retail/office)
14. Mobile Food Vendors subject to Article 9-24
15. Off-street parking for permitted uses subject to Article 7
16. Offices –business/industrial/professional
17. Parking Garage/Facilities (See Article 12 for Definition)
18. Parks and playgrounds
19. Personal Services
20. Professional and Business Offices
21. Restaurant without drive-thru facilities
22. Retail Sales, including stores and shops
23. Senior Centers
24. Shopping Centers
25. Studios
26. Theater
Industrial Uses
1. Conference Center
2. Contractor Offices
3. Flex Offices
4. Medical Laboratories
5. Taxi-cab Stands
6. Trade Schools
7. Warehouses
3-5.2.6.2 C-PUD Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit
The following uses may be permitted subject to approval of the Master Development plan
and authorization of the Town Council subject to Article 11 and to those limitations set
forth below in Sections 3-5.4.5.3 and 3-5.4.6:
Residential Uses
1. Dwelling Units for Elderly or Handicapped, within areas designated for multifamily
development, at bonus densities of up to twenty (20) dwelling units per net acre
within the permitted FAR.
2. Apartment Buildings, maximum 10%, but subject to the maximum of 15% for all
residential use of the site as prescribed in Section 3-5.2.4.1.
3. Assisted living/care facilities
Commercial Uses
1. Any use listed as permitted by right in Section 3-5.2.6.2 that exceeds 50,000 square
feet of gross floor area and was not included in a Master Plan for the development
as approved by Town Council.
2. Banks with drive-thru facilities.
3. Restaurant with Drive-thru facilities.
3 - 60 Updated December 2020
Industrial Uses
1. Contractor Office with Outdoor Storage
2. Lawn and Garden Retail/Equipment with Outdoor Storage
3-5.2.6.4. I-PUD Uses Permitted by Right
The following principal uses shall be permitted subject to approval of the Master
Development Plan and subject to the use limitations set forth below in Sections 3-5.4.5.3
and 3-5.4.6:
Residential Uses
1. Mixed Use Residential (apartments located above ground floor retail and/or offices)
2. Apartment buildings, multifamily dwellings, and condominiums, as authorized on
an approved Master Development Plan
3. Playgrounds and recreation areas
Commercial Uses
Any of the following uses, provided that no one-business establishment exceeds 50,000
square feet of gross floor area on the lot or on the tract, unless covered by an approved
Master Plan as approved by the Town Council.
1. Active and Passive Recreation and Recreation Areas and Facilities
2. Banks and Savings and Loan Offices
3. Commercial recreation (indoor)
4. Child Care Center
5. Clinics (medical and dental)
6. Family Care Home
7. Health and Fitness Facilities
8. Hotels and motels
9. Medical Offices and Laboratories
10. Mixed Use Retail/Commercial
11. Mobile Food Vendors subject to Article 9-24
12. Retail uses, Personal Services
13. Retail Stores and Shops
14. Restaurant without drive-thru facilities
15. Studios
16. Theater
17. Offices
18. Daycare Facilities
Industrial Uses
1. Accessory Buildings and uses customarily incidental to permitted uses
3 - 61 Updated December 2020
2. Broadcast Studios
3. Business and office supply establishments
4. Cabinet, upholstery and furniture repair shops
5. Cafeterias, snack bars or other employee related commercial facilities up to 15% of
building area
6. Conference Centers
7. Employment Service or Agency
8. Flex industrial
9. Health and fitness facilities
10. Institutional buildings
11. Light manufacturing uses, which can confine all aspect of the production and or
manufacturing of product to the interior of the building and do not create danger to
health and safety of the surrounding areas.
12. Medical Laboratories
13. Mixed Use Industrial (retail/office/industrial)
14. Off-street parking for permitted uses subject to Article 7
15. Offices
16. Parking Garage/Facilities (See Article 12 for Definition)
17. Parks
18. Plumbing and electrical supply, retail only
19. Rental Service Establishments, without outdoor storage
20. Restaurant
21. Security service office or station
22. Trade Schools
23. Warehouses restricted to outer areas of PUD
24. Wholesale establishment
3-5.2.6.5 I-PUD Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit
The following uses may be permitted, subject to approval of the Master Development plan
and authorization of the Town Council subject to Article 11:
Residential Uses
1. Dwelling Units for Elderly or Handicapped, within areas designated for multifamily
development
2. Assisted Living Facilities
Commercial Uses
1. Any use listed as permitted by right in Section 3-5.2.6.2 that exceeds 50,000 square
feet of gross floor area
2. Banks and Savings and Loan Office with Drive-thru facilities
3. Restaurants with Drive-thru facilities
Industrial Uses
1. Farm Equipment Sales/service/repair shop
3 - 62 Updated December 2020
2. Outdoor storage of any kind.
3. Nurseries and greenhouses
4. Warehouses or distribution center
5. Wholesale sales and services incidental to permitted manufacturing facility
3-5.2.7 Density/Intensity and Area Regulations
3-5.2.7.1 Maximum density for Residential Planned Unit Developments
The maximum density/intensity computed over the entire R-PUD shall not exceed that
specified in the Comprehensive Plan. Such computation may exclude from the land area
only those streets, which are to be constructed as a part of the R-PUD. In addition, the
maximum density/intensity computed over the entire R-PUD shall not exceed that permitted
for the zoning district or districts in force in the R-PUD area at the time of the R-PUD
application. Density intensity bonuses may be awarded in accordance with district
schedules as a part of the design approval for the R-PUD, but not to exceed overall
densities specified by the Comprehensive Plan.
3-5.2.7.2 Minimum Lot Sizes and Setbacks for Residential Planned Unit
Developments
Notwithstanding the following minimum lot sizes and setbacks, overall gross densities on
the site shall not exceed those provided for in Section 3-5.2.7.1.
3-5.2.7.3 Table of Bulk Development Requirements for Residential PUD (RPUD)
Maximum building area is based on an assigned Floor Area Ratio as defined in Article 12
of this ordinance. The overall Floor Area Ratio for the R-PUD shall not exceed 0.40. A
typical breakdown of separate uses is provided here for illustrative purposes only for use
on separate parcel within the PUD.
Use Minimum
Lot Size1
Minimum
Lot Width2 Front3 Side Rear
Single-Family 6,000 55 25 10 20
Multifamily
Residential
12,500 80 20 15 20
Townhouses
2,000 sq. ft.
per unit
20 for interior
30 for end units
20 204 25
Multifamily with ADU 10,000 80 20 15 35
Mixed-use C/R only 6000 55 0 0 20
Commercial Uses 6,000 55 40 10 20
3 - 63 Updated December 2020
Use Minimum
Lot Size1
Minimum
Lot Width2 Front3 Side Rear
Industrial 6,000 55 40 15 20
1 expressed in square feet
2 as measured at the front setback
3 as measured from the interior street right-of-way or service drive; peripheral setbacks
are based on the adjacent highway – 40 feet for 50 foot or less right-of-way and 60 feet
for greater than 50 foot right-of-way.
3-5.2.7.4 Table of Bulk Development Requirements for Commercial PUD (CPUD)
Maximum building area is based on an assigned Floor Area Ratio as defined in Article 12
of this ordinance. The overall Floor Area Ratio for the C-PUD shall not exceed 0.50. A
typical breakdown of separate uses is provided here for illustrative purposes only for use
on separate parcel within the PUD.
Use Minimum
Lot Size1
Minimum
Lot Width2
Front3 Side Rear
Multifamily
Residential *
12,500 80 20 15 20
Multifamily -
Elderly * 10,000 80 20 15 25
Mixed Use
Residential
2,000 sq. ft.
per unit
20 Ft Interior,
30 ft Exterior
0 0 0
Commercial 6000 80 20 10 20
Industrial 6000 80 20 15 20
* Requires Special Use Permit
3-5.2.7.5 Table of Bulk Development Requirements for Industrial PUD (I-PUD)
Maximum building area is based on an assigned Floor Area Ratio as defined in Article 12
of this ordinance. The overall Floor Area Ratio for the I-PUD shall not exceed 0.60. A
typical breakdown of separate uses is provided here for illustrative purposes only for use
on separate parcels within the PUD. Internal setbacks may be reduced to zero pursuant to
§ 3-5.2.4.3.
Use Minimum
Lot Size1
Minimum
Lot Width2
Front3 Side Rear
Multifamily
Residential *
12,500 80 20 15 20
3 - 64 Updated December 2020
Use Minimum
Lot Size1
Minimum
Lot Width2
Front3 Side Rear
Multifamily –
Elderly * 10,000 80 20 15 25
Mixed Use
Residential
2,000 sq. ft.
per unit
20 Ft Interior,
30 ft Exterior
0 0 0
Commercial 6000 80 20 10 20
Industrial 6000 80 20 15 20
* Requires Special Use Permit
3-5.2.8 Height Regulations
3-5.2.8.1 Residential Planned Unit Developments (R-PUD)
Buildings may be erected up to thirty-five (35) feet in height, measured from mean
finished grade, except that:
1. The height limit for residential dwellings and non-residential uses may be
increased up to forty-five (45) feet and up to three (3) stories provided that front,
side, and rear yard setbacks increase one (1) foot for each additional foot of
building height above thirty-five (35) feet.
2. The height limit for mixed-use building with residential units may be increased up
to sixty-five (65) feet and up to seven (7) stories provided each side yard is fifty (50)
feet plus one (1) foot or more of side yard for each additional foot of building
height above thirty-five (35) feet.
3-5.2.8.2 Commercial or Industrial Planned Unit Developments (C-PUD/IPUD)
Buildings and garage structures may be erected up to forty-five (45) feet in height,
measured from mean finished grade, except that:
1. The height limit for office and mixed uses may be increased up to sixty-five (65)
feet and up to five (5) stories by Special Use Permit approved by the Town Council.
2. The height limit for mixed-use buildings with residential components may be
increased to five stories up to a maximum height of sixth-five (65) feet in the area
immediately abutting the Central Plaza or within two hundred (200) feet
surrounding the perimeter of the Plaza.
3. No buildings or structures shall be allowed over 45 feet in height along the
periphery of the site or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the site boundary.
3-5.2.9 Special Provision for Accessory Structures in Planned Unit Developments
3-5.2.9.1 Accessory Structures
3 - 65 Updated December 2020
3-5.2.9.1.1 Residential accessory buildings shall not be located closer
than five (5) feet to any rear or side property line or within ten
(10) feet of the main structure. Provision must be made for
disposal of roof water onto the subject property or to the
nearest storm sewer.
3-5.2.9.1.2 Commercial accessory buildings over fifteen (15) feet in
height must be at least ten (10) feet from any side or rear lot
line.
3-5.2.9.1.3 Industrial accessory buildings over fifteen (15) feet in height
shall have a twenty (20) foot setback from any side or rear lot
line.
3-5.2.9.2 Open fire escapes of noncombustible material may project into side or
rear yards by not more than four (4) feet and be no closer to any
property line than five (5) feet.
3-5.2.9.3 Encroachments into yards shall conform with Article 2, Section 2-18,
unless otherwise specifically designated herein or as part of a proffered
condition.
3-5.2.10 Open Space Considerations
3-5.2.10.1 General
In determining the amount and location of required permanent open space, the Town
Council may request that the applicant:
1. Differentiate between open space and the Common Open Spaces and require a
reasonable amount of prepared active recreation facilities to be incorporated into
the open space plan;
2. Encourage protection of steep slope areas in excess of twenty-five percent (25%)
in accordance with the requirements for Special Use Permit in Section 9-17 of
the Warrenton Zoning Ordinance;
3. Identify any commercial recreational land use anticipated which land use shall not
be part of the required minimum amount of open space;
4. Identify any community or institutional recreational facility deemed appropriate
by the Town Council and made necessary by the magnitude and density of the
Planned Unit Development, which use shall be included in the minimum acreage
for open space, provided that such use shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the
minimum area required to be in Common Open Space; and
5. Document and make the appropriate assurances for the ownership and
maintenance of the Common Open Space, which assures its continuation and
conservation as outlined in Article 9, General Provisions for Open Space.
3-5.2.10.2 Healthy Lifestyle Amenity Reduction
3 - 66 Updated December 2020
The 25% Open Space requirement in the C-PUD and 20% Open Space requirement in the
I-PUD can be reduced if open space areas incorporate healthy lifestyle amenities into the
open space design. Healthy Lifestyle Amenities include, but are not limited to, such
features as walking trails, sport courts, playgrounds and recreation areas and other
applicable active recreation facilities.
3-5.2.10.3 Residential Planned Use Developments (R-PUD)
A minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the site shall be set aside as open space
exclusive of street right-of-way. A minimum of one half of this open space shall be
Common Open Space. Common Open Space refers to open space within the boundaries
of the planned unit development designed and set aside for use-by all residents of the
planned unit development or by residents of a designated portion of the development,
and not dedicated as public lands. The location of the Common Open Space shall be
planned as a contiguous area located for maximum benefit of the residents, preserving,
and where possible, enhancing natural features. At least fifty (50) percent of such
required open space shall be located in a central place within the development or near
the main entrance to the development and framed by two-story or three-story buildings
so as to create a human-scale development as defined in this ordinance. Healthy
Lifestyle Amenities shall be incorporated into the open space plan.
3-5.2.10.4 Commercial and Industrial Planned Unit Developments
A minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the total site area in a C-PUD and twenty
percent (20%) of the total site area in I-PUD shall be set aside as open space exclusive of
street right-of-way, subject to the following provisions:
1. A minimum of one half of this open space shall be Common Open Space for the
use of residents and occupants, located within the boundaries of the planned
development.
2. A minimum of 20,000 square feet of the Common Open Space shall be provided
in a Central Plaza planned and situated to provide maximum benefit to the public,
occupants and residents. The developer shall be encouraged to preserve and
enhance natural features, where possible, and to include such public amenities as
fountains, public art, places for public gathering, plantings and benches.
3. The Central Plaza shall be situated so that at least one side adjoins a road.
Buildings adjoining the plaza area shall be a minimum height of two (2) stories.
4. Design guidelines for the areas surrounding the Central Plaza shall be required at
the time of concept plan approval. Such design elements may include mixed-use
buildings surrounding the plaza with a consistent/cohesive design theme or
character; buildings with classical proportions or signature style consistent with
the Central Plaza or the promenade; and shall include sidewalks that are a
minimum of five (5) feet in width and streetscape that includes plantings and
3 - 67 Updated December 2020
street furniture. The streetscape shall provide features such as benches, lamp
posts, kiosks and transit shelters, where appropriate.
5. The Central Plaza and remaining open space shall be constructed and improved at
an equivalent or greater rate than the construction of any residential structures.
6. A reduction of the required open space to minimum 15% is allowed through the
implementation of healthy lifestyle initiatives throughout the PUD development.
See Section 3-5.2.4.1 PUD Development Standards Chart.
3-5.2.11 Traditional Neighborhood Development Option (TND)
3-5.2.11.1. Purpose
The purposes of the Traditional Neighborhood Development Option (TND) are to:
1. Provide opportunities for the creation of new neighborhoods that have the
desirable qualities of the Town’s older neighborhoods that were developed before
the late 20th century. These neighborhoods feature a mix of land uses and
building types, closely linked by an interconnected network of streets that are
framed by buildings, and thus comfortable for pedestrians.
2. Provide optional provisions is to allow a flexible set of land use and design
regulations that will allow traditional neighborhoods to be built subject to Town
review and approval through the Special Use Permit process.
3. Allow residents to carry out many of life’s activities within their neighborhood,
including working, shopping, education and recreation.
4. Provide a range and mix of land uses and dwelling types.
5. Provide a transportation system that provides safe and convenient movement for
all forms of traffic, including motor vehicles, pedestrians and bicycles.
6. Provide a system of civic spaces including parks, squares and public structures to
create a sense of community.
7. Provide a strong sense of identity to the neighborhood by creating public streets
and outdoor spaces that are convenient for people to be in and travel through.
Upon approval, a Traditional Neighborhood Development Plan becomes the basis for all
continuing land use controls and supercedes any other provisions of this ordinance that
conflict with the provisions of the TND approval.
3-5.2.11.2. Use and Development Area Standards for TND Option
Minimum Maximum
Neighborhood Size
5 acres for a new PUD;
2 acres for expanding an
existing PUD
None
3 - 68 Updated December 2020
% of Net Development Area
Minimum Maximum
Land Use Mix:
Residential uses 50% 80%
Commercial uses 2% 15%
Civic uses* 2% n/a
Parks, squares, and open
space
10% n/a
Net Density:
Total Residential n/a 6.0 du/ac
Single Family Detached n/a 4.0 du/ac
Duplex n/a 5.0 du/ac
Single Family Attached n/a 7.0 du/ac
Multi-Family n/a 12.0 du/ac
Building Floorplate
Commercial n/a 20,000 s.f.**
Lot Coverage:
Residential n/a 50%
Commercial n/a 70%
Civic n/a 50%
*Public utility uses shall not be included in this required percentage.
**maximum area of building floorplate; 50,000 s.f. by special use permit
Note: Buffer area (minimum 25’) required between district and existing residential
neighborhoods
3-5.2.11.3 Lot Area and Yard Standards for TND Option
Lot Requirements Minimum Maximum
Single Family Detached:
Lot Size 8,500 s.f. n/a
Lot Width 60 ft n/a
Front Setback-core 0 ft 15 ft*
Front Setback-edge 10 ft 25 ft*
Side Yard 10 ft. n/a
Rear Yard 25 ft n/a
Duplex:
Lot Size 14,000 s.f. n/a
Lot Width 90 ft. n/a
Front Setback 10 ft 25 ft
Side Yard 10 ft. n/a
Rear Yard 25 ft n/a
3 - 69 Updated December 2020
Lot Requirements Minimum Maximum
Single Family Attached:
Lot Size 1,600 s.f. n/a
Lot Width 18 ft. n/a
Front Setback-core 0 ft. 15 ft
Single Family Attached:
Front Setback-edge 10 ft. n/a
Side Yard 10 ft. n/a
Rear Yard 25 ft n/a
Multi-Family:
Lot Size 8,500 s.f. n/a
Lot Width 90 ft. n/a
Front Setback 0 ft. 25 ft
Side Yard 10 ft. n/a
Rear Yard 25 ft n/a
Commercial:
Lot Size 8,500 sf n/a
Lot Width 70 ft n/a
Front Setback 0 ft 15 ft
Side Yard 5 ft n/a
Rear Yard 35 ft n/a
Civic Uses:
Front Setback 10 ft. 25 ft.
Side Yard 5 ft. n/a
Rear Yard 25 ft n/a
Accessory Buildings:
Front Setback n/a n/a
Side Yard 5 ft. n/a
Rear Yard 20 ft n/a
*no maximum front setback for lots of 20,000 square feet or greater
Note: Buffer area (minimum 25’) required between district and existing residential
neighborhoods
3-5.2.11.4. Parks, Squares and Open Space Requirements
1. Total Land Areas for Parks, Squares and Other Open Space Uses
A minimum of ten (10) percent of the net development area must be designated for
Parks, Squares or Other Open Space uses as defined herein. Natural (undisturbed)
open space shall count toward no greater than twenty (20) percent of the total required
area for parks, squares or other open space uses.
3 - 70 Updated December 2020
2. Minimum Lot Area for Parks, Squares and Other Open Space Uses
A park, square or open space area shall be at least 10,000 square feet.
No residential dwelling unit of the neighborhood shall be located more than 1,400 feet
from the boundary of a park, square or open space property.
3-5.2.10.5. Streets, Alleys, Paths, Blocks and Parking
1. Grid Network
The transportation system in Traditional Neighborhoods shall generally be in the form
of a grid of interconnected streets, alleys and paths, modified as necessary to
accommodate topography and parcel shape. Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed ten (10)
percent of the total length of streets in the Traditional Neighborhood. Alleys are
excepted from this calculation.
2. Block Size
The blocks created by the grid of streets shall have a maximum block perimeter of
1,800 lineal feet, measured along the interior edge of the street right-of-way, except in
locations where a street must cross areas of steep slopes in excess of 10% natural
grade. In such cases, the block length may be extended as necessary to circumvent the
steep area.
3. Street Design
Street sections in Traditional Neighborhoods shall be designed to serve multiple
purposes, including movement of motor vehicle traffic, safe and convenient pedestrian
and bicycle movement, areas for public gathering and interaction, and areas for
placement of street trees, street furniture and landscaping. Streets shall be designed to
balance the needs of all users and promote efficient and safe movement of all modes
of transportation.
The following street designations and sections shall be used as guidelines in designing
streets that fit the land uses and densities of the proposed network.
Type of Street
by Name
Defined by
Typical ADT*
Design
Speed
Right of
Way Paving Parking
Neighborhood
Boulevard > 3,000 30 mph 72 feet
Two lanes @
18’; 8’ median
Two
sides
Neighborhood
Main Street > 2,000 20 mph 64 feet 36 feet
Two
sides
3 - 71 Updated December 2020
Type of Street
by Name
Defined by
Typical ADT*
Design
Speed
Right of
Way Paving Parking
Neighborhood
Avenue 1,000 to 2,000 20 mph 60 feet 34 feet
Two
sides
Mixed
Residential Street < 1,000 20 mph 48 feet 28 feet One side
Mixed
Residential Lane < 500 20 mph 46 feet 26 feet One side
Mixed
Residential
Side Street
< 500 20 mph 28 feet 20 feet None
*Average Daily Traffic volume projected to occur at the time of completion of development
of TND
4. Private Streets
Private streets and alleys, built to standards approved by the Zoning Administrator, are
permitted in Traditional Neighborhood Developments. Such private streets and alleys
may serve multiple lots and uses, allowing lots to share entrances on to the public
street. Private streets and alleys shall be maintained by a property owners association
approved by the Town.
5. Sidewalks
Sidewalks shall be provided on at least one side of the street. Paved area of sidewalk
shall be not less than six (6) feet wide, with total sidewalk area width not less than
twelve (12) feet.
6. Pedestrian and/or Bicycle Routes
Pedestrian and bicycle routes shall be provided to connect all uses, so that pedestrians
and bicyclists can move comfortably and safely from any site within the TND to any
other site with the TND. Pedestrian traffic shall be accommodated through the
provision of sidewalks and paths. Bicycle traffic shall be accommodated through the
provision of designated, well-marked bicycle lanes and/or paths suitable for bicycle
traffic.
7. Parking
Parking and loading spaces shall be provided as required in Article 7. On-street as
well as off-street parking spaces shall be counted toward satisfying the requirements.
3 - 72 Updated December 2020
On-street parking spaces assigned to a building or use shall be those spaces that abut
the lot containing that building or use. All required handicapped parking spaces shall
be provided off-street. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be located behind or
to the side of principal structures and may be served directly or indirectly by alleys.
Shared parking shall be permitted upon approval by the Zoning Administrator of a
shared parking plan prepared and submitted by the applicant.
3-5.2.11.6. Property Owners Association
A Property Owners Association shall be established at the time of zoning approval of a
TND. Charter provisions for the POA shall be subject to approval of the Town and at a
minimum shall provide for:
1. Adequate, on-going funding to maintain all common areas and facilities, including
any commonly-owned parks, squares, open space, streets or alleys
2. Design guidelines and procedures for review and approval of structures and site
plans
3-5.2.11.7. Use Limitations
1. Public Water and Sewer Service
All development within a Traditional Neighborhood District is required to be served
by public (or community) water and sewer facilities.
2. Maximum Site Area in Impervious Surfaces
Residential Areas: No greater than sixty-five (65) percent of any lot.
Commercial Areas: No greater than eighty-five (85) percent of any lot.
3-5.3 HD - Historic District
3-5.3.1 Legislative Intent
Districts may hereafter be created which are designated as Historic Districts (HD). They
shall include historic areas as defined in the 1950 Code of Virginia § 15.2-2201. See also
Code of Virginia § 15.2-2280-2283 and § 15.2-2306. districts may be created by
amendment of the Zoning Ordinance and shall be overlay districts, as defined herein.
Pursuant to the purposes and provisions of the 1950 Code of Virginia § 15.2-2306 and for
the purposes of implementing the Comprehensive Plan, promoting the general welfare,
education, and recreational pleasure of the public, through the perpetuation of those areas
or individual structures and premises which have been or may be officially designated by
3 - 73 Updated December 2020
the Town Council as having historic or architectural significance, historic districts are
created. Regulations within such districts are intended to protect against deterioration,
destruction of, or encroachment upon, such areas, structures, and premises; to encourage
uses which will lead to their continuance, conservation, and improvement in an
appropriate manner; and to assure that new structures and uses within such districts will
be in keeping with the character to be preserved and enhanced.
It is further the intent of this article that the Town Council along with the Planning
Commission shall seek and obtain the advice and assistance of the Architectural Review
Board, created herein, as well as other organizations or individuals qualified by interest,
training, and experience in achieving the objectives set forth.
3-5.3.2 Creation and Composition of Architectural Review Board
3-5.3.2.1 Creation. For the general purposes of administering this article and
specifically to preserve and protect historic places and areas in the
Town through the control of demolition of such places and through the
regulation of architectural design and uses of structures in such areas,
there is hereby created a board to be known as the "Architectural
Review Board" (ARB) to be composed of five (5) voting members.
The members of said Architectural Review Board shall be appointed
by the Town Council.
3-5.3.2.2 Membership. The Membership shall consist of five (5) members, a
majority of which shall be residents of the Town, and all of who have
reasonable knowledge and have demonstrated an interest in historic or
architectural development within the Town.
3-5.3.2.3 Terms. Members shall be appointed for a term of four (4) years.
Initial appointments shall be three (3) members for four (4) years, and
remaining members for two (2) years.
3-5.3.2.4 Organization. The ARB shall elect from its own membership a
chairman and vice-chairman who shall serve annual terms and may
succeed themselves. The Planning Director or his designee shall serve
as Secretary to the ARB.
3-5.3.2.5 Rules. The ARB shall meet in regular session at least once a month,
whenever an application has been filed for their consideration. Special
Meetings of the ARB may be called by the Chairman or a majority of
the members after twenty-four (24) hours written notice to each
member served personally or left at his usual place of business or
3 - 74 Updated December 2020
residence. Such notice shall state the time and place of a meeting and
the purpose thereof.
Written notice of a special meeting is not required if the time of the
special meeting has been fixed at a regular meeting, or if all members
are present at a special meeting or file a written waiver of notice. For
the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall
be not less than a majority of all voting members of the ARB. The
ARB may make, alter, or rescind rules and forms for its procedures,
consistent with the ordinances of the Town and the general laws of the
State of Virginia.
The ARB shall establish procedures for all matters coming before it for
review and all meetings shall be open to the public. Adequate notice
shall be given to applicants, but meetings need not be advertised in
advance except in the case of a proposal to demolish or move a
designated landmark or contributing structure. Notice when required
shall be the publication of the agenda in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county seven (7) days prior to the meeting.
3-5.3.2.6 Powers and Duties. The Architectural Review Board shall have the
power and authority for issuing or denying Certificates of
Appropriateness for construction, reconstruction, substantial exterior
alteration, razing, relocation, and signs within the historic district, with
right of direct appeal of an adverse decision to the Town Council as
provided in Article 11.
In addition to the aforementioned duties and powers, the Board shall
have the following duties and powers:
1. To assist and advise the Town Council, the Planning Commission,
and other Town departments, agencies, and property owners in
matters involving historically significant sites and buildings, such
as appropriate land usage, parking facilities, and signs.
2. To advise owners of historic landmarks or contributing structures
on problems of preservation.
3. To propose additional historic districts.
4. To conduct studies deemed necessary by the Town Council or
Planning Commission concerning additional districts, and means
of preservation and utilization of historic assets in the Town.
5. To formulate recommendations to the Town Council concerning
the establishment of an appropriate system of markers for selected
3 - 75 Updated December 2020
historic sites and buildings, including proposals for the installation
and care of such historic markers.
6. To cooperate with and enlist assistance from the Virginia
Department of Historic Resources, the National Trust for Historic
Preservation, and other interested parties both public and private in
its efforts to preserve, restore, and conserve historic landmarks,
buildings, sites, or areas within the Town.
3-5.3.3 Applicability; Historic District Boundaries Generally
3-5.3.3.1 Character.
The Historic District boundaries shall in general be drawn so as to
include lands closely related to and bearing upon the character of the
historic site or sites, thus providing an area needed to control
potentially adverse influences. Said boundary shall include land on
both sides of a street or streets where desirable to accomplish the
preservation objective. The concept of the historic district shall
include groupings of structures which have significance relative to
their patterns of development and/or interrelationships among such
structures, while some of the structures might not possess significant
merit when considered alone.
3-5.3.3.2 Inventory of Landmarks and Contributing Properties Established.
The ARB shall prepare and recommend for adoption as a part of this
Ordinance an inventory map based upon the criteria set forth in this
Ordinance. This map, hereinafter called the Inventory Map, when
adopted by the Town Council shall be as much a part of this Ordinance
as if fully described herein and shall be filed as a part of this Ordinance
by the Zoning Administrator. All structures or sites designated on the
Inventory Map as landmark structures or sites shall be considered as
landmarks or landmark structures for the purposes of this Ordinance.
Structures or sites designated as properties which contribute to the
historic character of the Town but which do not contain landmark
structures or sites shall be known as contributing properties for the
purpose of this Ordinance. Structures or sites not designated as
landmark or contributing properties shall be known as noncontributing
properties. The Inventory Map may be amended from time to time in
the same manner as the zoning map.
3-5.3.3.3 Establishment of and Amendments to Historic District Boundaries and
Regulations.
3 - 76 Updated December 2020
Historic District boundaries, regulations and amendments thereto may
be initiated (i) by resolution of the Town Council, (ii) by motion of the
Planning Commission, or (iii) by petition of the owner, contract
purchaser with the owner's written consent, or the owner's agent
therefore, of the property which is the subject of the proposed
Inventory Map amendment, addressed to the governing body or the
local planning commission, in accord with Section 11-3.10 of this
Ordinance. Any such resolution or motion by the Town Council or
Planning Commission proposing the rezoning shall state the public
purposes therefore.
The ARB shall prepare and submit a report with an evaluation of the
proposed amendment. Such report should establish and define the
historic district boundaries as defined upon an appropriate overlay
map, as well as the historic and/or architectural significance of the
buildings, structures, or sites to be protected; report on any special
characteristics, qualities and/or fabric to be preserved; and describe
current planning, present trends, conditions, and desirable public
objectives for preservation.
3-5.3.3.4 Criteria.
Criteria for evaluating the merits of a given structure or space shall be
based on architectural features as well as historic factors. Certain
buildings or areas, although not associated with a historic personage or
event, may be valuable examples of the Town's physical and cultural
heritage. Structures of local significance shall be evaluated as well as
those of State and National significance, and any structures
individually listed upon the National Register of Historic Places or the
Virginia Landmarks Register shall be designated upon the Town
Register. In addition, such evaluation shall be based on the following
matters, as well as the Town’s Historic District Design Guidelines.
1. Architectural and Landscape Style
The evaluation shall respect the qualities of each architectural and
landscape style and shall judge a structure's merit on how well it
exemplifies the distinguishing characteristics of said style.
Consideration will be given to:
1. Significance of architectural design.
3 - 77 Updated December 2020
2. Scale and/or interrelationships of structures and/or
environmental features.
3. Significant patterns of development.
4. Quality of Workmanship.
5. Amount of surviving original fabric.
6. Original location and/or use.
7. Remaining outbuildings or dependencies.
8. Surrounding environment, including gardens, landscaping, and
walks.
9. Aesthetic quality.
10. Original integrity of the structure and its details.
2. Historical and/or Cultural Significance
Structures or spaces relating to one or more of the following criteria
will be considered historically or culturally valuable:
1. Association with historic personage.
2. Association with historic event.
3. Work of leading architect or master craftsman.
4. Site or structure of cultural significance.
In addition, sole or infrequent surviving building types and structures
not historic in themselves but adding to the character of a historic
district need to be looked at as potentially deserving preservation. The
location of such resources within the Historic District and the
resource’s relative importance to the District as a whole, shall be
considered.
3-5.3.3.5 Additional Required Information. In addition to historical and
architectural information, the aforementioned report of the ARB
required by paragraph 3-5.3.3.2 for amendments to the Ordinance shall
include:
1. A description of existing structures, premises, and uses likely to
have an adverse effect on the desired character of the district,
including those near and visually related to the district, with maps,
photographs, and other data indicating the reasons for such an
effect.
2. An analysis of lands not occupied by structures, including lands
near and visually related to the district. For public lands,
ownership, use, and location shall be indicated. For private lands,
3 - 78 Updated December 2020
assessed valuation shall be added as well as existing zoning and
planned land use.
3. Recommendations concerning detailed regulations to be applied
within the district, to supplement or modify general regulations set
forth herein, which may include principal and accessory uses and
structures, minimum lot and yard requirements, maximum lot
coverage by all buildings, maximum height of structures, off-street
parking and loading requirements, control of signs and exterior
illumination, and control of integral facade changes to existing
buildings where said controls and regulations are only for the
express purpose of preventing changes which are architecturally
incompatible with the buildings, structures, or sites to be
preserved.
3-5.3.3.6 Action by the Town Council. The creation of a historic district by the
Town Council shall include a declaration that the landmarks, buildings,
structures, or sites to be preserved are in fact of historical and/or
architectural significance requiring protection against destruction or
encroachment; that the designation of individual structures and
premises is in substantial public interest; and that such
recommendations as approved by the Town Council supplementing or
modifying general regulations are to be applied to the district created.
3-5.3.4 District Regulations
Within the Historic District the following regulations shall apply:
3-5.3.4.1 Certain Minor Actions Exempted From Review By The Architectural
Review Board. Certain minor actions which are deemed not to have
permanent effects upon the character of the historic district are
exempted from review for architectural compatibility by the
Architectural Review Board. Such actions shall include the following
and any similar actions which in the written opinion of the Zoning
Administrator will have no more effect on the character of the district
than those listed:
1. Repainting resulting in the same or in a different color. (Original
painting of masonry surfaces is not exempted from review.)
2. Replacement of missing or broken window panes, roofing slates,
tiles, or shingles and except on landmark structures outside doors,
window frames, or shutters where no substantial change in design
or material is proposed.
3 - 79 Updated December 2020
3. Addition or deletion of storm doors or storm windows and window
gardens, or similar appurtinances.
4. Addition or deletion of television and radio antennas, or skylights
and solar collectors in locations not visible from a public street.
5. Landscaping involving planting of grass, trees or shrubs, minor
grading, walks, low retaining walls, temporary fencing, small
fountains, ponds, and the like which will not substantially affect
the character of the property and its surroundings.
6. Minor additions or deletions to the structure or accessory structures
which will not substantially change the architectural character of
the structure or which are generally hidden from public view.
7. Construction of accessory buildings and structures on properties
which are not designated as landmark or contributing properties
and which are generally in keeping with the character of the
existing structure and its surroundings.
8 Construction of off-street loading areas and off-street parking areas
containing five (5) spaces or less in a commercial or Central
Business District.
9. Creation of outside storage in a commercial or Central Business
District which does not require structural changes or major
grading.
10 Routine utility repairs and minor improvements which will not be
clearly visible from the public right-of-way.
11. Any changes within a structure which are not visible from a public
street.
Provided however that the Zoning Administrator shall have authority
to order that work be stopped and that an appropriate application be
filed for review by the Architectural Review Board in any case where
in his opinion the action may have an adverse effect on the Historic
District or may produce arresting and spectacular effects, violent
contrasts of materials or colors and intense and lurid colors or patterns,
or details clearly inconsistent with the character of the present
structures or with the prevailing character of the surroundings and the
historic district.
3-5.3.4.2 Certificate of Appropriateness Required for New Construction,
Reconstruction, and Substantial Exterior Alteration.
3 - 80 Updated December 2020
Except as herein provided no building or structure, including signs,
shall be refaced, erected, reconstructed, restored, or substantially
altered in exterior appearance within a historic district and no permit
authorizing same shall be granted unless and until the same is
approved by the Architectural Review Board and a Certificate of
Appropriateness has been issued by that body, with right of direct
appeal to the Town Council as hereinafter provided, as being
architecturally compatible with the historical, cultural, and/or
architectural aspects of the structure and its surroundings.
"Substantial alterations" shall be defined as any and all work done on
buildings, structures, or sites in a historic district other than those
specifically exempted herein and other than the general examples of
"nonsubstantial" alterations cited herein. Examples of work
constituting "substantial alterations" include:
1. Construction of a new building at any location or a new accessory
building on a landmark or contributing property or on a site within
the Historic District adjacent to a designated landmark site.
2. Any addition to or alteration of a structure which increases the
square footage of the structure or otherwise alters substantially its
size, height, contour, or outline.
3. Any change or alteration of the exterior architectural style of a
contributing or landmark structure, including removal or rebuilding
of porches, openings, dormers, window sash, chimneys, columns,
structural elements, stairways, terraces, and the like.
4. Addition or removal of one (1) or more stories or alteration of a
roof line.
5. Landscaping which involves major changes of grade or walls and
fences more than three-and-one-half (3.5) feet in height.
6. All signs on all structures shall be reviewed in accordance with
Article 6.
7. Any other major actions not specifically covered by the terms of
this section but which would have a substantial effect on the
character of the historic district.
8. Erection of awnings, canopies, and similar appurtenances shall be
reviewed.
9. Placement of window air conditioners on the front of commercial
buildings only shall be reviewed. Central air conditioning units on
residential and commercial buildings shall be reviewed. Placement
of exhaust fans shall be reviewed.
3 - 81 Updated December 2020
In any case in which there might be some question as to whether a
project may be exempted from review, may constitute a minor action,
or may constitute "substantial alteration," the Zoning Administrator
shall be contacted for a written determination prior to commencement
of work.
“Unsubstantial Alterations” shall include:
1. Work done to prevent deterioration or to replace parts of a
structure with similar materials in order to correct any
deterioration, decay of, or damage to any structure or on any part
thereof, or
2. To restore same as nearly as practical to its condition prior to such
deterioration, decay, or damage.
3. Those minor actions exempted from review by Section 3-5.3.4.1.
3-5.3.4.3 Matters to be Considered in Reviewing the Appropriateness of the
Construction, Reconstruction, or Exterior Alteration of Buildings or
Structures by the Board. The Architectural Review Board shall
consider only those elements that support the purpose of preventing
construction, reconstruction, exterior alteration, repair, or restoration
that is not compatible with the old and historic aspect of the
surroundings.
The Architectural Review Board shall consider the following in
reviewing the appropriateness of architectural features:
1. Exterior architectural features including all signs except for those
exempted in Section 3-5.3.4.1
2. General design, scale, and arrangement.
3. Texture and material, of new construction.
4. The relation of features 1, 2, and 3 above, to similar features of
buildings and structures in the immediate surroundings.
5. The extent to which the building or structure would be harmonious
with or incompatible with the old and historic aspects of the
surroundings. It is not the intent of this consideration to
discourage contemporary architectural expression or to encourage
the emulation of existing buildings or structures of historic or
architectural interest in specific detail. Harmony or
incompatibility should be evaluated in terms of the appropriateness
of materials, scale, size, height, and placement of a new building or
structure in relationship to existing buildings and structures and to
3 - 82 Updated December 2020
the setting thereof, in accord with the Town’s Historic District
Design Guidelines.
3-5.3.4.4 Matters Not to be Considered in Reviewing the Appropriateness of the
Construction, Reconstruction, or Exterior Alteration of Buildings or
Structures by the Board.
The Architectural Review Board shall not consider the following in
reviewing the appropriateness of architectural features:
1. Interior arrangements of rooms, spaces, materials and structural
elements, which are reviewed by the building official for
compliance with the building code
2. Base Zoning Regulations, such as use, lot size, height, setback,
parking requirements, density and landscaping, which are reviewed
by the Zoning Administrator for compliance with the Zoning
Ordinance.
3-5.3.4.5 Demolition. No building or structure officially designated as a
landmark or a contributing building or structure within the historic
district on the Inventory Map which accompanies this Ordinance shall
be demolished until a Certificate of Appropriateness is issued by the
Architectural Review Board, with right of direct appeal from an
adverse decision to the Town Council, as hereinafter provided. The
Town Council may approve the demolition of a building or structure
within the historic district which has not been designated either as a
landmark or contributing structure on said inventory map.
3-5.3.4.6 Moving or Relocation. No building or structure officially designated
as a landmark or contributing building or structure within the district
on the inventory map which accompanies this Ordinance shall be
moved or relocated unless the same is approved by the Architectural
Review Board and a Certificate of Appropriateness issued with right of
direct appeal of an adverse decision to the Town Council as herein
provided. An appeal for final decision by the Town Council shall be
automatic and mandatory in the case of approval of the moving or
relocation of a building or structure so designated as a landmark. The
Zoning Administrator may approve the moving or relocation of the
building or structure within the historic district which has not been
designated either as a landmark or contributing structure on said
inventory map.
3 - 83 Updated December 2020
3-5.3.4.7 Matters to be Considered in Determining the Appropriateness of
Moving or Relocating a Landmark Building or Structure within a
Historic District.
1. Whether or not the proposed relocation would have a detrimental
effect on the structural soundness of the landmark building or
structure.
2. Whether or not the proposed relocation would have a detrimental
effect on the historical aspects of other landmarks in the districts.
3. Whether the proposed relocation would provide new surroundings
that would be harmonious with or incompatible with the historical
and architectural aspects of the landmark, building, or contributing
structure.
4. Whether or not the proposed relocation is the only feasible means
of saving the structure from demolition or demolition by neglect.
3-5.3.4.8 Matters to be Considered in Determining Whether or Not to Grant a
Certificate of Appropriateness for Razing or Demolition. The
Architectural Review Board shall consider the following criteria in
determining whether or not to grant a certificate of appropriateness for
razing or demolition:
1. Whether or not the building or structure is of such architectural or
historic interest that its removal would be to the detriment of the
public interest.
2. Whether or not the building or structure is of such interest or
significance that it would qualify as a National, State, or local
historic landmark.
3. Whether or not the building is of such old and unusual or
uncommon design, texture, and/or material that it could be
reproduced only with great difficulty and/or expense.
4. Whether or not retention of the building or structure would help to
preserve and protect a historic place or area of historic interest in
the Town.
3-5.3.4.9 Offer for Sale. However, the owner of a historic landmark, as a matter
of right shall be entitled to raze or demolish such landmark provided
that:
1. He has applied to the Architectural Review Board for such right.
2. The owner has for the period of time set forth in the time schedule
hereinafter contained at a price reasonably related to its fair market
3 - 84 Updated December 2020
value as determined by independent appraisal, as hereinafter set
forth, made a bona fide offer to sell such landmark, and the land
pertaining thereto, to such person, firm, corporation, government,
or agency, or political subdivision or agency thereof, which gives
reasonable assurance that it is willing to preserve and restore the
landmark, and the land pertaining thereto. A bona fide offer shall
mean actions equivalent to a formal offer in writing and publicly
advertised, from the seller to the public, specifying the price and
terms of sale. The procedure for establishing the fair market value,
unless the owner and the Architectural Review Board agree upon
the said value, shall be that the owner and Architectural Review
Board shall each retain one independent, qualified appraiser, and
should the two appraisers not agree upon the said fair market
value, those appraisers shall choose a third qualified appraiser. A
median value shall be established by the three appraisers which
shall be final and binding upon the owner and the Architectural
Review Board.
3. No contract for the sale of any such historic landmark, and the land
pertaining thereto, shall be binding or enforceable prior to the
expiration of the applicable time period as set forth in the time
schedule hereinafter contained. Any appeal which may be taken to
the Town Council from the decision of the Architectural Review
Board, and from the Town Council to the Circuit Court of
Fauquier County, shall not affect the right of the owner to make
bona fide offer to sell. Offers to sell as provided in this section
shall be made within one (1) year of the date of application to the
Architectural Review Board.
4. Notice. Before making a bona fide offer to sell, an owner shall
first file a written statement with the Chairman of the Architectural
Review Board. Such statement shall identify the property, state
the offering price, the date the offer of sale is to begin, and name
of the real estate agent, if any. No time period set forth in the time
schedule hereinafter set forth shall begin to run until such
statement has been filed.
The time schedule for offers to sell shall be as follows:
1. Three (3) months when the offering price is less than twenty-five
thousand dollars ($25,000);
2. Four (4) months when the offering price is twenty-five thousand
dollars ($25,000) or more but less than forty thousand dollars
($40,000);
3 - 85 Updated December 2020
3. Five (5) months when the offering price is forty thousand dollars
($40,000) or more but less than fifty-five thousand dollars
($55,000);
4. Six (6) months when the offering price is fifty-five thousand
dollars ($55,000) or more but less than seventy-five thousand
dollars ($75,000);
5. Seven (7) months when the offering price is seventy-five thousand
dollars ($75,000) or more but less than ninety thousand dollars
($90,000);
6. Twelve (12) months when the offering price is ninety thousand
dollars ($90,000) or more.
3-5.3.4.10 Hazardous Buildings or Structures. Nothing in this Article shall
prevent the razing or demolition of any building or structure without
consideration of the Architectural Review Board which is in such an
unsafe condition that it would endanger life or property, and
protection from such condition is provided for in the Building Code
and/or other applicable Town ordinances. However, such razing or
demolition shall not be commenced without written approval of the
Zoning Administrator verifying the conditions necessitating such
action.
3-5.3.4.11 Demolition by Neglect. No officially designated historic landmark,
building, or structure within any historic district shall be allowed to
deteriorate due to neglect by the owner which would result in
violation of this section. "Demolition by neglect" shall include any
one (1) or more of the following courses of action or inaction:
1. Deterioration of the exterior of a building to the extent that it
creates or permits a hazardous or unsafe condition.
2. Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports,
horizontal members, roofs, chimneys, and exterior wall elements
such as siding, wooden walls, brick, plaster, or mortar, to the
extent that it adversely affects the character of the historic
district or could reasonably lead to irreversible damage to the
structure.
3. Action by any Town or State authority relative to the safety or
physical condition of any building.
4. The deterioration of exterior chimneys
3 - 86 Updated December 2020
5. The ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs and
foundations, including broken windows and doors
6. The peeling of paint, rotting, holes or other forms of decay
7. The lack of maintenance of the surrounding environment
including fences, gates, sidewalks, steps, signs, accessory
structures and landscaping
8. The deterioration of any feature that so as to create or permit the
creation of any hazardous or unsafe conditions.
In the event that the Zoning Administrator determines that a structure
in a historic district is being "demolished by neglect", he shall so
notify the owner and the Chairman of the Architectural Review
Board of this conclusion, stating the reasons therefore, and shall give
the owner thirty (30) days from the date of the notice in which to
commence work rectifying the specifics provided in the notice, or to
initiate proceedings as provided in Section 3-5.3.4.2 or 3-5.3.4.9
above. If appropriate action is not taken in this time, the Zoning
Administrator will initiate appropriate legal action as provided
herein.
3-5.3.4.12 Signs, Exterior Illumination. Within the Historic District only those
signs permitted in the underlying, base Zoning District shall be
permitted. However, no sign otherwise permitted by the Zoning
Ordinance shall be permitted if the Architectural Review Board finds
such sign or exterior illumination to be architecturally incompatible
with the historical and/or architectural character of the landmark or
district as set forth in the adopted Historic District Guidelines.
3-5.3.4.13 Exceptions. Where the strict interpretation of this article contradicts
existing building, sanitary, or other codes, the Architectural Review
Board shall make recommendations for reasonable relief after
consultation with qualified technical authorities or with any appeal
board now or hereafter established by code. In other cases of
conflict between this and other regulations, the stricter between the
two shall apply.
3-5.3.5 Administration
3-5.3.5.1 Zoning Administrator.
3 - 87 Updated December 2020
Except as authorized herein the Zoning Administrator shall not
authorize a permit for any erection, reconstruction, addition, integral
exterior facade change, demolition, or razing of a building or
structure, or for a sign in the Historic District until the same has been
approved by the Architectural Review Board as set forth in the
following provisions.
3-5.3.5.2 Receipt of Application.
Upon receipt of an application by the Planning Director for each
permit in the historic district, the Planning Director shall:
1. Forthwith forward to the Architectural Review Board a copy of
the application, together with a copy of the site plan and the
building plans and specifications filed by the applicant;
2. Maintain in his office a record of all such applications and of his
handling and final disposition of the same; and
3. Require applicants to submit seven (7) copies of material
required to permit compliance with the foregoing.
3-5.3.5.3 Material to be Submitted for Review.
By general rule, or by specific request in a particular case, the
Architectural Review Board may require submission of any or all of
the following in connection with the application: architectural plans,
site plans, landscaping plans, construction methods, proposed signs
with appropriate detail as to character, proposed exterior lighting
arrangements, elevations of all portions of structure with important
relationships to public view (with indications as to visual
construction materials, design of doors and windows, colors, and
relationships to adjoining structures), and such other exhibits and
reports as are necessary for its determinations. Requests for approval
of activities proposed in historic districts shall be accepted only from
the record owner of the land involved in such proposal, or his agent.
For minor actions not required to be reviewed by the Architectural
Review Board and which may be approved by the Zoning
Administrator, an application shall be submitted on a form provided
by the Town to determine if the proposed action is exempt from
review by the Architectural Review Board. Should the proposed
action not be capable of adequate description on the application
form, the Zoning Administrator may require additional information,
3 - 88 Updated December 2020
including photographs, sketches, and samples of materials or such
other information as may be required for a decision.
3-5.3.5.4 Other Approvals Required.
In any case in which an applicant's proposal also requires the
approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals, final action by the Board
of Zoning Appeals shall precede final action by the Architectural
Review Board. The Board of Zoning Appeals may, however, table a
proposal in order to request the comments of the Architectural
Review Board. Final action by the Architectural Review Board shall
be taken prior to consideration of proposals requiring site plan
approval..
3-5.3.5.5 Action by the Architectural Review Board, Issuance of Certificates
of Appropriateness.
The Architectural Review Board shall render a decision upon any
request or application for a Certificate of Appropriateness within
sixty (60) days after the filing of such application; failure of the
Architectural Review Board to render such a decision within said
sixty (60) day period, unless such period be extended with the
concurrence of the applicant, shall entitle the applicant to proceed as
if the Architectural Review Board had granted the Certificate of
Appropriateness applied for. Prior to denying the Certificate of
Appropriateness, the Architectural Review Board, on the basis of the
review of information received, shall, upon request, indicate to the
applicant the changes in plans and specifications, if any, which in the
opinion of the Board would protect and/or preserve the historical
aspects of the landmark, building, structure, or district. If the
applicant determines that he will make the suggested changes and
does so in writing, the Architectural Review Board may issue the
Certificate of Appropriateness.
3-5.3.5.6 Expiration of Certificates of Appropriateness and Permits to Raze.
Any Certificate of Appropriateness issued pursuant to this article and
any permit to raze a building issued pursuant to this article shall
expire of its own limitation twelve (12) months from the date of
issuance if the work authorized thereby is not commenced by the end
of such twelve-month period; and further, any such certificate and
permit shall also expire and become null and void if such authorized
work is suspended or abandoned for a period of twelve (12) months
3 - 89 Updated December 2020
after being commenced. Any period or periods of time during which
the right to use any such certificate or permit is stayed pursuant to
this article shall be excluded from the computation of the twelve (12)
months.
3-5.3.5.7 Appeals of Architectural Review Board Decisions to Town Council.
Applicants may appeal a decision by the ARB to the Town Council,
in accord with the procedures set forth in Article 11 of this
Ordinance and §15.2-2306 (A) (3) of the Code of Virginia.
3-5.3.5.8 Appeals of Town Council Decisions to the Circuit Court.
Applicants may appeal a decision by the Town Council to the Circuit
Court, in accord with the procedures set forth in Article 11 of this
Ordinance and §15.2-2306 (A) (3) of the Code of Virginia. Such
appeals shall set forth the alleged illegality of the action of the Town
Council and shall be filed within thirty days of the final decision
rendered by the Town Council.
3-5.3.6 Violations and Penalties
Any violation of this Article and the penalties for all such violations shall be as
set forth in the Zoning Ordinance, in accord with Article 11 of this Ordinance
and §15.2-2306 (A) (3) of the Code of Virginia.
Article 4 Site Conservation Manual
Amended April 9, 2019
December 10, 2019
Table of Contents
4.1 Title and Purpose
4.1.1 Title
4.1.2 Authority
4.1.3 Intent
4.1.4 Purpose
4.1.5 Conflicting Content with other Codes and Ordinances
4.1.6 Certain State Erosion and Sediment Control Provisions Adopted
4.1.7 Severability
4.2 Recordation of Riparian Setback Areas
4.3 Application Procedure
4.3.1 Applicant
4.3.2 Agreement in Lieu of SCP
4.3.3 SCP Authority
4.3.4 Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Approving Authority
4.3.5 Responsible Land Disturber
4.4 Definitions
4.5 Exceptions
4.5.1 Erosion and Sediment Control Exemptions
4.5.2 Riparian Buffer and Setback Exceptions
4.6 Riparian Buffer and Setback Area
4.6.1 Riparian Buffers
4.6.2 Riparian Setback Area
4.6.3 Riparian Areas of Special Concern
4.7 Permits
4.7.1 Land Disturbance Permit
4.7.2 Building Permit
4.8 Program Standards/Procedures
4.8.1 Plan Contents
4.8.2 Operation and Maintenance of Storm Water Management Facilities
4.8.3 Approval Process
4.8.4 Bond Requirements
4.8.5 Multi-jurisdiction Requirements
4.8.6 Erosion Impact Areas
4.8.7 Preconstruction Meeting
4.8.8 Inspection Process
4.9 Fees
4.10 Variances
4-2 Updated December 2019
4.11 Violations, Remedies, and Public Notice
4.11.1 Informal Contact/Verbal Warning
4.11.2 Notice to Comply
4.11.3 Stop Work Order
4.12 Criminal and Civil Penalties
4.13 Appellate Process
4.13.1 Appeals of items regulated by the Zoning Ordinance
4.13.2 Appeals to the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Laws
4.13.3 Appeal of a Stop Work Order
4.14 Duration of Approval
4-3 Updated December 2019
Article 4 Site Conservation Manual
4.1 Title and Purpose
4.1.1 Title
The Article contained herein shall hereafter be known as, referred to, and entitled: “The Town of
Warrenton Site Conservation Manual.”
4.1.2 Authority
This Site Conservation Manual is authorized under Section 15.2-2280 of the Code of Virginia,
9VAC25-840, Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law, and any other applicable titles and
sections of the Code, as amended. The Site Conservation Manual is hereby incorporated into and
made a part of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Warrenton, Virginia.
4.1.3 Intent
The intent of the Site Conservation Manual is to promote responsible land development and the
preservation of the Town’s natural landscape through the application of protective measures on and
around site development both during and following development. The Town’s natural landscape
shall include, but is not limited to, natural resources such as trees and woodlands, fresh water bodies,
wetlands, riparian areas, other natural areas and natural soils.
4.1.4 Purpose
• To promote the preservation of the natural landscape on public and private lands and to
encourage responsible development, this manual shall require the owner of each
development area to be responsible for developing a comprehensive Site Conservation Plan
(SCP). This plan will address preservation of our natural landscape through tree
preservation, riparian setbacks, erosion and sediment control, stormwater management, and
design.
• The Site Conservation Plan will assure all land disturbance activities are in accordance with
the requirements of the Virginia Stormwater Management Program (VSMP) Regulations and
permit, Town of Warrenton Zoning Ordinance; Section 8-7 Acceptable Tree Species,
Section 8-9 Conservation of Heritage and Specimen Trees, Section 8-10 Retention and
Replacement of Trees Requirements and Article 10 Site Development Plan; Town of
Warrenton Subdivision Ordinance; and the Commonwealth of Virginia Erosion and
Sediment Control Law.
• The Construction Site Conservation Manual (CSCM) shall establish procedures for the
4-4 Updated December 2019
administration and enforcement of such controls. The CSCM will include the preparation of
a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) to be maintained on site during
construction and that will clearly identify to conversion of temporary E&S measures to final
SWM/BMP measures and to protect the integrity of those permanent facilities after
construction is completed.
• The preparation of a VPDES (VSMP) Permit Registration Statement, submittal to the Town
of Warrenton, along with required permit fees, for processing through the Department of
Environmental Quality (DEQ), is hereby required, in accordance with the Authority set forth
in section 4-1.2.
4.1.5 Conflicting Content with other Codes and Ordinances
Whenever any provisions of any Commonwealth or Federal statue or other provisions impose a
greater requirement, or higher standard, than is required by these regulations, the provisions of the
Commonwealth or Federal statute, provision, or regulation shall govern.
4.1.6 Certain State Erosion and Sediment Control Provisions Adopted
Chapter Three of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook and the Virginia Erosion and
Sediment Control Regulations (9VAC25-840) amended by the State Water Control Board, October
2013, or the most current edition of such regulations, is hereby adopted in its entirety and
incorporated herein by reference in this manual as set out in full herein. The text of these regulations
is on file in the Community Development Department.
Except as otherwise provided for in Section 4-5 Exceptions of this manual, no person shall engage in
any kind of land disturbing activity within the Town of Warrenton until they have first acquired a
Land Disturbance Permit.
4.1.7 Severability
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be decided by the courts to be unconstitutional or
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity or application of the remainder of the Ordinance as
a whole or any part thereof.
4.2 Recordation of Riparian Setback Areas
Prior to final approval of a subdivision, site plan, or other development, as applicable, the Riparian
Setback Area shall be permanently recorded on the plat records for all parcels associated with the
site. Recordation shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Town of Warrenton
Subdivision Ordinance Section 3-10 Final Plat Requirements.
4-5 Updated December 2019
4.3 Application Procedure
The Site Conservation Plan shall be submitted as part of the acceptance of the preliminary plat (or in
the absence of a requirement for preliminary plats, then as part of the final plat, as applicable) and/or
a site development plan required for development within the Town of Warrenton and shall follow the
requirements outlined in Article 10, Site Development Plans, of the Town Zoning Ordinance.
4.3.1 Applicant
For the purposes of this Manual, the preparation, submission, and approval of the SCP shall be the
responsibility of the property owner. In addition, the requirements of Section 4.8.4, Bond
Requirements, of this Manual concerning a performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of
credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement that is acceptable under the
provisions of Section 4.8.4, Bond Requirements, shall be met.
4.3.2 Agreement in Lieu of SCP
Pertaining to development sites exempt from the site review process as per Section 10-2 of the Town
Zoning Ordinance, the Town of Warrenton and the land owner may enter into an Agreement in Lieu
of the SCP. This agreement must specify the BMPs that the property owner will put into effect to
assure the preservation of the Natural Landscape on site and on the adjacent sites in the best manner
available. With this agreement the designation of a responsible land disturber who holds a certificate
of competence is required per Section 62.1-44.15:53, Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law.
If a violation occurs during the land disturbing activities the person designated as the responsible
land disturber shall be responsible for correcting such violation. Failure to provide the name and
contact information, including phone number, of an individual holding a certificate of competence
prior to engaging in land disturbing activities may result in revocation of the approved plan and the
person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be subject to the penalties referenced in Section 4-
12, Criminal and Civil Penalties, of this Manual.
4.3.3 SCP Authority
The Zoning Administrator, or the Administrator’s designated representative, shall be responsible for
the verification and assurance that all applicable requirements are met prior to the issuance of any
permits for land development. The Zoning Administrator shall work with the Erosion and Sediment
Control Administrator, Town Arborist and/or any other department or agency of interest to assure
that a complete Site Conservation Plan has been approved prior to issuance of any permits for land
development.
4.3.4 Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Approving Authority
The Town of Warrenton’s Erosion and Sediment Control Administrator shall be responsible for
determining the adequacy of the Erosion & Sediment Control Plan submitted for land-disturbing
activities, for the approval of such plans, and that such plan will be complied with throughout the
4-6 Updated December 2019
development process.
4.3.5 Responsible Land Disturber
As a prerequisite to engaging in land-disturbing activities shown on the approved SCP the person
responsible for the plan shall provide all contact information, including phone numbers, of the
individual holding a certificate of competence to the Town. This person will be held as the contact
person to be notified if violations occur. This information shall be supplied directly onto the first
page of the SCP. Failure to provide the name and contact information, including phone number, of
an individual holding a certificate of competence prior to engaging in land-disturbing activities may
result in revocation of the approved plan and the person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be
subject to the penalties referenced in Section 4-12, Criminal and Civil Penalties, of this manual.
4.4 Definitions
See Article 12, the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook (VESCH), 9VAC25-840, and
any other applicable titles and sections of the Code, as amended.
4.5 Exceptions
4.5.1 Erosion and Sediment Control Exemptions
Minor land disturbing activities such as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs,
maintenance work.
Individual service connections.
Installation, maintenance, or repair of any underground public utility lines when such activity occurs
on an existing hard surfaced road, street, or sidewalk, provided the land disturbing activity is
confined to the area of the road, street, or sidewalk, which is hard surfaced.
Septic tank lines or drainage fields unless included in an overall plan for land disturbing activity
relating to construction of the building to be served by the septic tank system.
Surface or deep mining.
Exploration or drilling for oil and gas including the well site, roads, feeder lines, and off-site disposal
areas.
Tilling, planting, or harvesting or agricultural, livestock feedlot operations, horticultural, or forest
crops or livestock feedlot operations; including agricultural engineering as follows: construction of
terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds, ditches, strip cropping, lister
furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage, and land irrigation. However, this
exception shall not apply to harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which the harvesting occurs
is reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11 (§ 10.1-1100 et
4-7 Updated December 2019
seq.) of the code of Virginia or is converted to bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use as
described in subsection B of (§ 10.1-1163) of the Code of Virginia.
Repair or rebuilding of tracks, right-of-way, bridges, communication facilities, and other related
structures and facilities of a railroad company.
Agricultural engineering operations including but not limited to the construction of terraces, terrace
outlets, check dams, silt basins, dikes, ponds not required to comply with the provisions of the Dam
Safety Act, Article 2 (§ 10.1-1100 et seq.) Chapter 6 of this title, ditches, strip cropping, lister
furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage and land irrigation.
Disturbed land area of less than two thousand (2,000) square feet in size.
Installation of fence and sign posts or telephone and electric pole and other kinds of posts or poles.
Emergency work to protect life, limb, or property, and emergency repairs; however, if the land
disturbing activity would have required an approved erosion and sediment control plan, and the
activity were not an emergency, then the land area disturbed shall be shaped and stabilized in
accordance with the requirement of the plan-approving authority.
4.5.2 Riparian Buffer and Setback Exceptions
Grassy swales and other ephemeral streams
Roadside ditches
Drainage ditches whose purpose is to convey storm water to the public system
Tile drainage systems
Stream Culverts
4.6 Riparian Buffer and Setback Area
4.6.1 Riparian Buffers
Riparian buffers shall be composed of a 25 foot area extending from streamside and the existing
natural landscape of the stream including trees and underbrush. If the natural landscape has been
removed, the buffer area is required to be landscaped with a mixture of deciduous and coniferous
trees with the majority being deciduous canopy or ornamental trees of species specified in Section 8-
7 of the Zoning Ordinance. The riparian buffer shall be included as any buffer or part of any buffer
area required in Article 8 of the Zoning Ordinance.
4-8 Updated December 2019
4.6.2 Riparian Setback Area
Riparian Setbacks, unless as specified as a riparian area of special concern referenced in Section 4-
6.3, shall be 50 feet from streamside and will include the riparian buffer area.
4.6.3 Riparian Areas of Special Concern
4.6.3.1 Delineated Floodplain Areas
Where the 100-year floodplain is wider than the Riparian Setback on either or both sides of a
stream, the Riparian Setback shall be extended to the outer edge of the 100-year floodplain
as defined by FEMA.
4.6.3.2 Steep Slopes
In areas where the gradient of the riparian corridor significantly impacts the stream the
following adjustments to the Riparian Setback shall be made:
Average Percentage of Slope Adjustment to Riparian Setback
15%-20% Add 25 feet
21% - 25% Add 50 feet
>25% Add 100 feet*
*See Article 9-17 of the Zoning Ordinance
4.6.3.3 Wetland Areas
Where potential wetlands are shown on the US Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands
Inventory (NWI), a Jurisdictional Determination (JD) issued by the US Army Corps of
Engineers shall be required with any application for a land disturbance permit. Riparian
Setbacks shall include the full extent of wetlands protected by federal or state law.
4.7 Permits
Development in The Town of Warrenton shall require a two-tier permit system. This system will be
required for all construction activities within the Town except for those exemptions outlined in
Section 10-2 of the Town Zoning Ordinance and Section 4-5, Exceptions, specified in this manual.
Permits will be issued once the site review process has been completed and proper bonding is in
place. The two required permits are the Land Disturbance Permit and the Building Permit.
4.7.1 Land Disturbance Permit
The "LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT" (LDP) shall be issued for the implementation of grading
4-9 Updated December 2019
which is composed of riparian protection, tree removal and those requirements set by the erosion and
sediment control plan. No additional construction will be performed and no additional building
materials shall be allowed on site until the Zoning Administrator has verified that all requirements of
this permit have been met. No Land Disturbance Permit shall be issued without a plat survey
showing all riparian setback areas and a tree survey and replacement schedule approved by the Town
Arborist or Zoning Administrator.
The issuance of the Land Disturbance Permit shall be conditioned on an approved SCP which shall
be presented at the time of application.
The ESC Administrator may allow the stockpiling of additional construction materials, or the
temporary storage of equipment, on the site prior to the issuance of the second permit if a suitable
location can be identified. Proper Erosion and Sediment Control, approved by the Erosion and
Sediment Control Administrator, must be maintained on the stockpile area prior, during, and after the
area is used for stockpiling.
4.7.2 Building Permit
The "BUILDING PERMIT" will be issued once the Zoning Administrator certifies that the
requirements set forth in this manual and required by the Land Disturbance Permit, have been
properly installed. This permit will set forth the commencement of the final construction phase and
requires review and approval of the Site Development Plan and of any and all building plans.
4.8 Program Standards/Procedures
4.8.1 Plan Contents
The preservation of our natural landscapes requires that developers work to contain the natural
features of the land in their development practices. The contents of the SCP will demonstrate the
developer’s intent toward preservation and shall include the following requirements based on the
Chesapeake Bay Watershed Manual Section VI and Article 8 Sections 7, 9 and 10 of the Town
Zoning Ordinance:
4.8.1.1 Riparian Protection Plan
Riparian Protection Plan showing riparian setback and buffer areas and those methods of
either retaining the natural forested areas or plantings designed to protect the buffered area.
4.8.1.2 Tree Survey
A tree survey of existing trees as required by Section 10-4-2-15 of the Zoning Ordinance on
sites proposed for development, which includes a listing of all heritage and specimen trees to
be preserved and the location of all trees on the site with a caliper of six (6) inches or
greater. Such trees shall be also identified in a table listing their species, caliper, and canopy
4-10 Updated December 2019
size.
4.8.1.3 Tree Protection Plan
Tree Protection Plan as required by Section 10-6-12 of the Zoning Ordinance that indicates
the location of trunks and drip lines for trees or wooded areas that are to be retained. In the
case of wooded areas, the trunks and drip lines of perimeter trees shall be sufficient
indication of location.
4.8.1.4 Tree Replacement Schedule
A replacement schedule of all trees required to be replaced in Section 8-10 of the Zoning
Ordinance. Replacement trees shall be replaced by trees indigenous to the Warrenton region.
Deciduous trees shall replace deciduous trees and nondeciduous trees shall replace
nondeciduous trees.
4.8.1.5 Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
An erosion and sediment control plan containing a description of the controls appropriate for
the best management of each construction operation as outlined in the Virginia Erosion and
Sediment Control Law. The plan must make use of the practices that preserve the existing
natural conditions to the maximum extent possible. Clear-cutting, as defined in Article 12,
shall not be authorized.
For subdivisions of two lots or greater, and site plans comprising one or more acres of land,
the plan shall be designed after a Phase I investigation that identifies all potentially
historically significant and environmentally sensitive areas on the property. These include,
but are not limited to, structures, wetlands, floodplain, steep slopes, endangered habitats, and
unstable soils. Buildings and lot locations shall be laid out to preserve, to the maximum
extent possible, the conditions identified in the Phase I investigation.
Development of the plan shall be accomplished through the use of phased development
practices per the following schedule that follows the normal progression of land
development:
? Phase 1: Streets, parking areas, and utilities, including temporary and permanent
erosion and sediment control and stormwater installations
? Phase 2: Open space and amenity areas, where provided.
? Phase 3: Lots for buildings and structures. Lots shall not be cleared until a land
disturbance permit in conjunction with a building permit has issued.
4-11 Updated December 2019
4.8.1.6 Methods of protection
Methods of protection shall be clearly indicated on site plan with a legend of symbol
included on each sheet.
4.8.1.7 Responsible Party
Protected natural areas including riparian areas and all storm water management facilities
shall have an inspection and maintenance plan that identifies the owner and the responsible
party for carrying out the inspection and maintenance plan. Contact information, including
phone numbers, shall be located on the first page of the SCP.
4.8.2 Operation and Maintenance of Storm Water Management Facilities
An approved plan for the maintenance of all storm water management facilities is required by Article
5 of the Zoning Ordinance. The responsibility for the operation and maintenance of storm water
management facilities, unless assumed by the Town of Warrenton, shall remain with the property
owner and shall pass to any successor or owner. If portions of the land are to be sold, legally binding
arrangements shall be made to pass the basic responsibility to successors in title. These arrangements
shall be designated for each property owner, governmental agency, or other legally established entity
to be permanently responsible for maintenance.
4.8.3 Approval Process
4.8.3.1 Approval
The Town of Warrenton Erosion and Sediment Control Administrator and the Zoning
Administrator shall review any and all SCPs and grant written approval within sixty (60)
days of the receipt of the plan if it determines that the plan meets the requirements of the
Town’s regulations and if the person responsible for carrying out the plan certifies that he
will properly perform the conservation measures included in the plan and will conform to the
provisions of the SCP Manual. The approval process follows after a site development plan
(SDP) has been approved in accordance with Article 10 of the Zoning Ordinance. The land
disturbance permit will be issued after the site plan is approved in its entirety and all
required documentation, including proof of the purchase of off-site nutrient or wetland
credits, copies of required wetlands permits or Jurisdictional Determinations from the US
Army Corps of Engineers, and all easements, plats, bonds or surety contracts and documents
have been submitted and approved, as applicable.
4.8.3.2 Denials
When an SCP is determined to be inadequate, written notice of denial stating the specific
reasons for the denial shall be communicated to the applicant within sixty (60) days. The
notice shall specify the modifications, terms and conditions that will permit approval of the
4-12 Updated December 2019
plan. If no action is taken by the Town of Warrenton within the time specified above, the
plan shall be deemed approved and the person authorized to proceed with the proposed
activity.
4.8.3.3 Plan Alterations
An approved SCP may be changed in the following cases:
1. Where inspection has revealed that the plan is inadequate to satisfy applicable
regulation;
2. Where the person responsible for carrying out the approved SCP finds that because of
changed circumstances, or for other reasons, the approved plan cannot be effectively
carried out; and
3. Proposed amendments to the SCP, consistent with the requirements of this manual, are
agreed to by the Erosion and Sediment Control Administrator, and Zoning
Administrator, and the person responsible for carrying out the plan.
4.8.4 Bond Requirements
Upon approval of the cost estimates required by Section 10-8 of the Zoning Ordinance and Section
3-12.3 of the Subdivision Ordinance, the owner or developer is required to submit:
1. A certificate certifying that the construction costs have been paid to the person constructing
such improvements covered by the cost estimates; or
2. A cash escrow, certified check, or performance and payment bond surety with escalation
clause for the cost of improvements to insure completion; or
3. A bank or savings institution’s letter of credit, on certain designated funds satisfactory to the
Planning Director as to the institution, the amount and the form.
4.8.5 Multi-jurisdiction Requirements
Where land-disturbing activities involve lands under the jurisdiction of more than one local control
program an erosion and sediment control plan, the SCP may, at the option of the applicant, be
submitted to the State Board for review and approval rather than to each jurisdiction concerned.
4.8.6 Erosion Impact Areas
The Town may designate areas in the town which shall be classified as Erosion Impact Areas as
defined in Article 12. Any such designation and classification shall be deemed to be a component of
the local control program. Consistent with this Manual, and in order to prevent further erosion, the
Erosion and Sediment Control Administrator may require the approval of a conservation plan for any
4-13 Updated December 2019
Erosion Impact Area. Such plan shall be subject to all review, bonding, inspections and enforcement
provisions of this Manual which apply to Land Disturbance Permits. The plan must be submitted by
the property owner.
4.8.7 Preconstruction Meeting
Pre-Construction meeting shall be held prior to the initiation of any site work. Attendees include, but
are not limited to, Planning Director, Erosion and Sediment Control Inspector/Administrator, Town
Arborist, Town Engineer, Town Zoning Administrator, and the Responsible Land Disturber or his
representatives.
4.8.8 Inspection Process
During the development process, all land disturbing activities within the Town of Warrenton shall be
inspected by the Town’s Erosion and Sediment Control Administrator and when applicable, The
Town Erosion and Sediment Control Inspector, the Town Arborist, or a qualified Town
representative. The inspection process includes the following:
An initial site inspection shall be made prior to the start of construction to assure that all
relative onsite protective measures are in place and that all affected offsite waterways and
environmental impact areas are protected. The E&S Administrator shall give written notice
to Responsible Land Disturber that the inspection is complete and that construction can start.
If the inspection finds that these protective measures are not in place, corrective action shall
be recorded and given to the Responsible Land Disturber either directly onsite or via first
class mail. Construction shall not begin until the relative onsite and offsite protective
measures are in place.
Each site in which land disturbing activities are being conducted shall be inspected at least
once every two weeks and within twenty four (24) hours of a runoff producing event and at
the completion of the project prior to the release of any performance bonds.
Town of Warrenton Standard Operating Procedure for Erosion and Sediment Control Inspection
further outlines the inspection process.
4.9 Fees
A reasonable fee to defray the cost of plan review, including site inspections for the duration of the
construction process, shall be paid to the Town. These charges shall be in accord with the Site Plan
Review fee schedule as adopted by the Town Council and relative permits such as the Land
Disturbance Permit.
4.10 Variances
The ESC Administrator may waive or modify any regulations that are deemed inappropriate or too
4-14 Updated December 2019
restrictive for site conditions, by granting a variance. The ESC Administrator shall follow the
process as outlined in section 9VAC25-840 of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control
Regulations. For ESC variance denials, the applicant may resubmit a variance request with additional
documentation to the State Water Control Board.
• During construction, the person responsible for implementing the approved ESC plan may
request a variance in writing from the Erosion and Sediment Control Administrator. The
Erosion and Sediment Control Administrator shall respond in writing either approving or
disapproving such a request.
• If variances submitted during construction are not approved within ten (10) days of receipt
of the variance request, the request shall be considered to be disapproved.
4.11 Violations, Remedies, and Public Notice
Violations include, but are not limited to, failure to comply with an approved plan or undertaking a
land disturbing activity without an approved plan, and the destruction of adjacent property including
adjacent tree damage or damage to any tree save areas. When a violation is noted, the ESC
Administrator shall take the following steps to secure compliance:
4.11.1 Informal Contact/Verbal Warning
The Inspector shall complete a standard inspection report form detailing the observed violation and
circumstances pertaining to it. The report shall specify the measures needed for compliance and a
time frame for completion. The on-site job superintendent shall be notified verbally, if possible, and
asked to sign the inspection report to verify that verbal notification has been given. Copies of the
inspection report shall be given or sent to the permit holder and other concerned parties.
4.11.2 Notice to Comply
If the informal contact is unsuccessful, the Erosion and Sediment Control Administrator shall issue a
“Notice to Comply”. This notice shall specify the measures required for compliance and the deadline
for completion. The notice must be sent to the permit holder by registered or certified mail to the
address specified by the permit holder in his application or the notice can be delivered to the person
supervising the activity.
4.11.3 Stop Work Order
If the Notice to Comply is not acted upon by the land developer the Zoning Official or ESC
Administrator shall issue a stop work order requiring that all or part of a land-disturbing activities on
the site be stopped until the specified corrective measures have been taken.
Where the alleged noncompliance is causing, or is in imminent danger of causing, harmful erosion of
lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the Commonwealth, tree removal is
4-15 Updated December 2019
taken place without notification to the Zoning Administrator, and/or land disturbance activity has
commenced without a an approved plan or land disturbance permit, per Section 11-3.3.11 of the
Zoning Ordinance, such an order may be issued whether or not the alleged violator has been issued a
notice to comply as specified above. Under these circumstances, a stop work order may be issued on
site to the responsible party or their agent.
Otherwise, such an order may be issued only after the alleged violator has failed to comply with a
notice to comply. The stop work order shall be served upon the owner by registered or certified mail
to the address specified in the permit application or the land records of the locality in which the site
is located. Upon failure to comply within the time specified, the land disturbance permit or
construction permit may be revoked and the permit holder or person responsible for carrying out the
plan shall be deemed to be in violation of the requirements of this manual and shall be subject
penalties set forth in Section 4-12 Criminal and Civil Penalties.
4.11.3.1 The order shall remain in effect for seven days from the date of service;
pending application by the enforcing authority or alleged violator for appropriate
relief to the circuit court of Fauquier County. If the alleged violator has not
obtained an approved site plan or any required permits within seven days from the
date of service of the order, the Zoning Administrator and/or ESC Administrator
or his designee may issue an order to the owner requiring that all construction and
other work on the site be stopped until the appropriate corrective measures have
been taken.
4.11.3.2 The owner may appeal the issuance of an order to the circuit court of
Fauquier County. Any person violating, neglecting, or refusing to obey an order
issued by the Town may be compelled in a proceeding instituted in the court to
obey same and to comply therewith by injunction, mandamus or other appropriate
remedy. Upon completion and approval of corrective action or obtaining an
approved plan or any required permits the order shall immediately be lifted.
4.12 Criminal and Civil Penalties
Violators shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and shall be subject to fines not to exceed $2,500
and/or twelve months imprisonment in jail.
Every violation not remedied in the notice to comply letter shall carry a $100.00 fine per day with a
total of $3,000.00 per violation and $1,000.00 per day for any land disturbing activity commenced
without an approved plan for a total of $10,000 per violation.
In addition to any criminal or civil penalties provided this section, any person who violates any
provision of this chapter may be liable to the Virginia State Water Control Board per § 62.1-44.15 of
the Code of Virginia.
4-16 Updated December 2019
4.13 Appellate Process
4.13.1 Appeals of items regulated by the Zoning Ordinance
Appeal of a formal decision of the Zoning Administrator shall be subject to the requirement of
Section 11-3.12 of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Warrenton. Appeals shall be in writing and
shall be filed with the Board of Zoning Appeals in care of the Zoning Administrator. Such appeal
shall be taken within thirty (30) days from the date of any written decision adversely affecting the
rights, duties or privileges of the person engaging in or proposing to engage in land disturbing
activities. The application for appeal shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator and shall specify
the grounds for the appeal.
4.13.2 Appeals to the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Laws
Any appeals concerning the ESC portion of this document shall be taken to the Virginia State Water
Control Board and shall be subject to review by the circuit court provided that an appeal is filed
within thirty (30) days from the date of any written decision adversely affecting the rights, duties or
privileges of the person engaging in or proposing to engage in land disturbing activities.
4.13.3 Appeal of a Stop Work Order
The owner may appeal the issuance of an order to the circuit court of Fauquier County. Any person
violating or failing, neglecting, or refusing to obey the stop work order may be compelled in a
proceeding instituted in the circuit court of Fauquier County to obey same and to comply therewith
by injunction, mandamus or other appropriate remedy. Upon completion and approval of corrective
action or obtaining an approved plan or any required permits, the order shall immediately be lifted.
4.14 Duration of Approval
Approval of the SCP is conditioned to the Site Plan Approval process and all time limits associated
with it. Although, the Town reserves the right to adjust requirements of this SCP if field conditions
warrant such adjustments.
5-1 Revised December 2019
(DCR-VSWCB-030)(12/12)
Article 5 Stormwater Management
Amended April 9, 2019
December 10, 2019
Table of Contents
5-1 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY (Section 9VAC25-870-20, 9VAC25-870-40)
5-2 DEFINITIONS (9VAC25-870-10)
5-3 STORMWATER PERMIT REQUIREMENT; EXEMPTIONS
5-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM ESTABLISHED; SUBMISSION AND
APPROVAL OF PLANS; PROHIBITIONS
5-5 STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN; CONTENTS OF PLANS
5-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN; CONTENTS OF PLAN
5-7 POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN; CONTENTS OF PLANS
5-8 REVIEW OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
5-9 TECHNICAL CRITERIA FOR REGULATED LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITIES
5-10 ADEQUATE DRAINAGE
5-11 LONG-TERM MAINTENANCE OF PERMANENT STORMWATER FACILITIES
5-12 MONITORING AND INSPECTIONS
5-13 HEARINGS
5-14 APPEALS
5-15 ENFORCEMENT
5-16 FEES
5-17 PERFORMANCE BOND (9VAC25-870-104.D AND CODE § 603.8(A))
5-18 ADOPTION, AMENDMENTS, AND REPEAL
5-2 Revised December 2019
(DCR-VSWCB-030)(12/12)
Article 5 Stormwater Management
Pursuant to Code § 62.1-44.15:27, this ordinance is adopted as part of an initiative to coordinate the Town
of Warrenton stormwater management requirements with the Town’s erosion and sediment control, flood
insurance, and flood plain management requirements into a unified program within the Town’s Zoning
Ordinance, in accordance with the provisions of the Virginia Stormwater Management Act. It is intended
to facilitate the submission and approval of plans, issuance of permits, payment of fees, and coordination
of inspection and enforcement activities into a more convenient and efficient manner for both the Town
and those responsible for compliance with these programs.
5-1 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY (Section 9VAC25-870-20, 9VAC25-870-40)
(a) The purpose of this Ordinance is to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of
the Town of Warrenton, to protect private and public properties, and to protect the quality
and quantity of state waters from unmanaged stormwater runoff through land disturbing
activities that may cause unreasonable degradation of properties, water quality, stream
channels, and other natural resources, and to establish procedures whereby legal
requirements related to water quality and quantity shall be administered and enforced.
(b) This ordinance is adopted pursuant to Article 1.1 (§ 62.1-44.15:25 et seq.) of Chapter 6 of
Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia.
DEFINITIONS (9VAC25-870-10)
See Article 12.
STORMWATER PERMIT REQUIREMENT; EXEMPTIONS
(a) Except as provided herein, no person may engage in any land-disturbing activity until a
VSMP authority permit has been issued by the Administrator in accordance with the
provisions of this Ordinance.
(b) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, the following activities are exempt
from permitting under this Article, unless otherwise required by law:
(1) Permitted surface or deep mining operations and projects, or oil and gas extraction
operations and projects conducted under the provisions of Title 45.1 of the Code of
Virginia;
(2) Clearing of lands specifically for agricultural purposes and the management, tilling,
planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or forest crops, livestock feedlot
operations, or as additionally set forth by the State Board in regulations, including
engineering operations as follows: construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check
dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds, ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour
cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage, and land irrigation; however, this
exception shall not apply to harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which
harvesting occurs is reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with the
5-3 Revised December 2019
(DCR-VSWCB-030)(12/12)
provisions of Chapter 11 (§ 10.1-1100 et seq.) of Title 10.1 of the Code of Virginia or
is converted to bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in
Subsection B of § 10.1-1163 of Article 9 of Chapter 11 of Title 10.1 of the Code of
Virginia;
(3) Single-family residences separately built and disturbing less than 10,000 square feet
and not part of a larger common plan of development or sale, including additions or
modifications to existing single-family detached residential structures. However,
these will require an Agreement-in-Lieu for Erosion and Sediment Control, and may
require other permits such as Floodplain, Zoning, etc.
(4) Land disturbing activities that disturb less than 10,000 square feet of land area or
activities that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale that is one (1)
acre or greater of disturbance, for which an approved SWM Plan has already been
implemented covering that proposed disturbance, and a VSMP Permit is currently in
effect for that common plan of development. Discharges to a sanitary sewer or
combined sewer system; although these discharges are prohibited in the Town Code.
(5) Activities under a State or federal reclamation program to return an abandoned
property to an agricultural or open land use;
(6) Routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade,
hydraulic capacity, or original construction of the project. The paving of an existing
road with a compacted or impervious surface and reestablishment of existing
associated ditches and shoulders shall be deemed routine maintenance if performed in
accordance with this Subsection; and
(7) Conducting land-disturbing activities in response to a public emergency where the
related work requires immediate authorization to avoid imminent endangerment to
human health or the environment. In such situations, the Administrator shall be
advised of the disturbance within seven days of commencing the land-disturbing
activity and compliance with the administrative requirements of Subsection (a) is
required within 30 days of commencing the land-disturbing activity.
(c) In order to protect the quality of state waters and to control the discharge of stormwater
pollutants from land-disturbing activities, runoff from Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act
land-disturbing activities shall be controlled unless otherwise exempt. Chesapeake Bay Act
land disturbing activities do not require completion of a registration statement or coverage
under the General Permit but shall be subject to the following technical criteria and
program administrative requirements in this ordinance and 9VAC25-870-51:
(1) Erosion and Sediment Control Plan;
(2) Stormwater Management Plan;
5-4 Revised December 2019
(DCR-VSWCB-030)(12/12)
(3) Exemptions may be requested;
(4) Long-term maintenance of stormwater management facilities;
(5) Water quality design criteria;
(6) Water quality compliance;
(7) Channel protection and flood protection;
(8) Offsite compliance options available;
(9) Subject to design storm and hydrologic methods, linear development controls, and
criteria associated with stormwater impoundment structures or facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM ESTABLISHED; SUBMISSION AND
APPROVAL OF PLANS; PROHIBITIONS
(a) Pursuant to § 62.1-44.15:27 of the Code of Virginia, the Town hereby establishes a
Virginia stormwater management program for land-disturbing activities and adopts the
applicable Regulations that specify standards and specifications for VSMPs promulgated
by the State Board for the purposes set out in Section 5-1 of this Ordinance. The Town
hereby designates the Community Development Director as the Administrator of the Town
of Warrenton VSMP stormwater management program.
(b) No VSMP authority permit shall be issued by the Administrator, until the following items
have been submitted to and approved by the Administrator as prescribed herein:
(1) A permit application that includes a general permit registration statement, if such
statement is required;
(2) An erosion and sediment control plan approved in accordance with Article 4, Erosion
and Sediment Control, of the Town Zoning Ordinance; and
(3) A stormwater management plan that meets the requirements of Section 5-6 of this
Ordinance or an executed agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan.
(c) No VSMP authority permit shall be issued until evidence of general permit coverage is
obtained.
(d) No VSMP authority permit shall be issued until the fees required to be paid pursuant to
Section 5-15, are received and a reasonable performance bond required pursuant to Section
5-16 of this Ordinance has been submitted.
(e) No VSMP authority permit shall be issued unless and until the permit application and
attendant materials and supporting documentation demonstrate that all land clearing,
5-5 Revised December 2019
(DCR-VSWCB-030)(12/12)
construction, disturbance, land development and drainage will be done according to the
approved permit.
(f) No grading, building or other local permit shall be issued for a property unless a VSMP
authority permit has been issued by the Administrator.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN; CONTENTS OF PLANS
(a) The Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) shall include the content specified by
Section 9VAC25-870-54 and must also comply with the requirements and general
information set forth in Section 9VAC25-880-70, Section II [stormwater pollution
prevention plan] of the general permit. The SWPPP must include:
(1) Approved erosion and sediment control plan;
(2) Approved stormwater management plan;
(3) Pollution Prevention Plan for regulated land disturbing activities; and
(4) Description of any additional control measures necessary to address a TMDL.
(b) The SWPPP shall be amended by the operator whenever there is a change in design,
construction, operation, or maintenance that has a significant effect on the discharge of
pollutants to state waters which is not addressed by the existing SWPPP.
(c) The SWPPP must be maintained by the operator at a central location onsite. If an onsite
location is unavailable, notice of the SWPPP's location must be posted near the main
entrance at the construction site. Operators shall make the SWPPP available for public
review in accordance with Section II of the general permit, either electronically or in hard
copy.
(d) At the discretion of the Administrator, the SWPPP may be waived for projects less than 1
acre and where the proposed new impervious area is less than 10,000 square feet.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN; CONTENTS OF PLAN
(a) The Stormwater Management Plan, required in Section 5-4 of this Ordinance, must apply
the stormwater management technical criteria set forth in Section 5-9 of this Ordinance to
the entire land-disturbing activity. Individual lots in new residential, commercial or
industrial developments shall not be considered separate land-disturbing activities but shall
be considered under a Common Plan of Development. A stormwater management plan
shall consider all sources of surface runoff and all sources of subsurface and groundwater
flows converted to surface runoff, and include the following information:
5-6 Revised December 2019
(DCR-VSWCB-030)(12/12)
(1) Information on the type and location of stormwater discharges; information on the
features to which stormwater is being discharged including surface waters or karst
features, if present, and the predevelopment and postdevelopment drainage areas;
(2) Contact information including the name, address, and telephone number of the owner
and the tax reference number and parcel number of the property or properties
affected, and a Responsible Land Disturber certification;
(3) A narrative that includes a description of current site conditions and final site
conditions;
(4) A general description of the proposed stormwater management facilities and the
mechanism through which the facilities will be operated and maintained after
construction is complete;
(5) Information on the proposed stormwater management facilities, including:
(i) The type of facilities;
(ii) Location, including geographic coordinates;
(iii) Acres treated; and
(iv) The surface waters or karst features, if present, into which the facility
will discharge.
(6) Hydrologic and hydraulic computations, including runoff characteristics;
(7) Documentation and calculations verifying compliance with the water quality and
quantity requirements of Section 5-9 of this Ordinance.
(8) A map or maps of the site that depicts the topography of the site and includes:
(i) All contributing drainage areas;
(ii) Existing streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, wetlands, other water bodies,
and floodplains;
(iii) Soil types, geologic formations if karst features are present in the area,
forest cover, and other vegetative areas;
(iv) Current land use including existing structures, roads, and locations of
known utilities and easements;
(v) Sufficient information on adjoining parcels to assess the impacts of
stormwater from the site on these parcels;
(vi) The limits of clearing and grading, and the proposed drainage patterns
on the site;
5-7 Revised December 2019
(DCR-VSWCB-030)(12/12)
(vii) Proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, and stormwater
management facilities; and
(viii) Proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be
adapted to various uses, including but not limited to planned locations of
utilities, roads, and easements.
(b) If an operator intends to meet the water quality and/or quantity requirements set forth in
Section 5-9 of this Ordinance through the use of off-site compliance options, where
applicable, then a letter of availability from the off-site provider must be included.
Approved off-site options must achieve the necessary nutrient reductions prior to the
commencement of the applicant's land-disturbing activity except as otherwise allowed by §
62.1-44.15:345 of the Code of Virginia. A VSMP authority shall allow offsite options
when:
(1) Less than five acres of land will be disturbed;
(2) The post-construction phosphorous control requirement is less than 10 pounds per
year; or
(3) The applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the VSMP authority that:
(i) Alternative site designs have been considered that may accommodate
onsite best management practices; and
(ii) Onsite best management practices have been considered in alternative
designs to the maximum extent practicable; and
(iii) Appropriate onsite best management practices will be implemented; and
(iv) Full compliance with post-development nonpoint nutrient runoff
compliance requirements cannot practicably be met onsite. The
applicant must demonstrate onsite control of at least 75 percent (75%) of
the required phosphorous nutrient reductions. If the applicant is unable
to provide 75% onsite control, a waiver may be granted by the VSMP
authority subject to review of the applicant’s justification to allow the
use of offsite credit purchase to exceed 25%.
(c) Elements of the stormwater management plans that include activities regulated under
Chapter 4 (§54.1-400 et seq.) of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia shall be appropriately
sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia pursuant
to Article 1 (§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia.
(d) A construction record drawing for permanent stormwater management facilities shall be
submitted to the Administrator. The construction record drawing shall be appropriately
sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia, certifying
5-8 Revised December 2019
(DCR-VSWCB-030)(12/12)
that the stormwater management facilities have been constructed in accordance with the
approved plan. Construction record drawings are not required for stormwater management
facilities for which maintenance agreements are not required pursuant to Section 5-10(b).
(e) Approved stormwater management plans for residential, commercial and industrial
subdivisions govern the development of individual parcels within that plan, throughout the
development life of the property even if ownership changes.
POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN; CONTENTS OF PLANS
(a) Pollution Prevention Plan, required by 9VAC25-870-56, shall be developed, implemented,
and updated as necessary and must detail the design, installation, implementation, and
maintenance of effective pollution prevention measures to minimize the discharge of
pollutants. At a minimum, such measures must be designed, installed, implemented, and
maintained to:
(1) Minimize the discharge of pollutants from equipment and vehicle washing, wheel
wash water, and other wash waters. Wash waters must be treated in a sediment basin
or alternative control that provides equivalent or better treatment prior to discharge;
(2) Minimize the exposure of building materials, building products, construction wastes,
trash, landscape materials, fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, detergents, sanitary
waste, and other materials present on the site to precipitation and to stormwater; and
(3) Minimize the discharge of pollutants from spills and leaks and implement chemical
spill and leak prevention and response procedures.
(b) The pollution prevention plan shall include effective best management practices to prohibit
the following discharges:
(1) Wastewater from washout of concrete, unless managed by an appropriate control;
(2) Wastewater from washout and cleanout of stucco, paint, form release oils, curing
compounds, and other construction materials;
(3) Fuels, oils, or other pollutants used in vehicle and equipment operation and
maintenance; and
(4) Soaps or solvents used in vehicle and equipment washing.
(c) Discharges from dewatering activities, including discharges from dewatering of trenches
and excavations, are prohibited unless managed by appropriate controls.
REVIEW OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
5-9 Revised December 2019
(DCR-VSWCB-030)(12/12)
(a) The Administrator or the Public Works Director as the duly authorized agent of the
Administrator shall review stormwater management plans and shall approve or disapprove
a stormwater management plan according to the following:
(1) The Administrator shall determine the completeness of a plan in accordance with
Section 5-6 of this Ordinance, and shall notify the applicant, in writing, of such
determination, within 15 calendar days of receipt. If the plan is deemed to be
incomplete, the above written notification shall contain the reasons the plan is
deemed incomplete.
(2) The Administrator shall have an additional 60 calendar days from the date of the
communication of completeness to review the plan, except that if a determination of
completeness is not made within the time prescribed in subdivision (1), then plan
shall be deemed complete and the Administrator shall have 60 calendar days from the
date of submission to review the plan.
(3) The Administrator shall review any plan that has been previously disapproved, within
45 calendar days of the date of resubmission.
(4) During the review period, the plan shall be approved or disapproved and the decision
communicated in writing to the person responsible for the land-disturbing activity or
his designated agent. If the plan is not approved, the reasons for not approving the
plan shall be provided in writing. Approval or denial shall be based on the plan's
compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
(5) If a plan meeting all requirements of this Ordinance is submitted and no action is
taken within the time provided above in subdivision (2) for review, the plan shall be
deemed approved.
(6) Any changes or modifications to the plans initiated by the applicant during the review
process (not responses to staff comments) will reset the 60 day calendar review
process as of the date of the applicant’s request. .
(b) Approved stormwater plans may be modified as follows:
(1) Modifications to an approved stormwater management plan shall be allowed only
after review and written approval by the Administrator. The Administrator shall have
60 calendar days to respond in writing either approving or disapproving such request.
(2) The Administrator may require that an approved stormwater management plan be
amended, within a time prescribed by the Administrator, to address any deficiencies
noted during inspection.
5-10 Revised December 2019
(DCR-VSWCB-030)(12/12)
(c) The Administrator shall require the submission of a construction record drawing for
permanent stormwater management facilities. The Administrator may elect not to require
construction record drawings for stormwater management facilities for which recorded
maintenance agreements are not required pursuant to Section 5-10 (b).
TECHNICAL CRITERIA FOR REGULATED LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITIES
(a) To protect the quality and quantity of state water from the potential harm of unmanaged
stormwater runoff resulting from land-disturbing activities, the Town of Warrenton hereby
adopts the technical criteria for regulated land-disturbing activities set forth in Part II B of
the Regulations 9VAC25-870(62-99), as amended, expressly to include 9VAC25-870-63
[water quality design criteria requirements]; 9VAC25-870-65 [water quality compliance];
9VAC25-870-66 [water quantity]; 9VAC25-870-69 [offsite compliance options]; 9VAC25-
870-72 [design storms and hydrologic methods]; 9VAC25-870-74 [stormwater harvesting];
9VAC25-870-76 [linear development project]; and, 9VAC25-870-85 [stormwater
management impoundment structures or facilities], which shall apply to all land-disturbing
activities regulated pursuant to this Ordinance, except as expressly set forth in Subsection
(b) of this Section.
(b) Any land disturbing activity considered grandfathered by the VSMP authority shall be
subject to the Part II C (9VAC25-870 (93-99) technical criteria of the VSMP Regulation
provided:
(1) A proffered or conditional zoning plan, zoning with the a plan of development,
preliminary or final subdivision plat, preliminary or final site plan, or any document
determined by the locality to be equivalent thereto (i) was approved by the locality
prior to July 1, 2012, (ii) provided a layout as defined in 9VAC25-870-10, (iii) will
comply with the Part II C technical criteria of the VSMP Regulation, and (iv) has not
been subsequently modified or amended in a manner resulting in an increase in the
amount of phosphorus leaving each point of discharge, and such that there is no
increase in the volume or rate of runoff;
(2) A state permit has not been issued prior to July 1, 2014; and
(3) Land disturbance did not commence prior to July 1, 2014.
(c) Locality, state and federal projects shall be considered grandfathered by the VSMP
authority and shall be subject to the Part II C technical criteria of the VSMP Regulation
provided:
(1) There has been an obligation of locality, state or federal funding, in whole or in part,
prior to July 1, 2012, or the department has approved a stormwater management plan
prior to July 2, 2012; and
(2) A state permit has not been issued prior to July 1, 2014, and
5-11 Revised December 2019
(DCR-VSWCB-030)(12/12)
(3) Land disturbance did not commence prior to July 1, 2014.
(d) Land disturbing activities grandfathered under subsections A and B of this section shall
remain subject to the Part II C technical criteria of the VSMP Regulation for one additional
state permit cycle. After such time, portions of the project not under construction shall
become subject to any new technical criteria adopted by the board.
(e) In cases where governmental bonding or public debt financing has been issued for a project
prior to July 1, 2012, such project shall be subject to the technical criteria of Part II C.
(f) Nothing in this section shall preclude an operator from constructing to a more stringent
standard at his discretion.
(g) The Administrator may grant exceptions to the technical requirements of Part II B or Part II
C of the Regulations, provided that (i) the exception is the minimum necessary to afford
relief, (ii) reasonable and appropriate conditions are imposed so that the intent of the Act,
the Regulations, and this Ordinance are preserved, (iii) granting the exception will not
confer any special privileges that are denied in other similar circumstances, and (iv)
exception requests are not based upon conditions or circumstances that are self-imposed or
self-created. Economic hardship alone is not sufficient reason to grant an exception from
the requirements of this Ordinance.
(1) Exceptions to the requirement that the land-disturbing activity obtain required VSMP
authority permit shall not be given by the Administrator, nor shall the Administrator
approve the use of a BMP not found on the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse
Website, or any other control measure duly approved by the Director.
(2) Exceptions to requirements for phosphorus reductions shall not be allowed unless
offsite options otherwise permitted pursuant to 9VAC25-870-69 have been
considered and found not available.
(h) Nothing in this Section shall preclude an operator from constructing to a more stringent
standard at their discretion.
ADEQUATE DRAINAGE
(a) In order to protect and conserve the land and water resources of this Town for the use and
benefit of the public, measures for the adequate drainage of surface waters shall be taken
and facilities provided in connection with all land development activities.
(b) Adequate drainage of surface water means the effective conveyance of storm and other
surface waters through and from the onsite stormwater management facilities into a(n):
(1) natural watercourse, i.e., a stream with incised channel (bed and banks).
5-12 Revised December 2019
(DCR-VSWCB-030)(12/12)
(2) drainage facility of sufficient capacity without adverse impact upon the land over
which the waters are conveyed or upon the watercourse or facility into which such
waters are discharged, or
(3) adequate channel as defined in Section 5-2 of these regulations.
5-10.1 Minimum Requirements
(a) The drainage system must have the hydraulic characteristics to accommodate the maximum
expected flow of surface waters for a given watershed, or portion thereof, for the duration
and intensity of rainfall, as specified in the Town’s Public Facilities Manual (PFM).
(b) Determination of the size and capacity of the drainage system shall be based on the planned
development, existing zoning or existing development, whichever is greater, within the
watershed.
(c) The drainage system shall be designed:
(1) To honor natural drainage divides,
(2) To account for both off site and on site surface waters,
(3) To convey such waters to a natural watercourse, i.e., a natural watercourse at the
natural elevation, or an existing or proposed stormwater management facility, and
(4) To discharge the surface waters into a natural watercourse at the natural elevation, or
into an existing facility of adequate capacity.
(d) The drainage system shall be designed such that properties over which the surface waters
are conveyed, from the development site to discharge point(s), are not subject to increased
erosion or increased flooding.
(e) Concentrated surface waters shall not be discharged on adjoining property, unless an
easement expressly authorizing such discharge has been granted by the owner of the
affected land or unless the discharge is into a natural watercourse, or other appropriate
discharge point as set for the above.
(f) The owner or applicant/development may continue to discharge storm water which has not
been concentrated into a lower lying property if the following three conditions are met:
(1) The peak runoff rate after development does not exceed the predevelopment peak
runoff rate for the 1-year storm and 10-year storm.
(2) The increase in runoff volume caused by the development will not have an adverse
impact, such as erosion or flooding, on the lower lying property. Any increase in
runoff volume will be analyzed and meet the requirement of the Energy Balance
5-13 Revised December 2019
(DCR-VSWCB-030)(12/12)
Equation as defined by the Channel Protection criterion of Part IIB of the new SWM
Regulations (9VAC25-870-66 Water Quantity). Sheet flow is to be analyzed in
accordance with 9VAC25-870-66.D.
(g) If the discharge conditions are not met and the discharge may aggravate an existing
drainage problem or cause a drainage problem, the applicant/developer must provide a
drainage system satisfactory to the Director to preclude an adverse impact upon the
adjacent or downstream property. These improvements will be contained within a suitable
Drainage Easement.
(h) Drainage structures shall be constructed in such a manner that they may be maintained at a
reasonable cost. Drainage structures and treatment facilities designed for treatment of
stormwater runoff from multiple building lots shall not be located on or within and
individual building lot or lots, but shall be within commonly-owned area, and shall be
located so as to be easily accessed for maintenance purposes.
(i) If the outfall is into a natural and well defined, stabilized watercourse, the two-year peak
flow from the development of the watershed must be at a flow rate and velocity which the
watercourse can accept without causing erosion in the streambed or over-bank flooding.
Alternatively, if he applicant/developer chooses, the downstream watercourse may be
modified so that it can handle the two-year post-development flow, provided, however, that
if the applicant/developer choose to install a storm drainage system, the system shall be
designed in accordance with these regulations for such systems.
(j) If off site downstream construction and easements are necessary to obtain an adequate
drainage outfall, no plans shall receive final approval until such storm drainage easements,
extending to the nearest natural and well defined, adequate, stabilized watercourse, or
adequate man-made drainage channel or pipe, have obtained and recorded among the land
records of Fauquier County, Virginia.
(k) Storm sewers shall be discharged into the area least likely to erode. The following should
be considered:
(1) Generally, it is preferred to discharge at the flood plain limit into an adequate
watercourse channel leading to the main stream-bed, rather than disturb the flood
plain by extending the storm sewer.
(2) If an adequate watercourse channel does not exist, the only alternative is to discharge
into the main stream-bed.
(3) In either case, energy dissipation devices are required.
(l) The requirements of Town of Warrenton relating to Erosion and Sedimentation Control,
and the further requirements for protection of stream-beds by detention of surface waters,
5-14 Revised December 2019
(DCR-VSWCB-030)(12/12)
set forth in these regulations must be satisfied. Additionally, the Stormwater Management
Regulations requirements to protect water quality must be met, if applicable.
(m) All drainage-ways, including overland relief pathways, must be separated from buildings.
No building or other permanent structure may be built on or in a storm drainage system, or
easement.
(n) Consideration must be given in the preparation of the plans to preclude adverse impacts
resulting from higher rates and volumes of flow that might occur during construction.
(o) In cases where the drainage plans of a proposed development do not satisfy these minimum
requirements because necessary off site facilities or improvements are lacking, the
applicant/developer shall delay development until the necessary off site facilities or
improvements are constructed or other arrangements are made which are suitable to the
Director of Public Works. In such event, the plat or plans, if otherwise satisfactory, will be
approved when the requirements of this Article are satisfied. Alternatively, the
applicant/developer may choose to supply the offsite facilities that are necessary for
adequate drainage.
(p) The downstream extent of this review shall be to the point at which the total drainage area
is at least 100 times greater than the area of the development site in question.
LONG-TERM MAINTENANCE OF PERMANENT STORMWATER FACILITIES
(a) The Administrator shall require the provision of long-term responsibility for and
maintenance of stormwater management facilities and other techniques specified to manage
the quality and quantity of runoff. Such requirements shall be set forth in an instrument
recorded in the local land records prior to general permit termination or earlier as required
by the Administrator and shall at a minimum:
(1) Be submitted to the Administrator for review and approval prior to the approval of
the stormwater management plan;
(2) Be stated to run with the land;
(3) Provide for all necessary access to the property for purposes of maintenance and
regulatory inspections;
(4) Provide for inspections and maintenance and the submission of inspection and
maintenance reports to the Administrator; and
(5) Be enforceable by all appropriate governmental parties.
(b) At the discretion of the Administrator, such recorded instruments need not be required for
stormwater management facilities designed to treat stormwater runoff primarily from an
individual residential lot on which they are located, provided it is demonstrated to the
5-15 Revised December 2019
(DCR-VSWCB-030)(12/12)
satisfaction of the Administrator that future maintenance of such facilities will be addressed
through an enforceable mechanism at the discretion of the Administrator.
(c) If a recorded instrument is not required pursuant to Subsection 5-10 (b), the Administrator,
or any duly authorized agent of the Administrator, shall develop a strategy for addressing
maintenance of stormwater management facilities designed to treat stormwater runoff
primarily from an individual residential lot on which they are located. Such a strategy may
include periodic inspections, homeowner outreach and education, or other method targeted
at promoting the long-term maintenance of such facilities. Such facilities shall not be
subject to the requirement for an inspection to be conducted by the Administrator.
MONITORING AND INSPECTIONS
(a) The Administrator or any duly authorized agent of the Administrator shall inspect the landdisturbing
activity during construction for:
(1) Compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan;
(2) Compliance with the approved stormwater management plan;
(3) Development, updating, and implementation of a pollution prevention plan; and
(4) Development and implementation of any additional control measures necessary to
address a TMDL, if applicable.
(b) The Administrator or any duly authorized agent of the Administrator may, at reasonable
times and under reasonable circumstances, enter any establishment or upon any property,
public or private, for the purpose of obtaining information or conducting surveys or
investigations necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance.
(c) In accordance with a performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, any
combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement or instrument, the Administrator may
also enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of
initiating or maintaining appropriate actions which are required by the permit conditions
associated with a land-disturbing activity when a permittee, after proper notice, has failed
to take acceptable action within the time specified.
(d) Pursuant to § 62.1-44.15:40 of the Code of Virginia, the Administrator may require every
VSMP authority permit applicant or permittee, or any such person subject to VSMP
authority permit requirements under this Ordinance, to furnish when requested such
application materials, plans, specifications, and other pertinent information as may be
necessary to determine the effect of his discharge on the quality of state waters, or such
other information as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Ordinance.
(e) Post-construction inspections of stormwater management facilities required by the
provisions of this Ordinance shall be conducted by the Administrator or any duly
5-16 Revised December 2019
(DCR-VSWCB-030)(12/12)
authorized agent of the Administrator pursuant to the Town's adopted and State Board
approved inspection program, and shall occur, at minimum, at least once every five (5)
years except as may otherwise be provided for in Section 5-10.
HEARINGS
(a) Any permit applicant or permittee, or person subject to Ordinance requirements, aggrieved
by any action of the Town taken without a formal hearing, or by inaction of the Town, may
demand in writing a formal hearing by the Town Board of Zoning Appeals causing such
grievance, provided a petition requesting such hearing is filed with the Administrator
within 30 days after notice of such action is given by the Administrator.
(b) The hearings held under this Section shall be conducted by the Town at a regular or special
meeting of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(c) A verbatim record of the proceedings of such hearings shall be taken and filed with the
Board of Zoning Appeals. Depositions may be taken and read as in actions at law.
(d) The Board of Zoning Appeals or its designated member, as the case may be, shall have
power to issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum, and at the request of any party shall
issue such subpoenas. The failure of a witness without legal excuse to appear or to testify or
to produce documents shall be acted upon by the local governing body, or its designated
member, whose action may include the procurement of an order of enforcement from the
circuit court. Witnesses who are subpoenaed shall receive the same fees and reimbursement
for mileage as in civil actions.
APPEALS
See Section 5-13 – HEARINGS above and Article 11-3.3.10 Appeals of the Town Zoning
Ordinance.
ENFORCEMENT
(a) If the Administrator determines that there is a failure to comply with the VSMP authority
permit conditions or determines there is an unauthorized discharge, notice shall be served
upon the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the permit conditions by any of
the following: verbal warnings and inspection reports, notices of corrective action, consent
special orders, and notices to comply. Written notices shall be served by registered or
certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or by delivery at the site of
the development activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities.
(1) The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the permit conditions
and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. Upon
failure to comply within the time specified, a stop work order may be issued in
accordance with Subsection (b) or the permit may be revoked by the Administrator.
5-17 Revised December 2019
(DCR-VSWCB-030)(12/12)
(2) If a permittee fails to comply with a notice issued in accordance with this Section
within the time specified, the Administrator may issue an order requiring the owner,
permittee, person responsible for carrying out an approved plan, or the person
conducting the land-disturbing activities without an approved plan or required permit
to cease all land-disturbing activities until the violation of the permit has ceased, or
an approved plan and required permits are obtained, and specified corrective
measures have been completed.
Such orders shall be issued in accordance with Article 11 of the Town Zoning
Ordinance. Such orders shall become effective upon service on the person by
certified mail, return receipt requested, sent to his address specified in the land
records of the locality, or by personal delivery by an agent of the Administrator.
However, if the Administrator finds that any such violation is grossly affecting or
presents an imminent and substantial danger of causing harmful erosion of lands or
sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the Commonwealth or
otherwise substantially impacting water quality, it may issue, without advance notice
or hearing, an emergency order directing such person to cease immediately all landdisturbing
activities on the site and shall provide an opportunity for a hearing, after
reasonable notice as to the time and place thereof, to such person, to affirm, modify,
amend, or cancel such emergency order. If a person who has been issued an order is
not complying with the terms thereof, the Administrator may institute a proceeding
for an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate remedy in accordance with
Subsection 5-13 (c).
(b) In addition to any other remedy provided by this Ordinance, if the Administrator or his
designee determines that there is a failure to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance,
they may initiate such informal and/or formal administrative enforcement procedures in a
manner that is consistent with the Town Zoning Ordinance and/or the Public Facilities
Manual.
(c) Any person violating or failing, neglecting, or refusing to obey any rule, regulation,
ordinance, order, approved standard or specification, or any permit condition issued by the
Administrator may be compelled in a proceeding instituted in Fauquier Circuit Court by the
Town to obey same and to comply therewith by injunction, mandamus or other appropriate
remedy.
(d) Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance or who fails, neglects, or refuses
to comply with any order of the Administrator, shall be subject to a civil penalty not to
exceed $32,500 for each violation within the discretion of the court. Each day of violation
of each requirement may constitute a separate offense.
(1) Violations for which a penalty may be imposed under this Subsection shall include
but not be limited to the following:
(i) No state permit registration;
5-18 Revised December 2019
(DCR-VSWCB-030)(12/12)
(ii) No SWPPP;
(iii) Incomplete SWPPP;
(iv) SWPPP not available for review;
(v) No approved erosion and sediment control plan;
(vi) Failure to install stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls;
(vii) Stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls improperly installed
or maintained;
(viii) Operational deficiencies;
(ix) Failure to conduct required inspections;
(x) Incomplete, improper, or missed inspections; and
(xi) Discharges not in compliance with the requirements of Section 4VAC
50-60-1170 of the general permit.
(2) The Administrator may issue a summons for collection of the civil penalty and the
action may be prosecuted in the appropriate court.
(3) In imposing a civil penalty pursuant to this Subsection, the court may consider the
degree of harm caused by the violation and also the economic benefit to the violator
from noncompliance.
(4) Any civil penalties assessed by a court as a result of a summons issued by the
Locality shall be paid into the treasury of the Town of Warrenton to be used for the
purpose of minimizing, preventing, managing, or mitigating pollution of the waters
of the locality and abating environmental pollution therein in such manner as the
court may, by order, direct.
(e) Notwithstanding any other civil or equitable remedy provided by this Section or by law,
any person who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this Ordinance, any order
of the Administrator, any condition of a permit, or any order of a court shall, be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by confinement in jail for not more than 12 months or a fine of
not less than $2,500 nor more than $32,500, or both.
FEES
(a) Fees to cover costs associated with implementation of a VSMP related to land disturbing
activities and issuance of general permit coverage and VSMP authority permits shall be
imposed in accordance with Table 1. When a site or sites has been purchased for
development within a previously permitted common plan of development or sale, the
Applicant shall be subject to fees (“total fee to be paid by applicant” column) in accordance
with the disturbed acreage of their site or sites according to Table 1.
5-19 Revised December 2019
(DCR-VSWCB-030)(12/12)
Table 1: Fees for permit issuance
Fee type
Total fee to be paid by
Applicant (includes both
VSMP authority and
Department portions
where applicable)
Department portion
of “total fee to be
paid by Applicant”
(based on 28% of
total fee paid*)
General / Stormwater Management - Small
Construction Activity/Land Clearing. (Areas with
common plans of development or sale with landdisturbance
acreage less than one acre, except for
single-family detached residential structures).
$290 $81
General / Stormwater Management – Small
Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Single-family
detached residential structures within or outside a
common plan of development or sale with landdisturbance
acreage less than 5 acres). No registration
statement required: must adhere to general permit
requirements.
$209 $0
General / Stormwater Management - Small
Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas
within common plans of development or sale with
land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 1
acre and less than 5 Acres)
$2,700 $756
General / Stormwater Management – Large
Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas
within common plans of development or sale with
land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 5
acres and less than 10 acres)
$3,400 $952
General / Stormwater Management – Large
Construction Activity/Land Clearing [Sites or areas
within common plans of development or sale with
land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 10
acres and less than 50 acres]
$4,500 $1,260
General / Stormwater Management – Large
Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas
within common plans of development or sale with
land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 50
acres and less than 100 acres)
$6,100 $1,708
General / Stormwater Management – Large
Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas
within common plans of development or sale with
land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 100
acres)
$9,600 $2,688
* If the project is completely administered by the Department such as may be the case for a state or federal
project or projects covered by individual permits, the entire applicant fee shall be paid to the Department.
(b) Fees for the modification or transfer of registration statements from the general permit
issued by the State Board shall be imposed in accordance with Table 2. If the general
permit modifications result in changes to stormwater management plans that require
5-20 Revised December 2019
(DCR-VSWCB-030)(12/12)
additional review by the Town, such reviews shall be subject to the fees set out in Table 2.
The fee assessed shall be based on the total disturbed acreage of the site. In addition to the
general permit modification fee, modifications resulting in an increase in total disturbed
acreage shall pay the difference in the initial permit fee paid and the permit fee that would
have applied for the total disturbed acreage in Table 1.
Table 2: Fees for the modification or transfer of registration statements for the General Permit for
Discharges of Stormwater from Construction Activities
Type of Permit Fee Amount
General / Stormwater Management – Small Construction Activity/Land
Clearing (Areas within common plans of development or sale with land
disturbance acreage less than 1 acre)
$20
General / Stormwater Management – Small Construction Activity/Land
Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land
disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 1 and less than 5 acres)
$200
General / Stormwater Management – Large Construction Activity/Land
Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land
disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 5 acres and less than 10 acres)
$250
General / Stormwater Management – Large Construction Activity/Land
Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land
disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 10 acres and less than 50 acres)
$300
General / Stormwater Management – Large Construction Activity/Land
Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land
disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 50 acres and less than 100 acres)
$450
General / Stormwater Management – Large Construction Activity/Land
Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land
disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 100 acres)
$700
(c) The following annual permit maintenance shall be imposed in accordance with Table 3,
including fees imposed on expired permits that have been administratively continued. With
respect to the general permit, these fees shall apply until the permit coverage is terminated.
Table 3: Permit Maintenance Fees**
Type of Permit Fee Amount
Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act Land-Disturbing Activity (not subject to
General Permit coverage; sites within designated areas of Chesapeake Bay Act
localities with land-disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 2,500 square
feet and less than 1 acre)
$50
General / Stormwater Management – Small Construction Activity/Land
Clearing (Areas within common plans of development or sale with land
disturbance acreage less than 1 acre)
$50
General / Stormwater Management – Small Construction Activity/Land
Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land
disturbance equal to or greater than 1 acre and less than 5 acres)
$400
General / Stormwater Management – Large Construction Activity/Land
Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land
disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 5 acres and less than 10 acres)
$500
5-21 Revised December 2019
(DCR-VSWCB-030)(12/12)
Type of Permit Fee Amount
General / Stormwater Management – Large Construction Activity/Land
Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land
disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 10 acres and less than 50 acres)
$650
General / Stormwater Management – Large Construction Activity/Land
Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land
disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 50 acres and less than 100 acres)
$900
General / Stormwater Management – Large Construction Activity/Land
Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land
disturbance acreage equal to or greater 100 acres)
$1,400
**General permit coverage maintenance fees shall be paid annually to the Town, by the anniversary date
of general permit coverage. No permit will be reissued or automatically continued without payment of
the required fee. General permit coverage maintenance fees shall be applied until a Notice of Termination
is effective.
(d) The fees set forth in Subsections (a) through (c) above, shall apply to:
(1) All persons seeking coverage under the general permit.
(2) All permittees who request modifications to or transfers of their existing registration
statement for coverage under a general permit.
(3) Persons whose coverage under the general permit has been revoked shall apply to the
Department for an Individual Permit for Discharges of Stormwater from Construction
Activities.
(4) Permit and permit coverage maintenance fees outlined under Section 5-15 (c) may
apply to each general permit holder.
(e) No general permit application fees will be assessed to:
(1) Permittees who request minor modifications to general permits as defined in Section
5-2 of this Ordinance. Permit modifications at the request of the permittee resulting
in changes to stormwater management plans that require additional review by the
Administrator shall not be exempt pursuant to this Section.
(2) Permittees whose general permits are modified or amended at the initiative of the
Department, excluding errors in the registration statement identified by the
Administrator or errors related to the acreage of the site.
(f) All incomplete payments will be deemed as nonpayments, and the applicant shall be
notified of any incomplete payments. Interest may be charged for late payments at the
underpayment rate set forth in §58.1-15 of the Code of Virginia and is calculated on a
monthly basis at the applicable periodic rate. A 10% late payment fee shall be charged to
any delinquent (over 90 days past due) account. The Town shall be entitled to all remedies
available under the Code of Virginia in collecting any past due amount.
5-22 Revised December 2019
(DCR-VSWCB-030)(12/12)
PERFORMANCE BOND (9VAC25-870-104.D AND CODE § 603.8(A))
Prior to issuance of any permit, the Applicant shall be required to submit a reasonable performance bond
with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement
acceptable to the Town, to ensure that measures could be taken by the Town at the Applicant's expense
should he fail, after proper notice, within the time specified to initiate or maintain appropriate actions
which may be required of him by the permit conditions as a result of his land disturbing activity. If the
Town takes such action upon such failure by the Applicant, the Locality may collect from the Applicant
for the difference should the amount of the reasonable cost of such action exceed the amount of the
security held, if any. Within 60 days of the completion of the requirements of the permit conditions, such
bond, cash escrow, letter of credit or other legal arrangement, or the unexpended or unobligated portion
thereof, shall be refunded to the Applicant or terminated.
ADOPTION, AMENDMENTS, AND REPEAL
This guidance document shall remain in effect until rescinded, amended or superseded.
6-1 Updated September 2019
Article 6 – Sign Regulations
Amended by Town Council: February 12, 2013
December 11, 2018
September 10, 2019
Contents (Sections)
6-1 Intent
6-2 Severability
6-3 General Applicability
6-3.5 Signs Not Regulated by this Article
6-4 Sign Permit Requirements, Review Timing, and Process
6-4.1 Sign Permit Required
6-4.2 Sign Permit Review Timing
6-4.3 Sign Permit Review Process
6-4.4 Sign Permit Review in the Historic District
6-4.5 Violation and Revocation of Sign Permit
6-5 Measurements and Calculations
6-5.1 Sign Setback
6-5.2 Sign Height
6-5.3 Sign Area
6-5.4 Street and Façade Frontage Measurements
6-6 General Regulations for All Sign Types
6-6.12 Signs in Rights-of-Way
6-7 Sign Illumination
6-8 Prohibited Signs
6-9 Special Standards for Signs in the Historic District
6-9.3 Illumination
6-10 Permanent Signs at Entries
6-10.9 Residential Sign Alternative
6-11 Permanent Signs Permitted in PUD Districts
6-12 Permanent Signs Permitted in Residential Districts and the RO District
6-12.1 Signs for Individual Dwellings
6-12.2 Signs for Nonresidential Uses in Residential Zoning Districts
6-13 Permanent Signs Permitted in Nonresidential Districts
6-13.2 Window Signs
6-13.3 Building Signs
6-13.4 Freestanding Signs
6-13.5 Signs at Private Driveway Entrances or Intersections
6-13.6 Drive-Through Signs
6-14 Master Sign Plan Option for Large Developments
6-14.3 Master Sign Plan Requirements
6-15 Temporary Signs
6-2 Updated September 2019
6-15.1 Standards that Apply to all Temporary Signs
6-15.2 Sign Permits for Temporary Signs
6-15.3 Temporary Signs without a Commercial Message
6-15.4 Temporary Signs with a Commercial Message in Residential Zoning Districts and the RO
District
6-15.5 Temporary Signs with a Commercial Message in Nonresidential Zoning Districts
6-15.6 Standards for Temporary Sign Types
6-16 Nonconforming Signs
6-17 Removal of Signs
6-18 Maintenance
6-3 Updated September 2019
Article 6 – Sign Regulations
6-1 Intent
Signs are an integral part of the built environment that can contribute to Warrenton’s sense of place, direct
people to businesses and destinations, and allow for the promotion of community events and business
operations. The intent of this Article is to allow for the continued use of signs for these purposes while
managing potential safety issues. It is furthermore the intent of these regulations to promote and protect
the public health, safety and welfare, further the goals of the Comprehensive Plan, and regulating signs in
a manner consistent with the First Amendment guarantee of free speech by enabling the public to:
6-1.1 Locate goods, services and facilities without difficulty or confusion;
6-1.2 Protect and enhance property values;
6-1.3 Facilitate the creation of a convenient, orderly, attractive and harmonious community;
6-1.4 Protect the scenic, natural and historic character of the Town;
6-1.5 Promote economic development;
6-1.6 Promote traffic safety by preventing obstructions within public rights-of-way, minimizing
visual distractions to motorists, ensuring that sign size and height are appropriate to their
location, and preventing conflicts with public safety signs and police and fire protection;
and
6-1.7 Protect the safety of people and property against sign hazards due to collapse, decay or
abandonment; and permitting signs that are appropriate to the planned character and
development of each zoning district.
6-2 Severability
The regulations of this Article shall be subject to the severability clause of Section 1-8 of this Ordinance.
6-3 General Applicability
6-3.1 It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to erect, place, relocate, expand, modify,
maintain, or otherwise alter a sign in the Town except in accordance with the provisions
of this Article.
6-3.2 Unless otherwise provided, this Article shall apply to any sign, in any zoning district, that
is legible or readable from a public right-of-way or from an adjacent property.
6-3.3 Any sign legally established prior to the effective date of this Article, and which sign is
rendered nonconforming by the provisions herein, shall be subject to the nonconforming
sign regulations of Section 6-16.
6-3.4 Sign regulations in the Historic District shall be subject to Section 6-4.4.
6-4 Updated September 2019
6-3.5 Signs Not Regulated by this Article
The following are signs that are entirely exempt from the regulations of this Article including any
requirements for sign permits:
6-3.5.1 Any sign that is located completely inside a building that is not visible from
the exterior (See also definition of window sign.);
6-3.5.2 Signs that are located within a stadium, open-air theater, outdoor shopping
center, park, arena or other outdoor use, with the exception of vehicular use
areas, which signs are not visible from a public right-of-way or adjacent
property, and can be viewed only by persons within such stadium, open-air
theater, outdoor shopping center, parks, arena, or other outdoor use;
6-3.5.3 Any sign on a truck, bus or other vehicle that is used in the normal course of
a business (e.g., deliveries or fleet vehicles for contractors) for
transportation (See also Section 6-8.14.), or signage required by the State or
Federal government;
6-3.5.4 Signs installed or required by the Town, Fauquier County, State of Virginia,
or approved transit agency;
6-3.5.5 Address identification signs as required by the most current and adopted
version of the applicable Virginia Building Code;
6-3.5.6 Any warning signs or traffic safety signs required by public utility
providers; and
6-3.5.7 Any illumination or decorations erected in observance of religious, national,
or state holidays which are not intended to be permanent in nature and
which contain no advertising material.
6-4 Sign Permit Requirements, Review Timing, and Process
6-4.1 Sign Permit Required
6-4.1.1 Unless otherwise stated in this Article, all signs shall require a sign permit
issued by the Zoning Administrator. Where applicable, signs in the Historic
District shall receive approval by the Architectural Review Board (ARB), in
accordance with this Article, prior to issuance of a sign permit.
6-4.1.2 The following signs are subject to the requirements of this Article but do not
require a sign permit. Such signs may, however, still be subject to building
permit requirements.
1. Flags that do not contain a commercial message provided there shall be
no more than three such flags on any lot and the size of each flag does
not exceed 50 square feet;
2. Signs and/or notices issued by any court, officer, or other person in
performance of a public duty. Any such sign shall be removed no later
than seven days after the last day it is required to be displayed;
6-5 Updated September 2019
3. Sign face changes where there is no change to the structure including
change in sign face area, height, or alteration of the sign cabinet, if
applicable (e.g., replacement of a sign face, repainting of a sign face,
etc.) except in the Historic District where a sign permit is required for
such changes;
4. Certain temporary signs as established in Section 6-15.
5. Changes of copy on signs with changeable copy; and
6. A sign permit is not required for general maintenance, painting,
repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance and repair of a sign
or any sign structure unless a structural change is made.
6-4.2 Sign Permit Review Timing
Table 1 below identifies when a sign that requires a sign permit shall be reviewed.
TABLE 1: SIGN PERMIT REVIEW TIMING
Sign Permit Requirement Due at Time Of:
Installation, replacement, or other change to a sign that is not part of a new use,
new development, or change of use
Sign Permit
Installation, replacement, or other change to a sign that is part of a new use, new
development, or change of use that requires a Site Development Plan as
established in Article 10
All signs reviewed as part of the site
development plan process. Approval
of signs during this process shall
constitute approval of sign permits for
the reviewed signs.
Signs at entries as allowed in
Section 6-10
Proposal for a sign to be a part of a new
subdivision
Sign placement and allocation to be
reviewed as part of a subdivision plat
Proposal for a sign to be a part of an existing,
platted subdivision
Sign placement and allocation to be
reviewed as part of an amended
easement plat
Installation, replacement, or other change to a
sign allowed at entries of subdivisions
Sign Permit
Master Sign Plan Review
(See Section 6-14.)
Proposal for a master sign plan
As part of a Planned Unit
Development District or land use
application, as applicable
Installation, replacement, or other changes to a
sign allowed under an approved master sign
plan
As part of a site development plan
review or sign permit review, as
applicable above
Other situations where a sign permit is required
As determined by the Zoning
Administrator
NOTE: In all cases, if the sign is within the Historic District, the sign must be reviewed and approved by the ARB prior
to issuance of a sign permit from the Town of Warrenton,
6-6 Updated September 2019
6-4.3 Sign Permit Review Process
6-4.3.1 Applications for sign permits must be filed with the Zoning Administrator on
forms as provided by the Town, accompanied by a filing fee.
6-4.3.2 The application shall be accompanied by information as established in a
submittal requirement established by the Zoning Administrator.
6-4.3.3 The Zoning Administrator or designee shall promptly process the sign
permit application and approve the application, reject the application, or
notify the applicant of deficiencies in the application within 20 business
days after receipt. For signs that require a Certificate of Appropriateness,
(COA), such timeframe for a sign permit shall not begin until the COA is
approved.
6-4.3.4 A COA is required before sign permits can be issued within the Historic
District. See also Section 6-9, below.
6-4.3.5 An approved sign permit shall expire one year after date of issuance unless
the permitted sign has been erected as specified by the permit. If the permit
expires, a new application and approval shall be required in accordance with
this Article. Such resubmission shall also require a new payment of the
required sign permit fees, under the sign regulations in effect at that time.
6-4.3.6 In some instances, a sign may require a building permit. No sign shall be
installed until all required permits have been approved.
6-4.4 Sign Permit Review in the Historic District
6-4.4.1 Any sign to be located within the Historic District shall be subject to the
provisions of this Article and the Warrenton Historic District Design
Guidelines, as may be applicable. Where there is a conflict between this
Article and the Design Guidelines, the requirements of this Article shall
apply.
6-4.4.2 Where a COA is required for a sign in the Historic District, such COA shall
be approved by the Zoning Administrator or the ARB, as determined in this
section.
6-4.4.3 Administrative COA Approval
1. The Zoning Administrator, or their designee, may review and approve
a COA application for the any window, building, or temporary sign in
the Historic District if such sign meets all of the following criteria:
(1) The sign complies with the design guidelines and any applicable
standards of this Article;
(2) The color of the sign is a color established in a historic color
palette from a commercial paint store;
(3) The sign is less than 20 square feet in sign area;
(4) The sign is illuminated from an external source only; and
6-7 Updated September 2019
2. The Zoning Administrator, or their designee, shall have the authority to
forward any COA application for a sign to the ARB if there is a need
for any further clarification on compliance with the design guidelines
and/or this Article.
6-4.4.4 COA Approval by the ARB
1. The ARB shall review and make decisions on COAs for all
freestanding signs and projecting signs (where a bracket is being
installed, relocated, or replaced) in the Historic District.
2. The ARB shall review any COA application for a sign that is not
subject to an administrative approval in Section 6-4.4.3, above.
3. The ARB shall review any COA application for a sign that is
forwarded to the board for review by the Zoning Administrator, or
their designee.
4. The ARB shall review any bonus sign area allowed pursuant to Section
6-9.
5. The ARB shall review any Temporary A-Frame or T-Frame sign
composed of material other than wood.
6-4.4.5 Alternative Review
1. Where an applicant proposes a building material for a sign or the
application of lettering that is not in compliance with the Historic
District Design Guidelines, the ARB may review the proposed material
or application to determine if it may be approved as an alternative as
part of the COA application review.
2. Alternatives may only be approved by the ARB and only if the ARB
finds:
(1) That the proposed alternative achieves the intent of the subject
design or development standard to the same or better degree than
the subject standard;
(2) That the proposed alternative results in benefits to the overall
historic district that are equivalent to or better than compliance
with the subject standard; and
(3) That the proposed alternative imposes no greater impacts on
adjacent properties than would occur through compliance with
the specific requirements of this code.
6-4.5 Violation and Revocation of Sign Permit
6-4.5.1 The Zoning Administrator may revoke a permit or approval if it is found
that there has been concealment or misrepresentation of material facts in
either the application or plans submitted.
6-8 Updated September 2019
6-4.5.2 Failure to adhere to the requirements of this Ordinance in the construction
and maintenance of a sign shall void any sign permit issued, and said sign or
structure shall be removed by the property owner forthwith.
6-5 Measurements and Calculations
6-5.1 Sign Setback
All required setbacks for signs shall be measured as the distance in feet from the applicable lot
line or right-of-way, whichever is applicable, to the closest point on the sign structure.
6-5.2 Sign Height
6-5.2.1 The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the
sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the
sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the newly established grade
after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or
excavating solely undertaken for the purpose of locating or increasing the
height of sign.
6-5.2.2 In cases where the normal grade is below grade at street level, sign height
shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade
at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the
crown of a public or private street.
6-5.3 Sign Area
The surface of a sign to be included when computing maximum allowable square footage of sign
area shall be calculated as follows:
6-5.3.1 For sign copy mounted or painted on a background panel, cabinet, or
surface distinctively painted, textured, lighted, or constructed to serve as the
background for the sign copy, the sign area shall be computed by means of
the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that
encompasses the extreme limits of the background panel, cabinet, or
surface. See Figure A and Figure B.
6-9 Updated September 2019
Figure A: Illustration of sign area calculation for a monument sign with copy on a distinct cabinet.
Figure B: Illustration of computing the sign area for wall signs with a background panel or cabinet.
6-5.3.2 For sign copy where individual letters or elements are mounted or painted
on a building façade or window where there is no background panel,
cabinet, or surface distinctively painted, textured, lighted, or constructed to
serve as the background for the sign copy, the sign area shall be computed
by means of the combination of the smallest square, circle, rectangle,
triangle, or combination thereof that encloses all the letters or elements
associated with the sign. See Figure C. In cases where there are multiple
sign elements on the same surface, the Zoning Administrator shall have the
authority to determine the outermost boundaries of individual sign elements.
Decorative edging or other window treatments that are not an integral part
of the sign copy shall not be considered a part of the sign for the purposes of
this Article. See Figure D.
6-10 Updated September 2019
Figure C: Illustration of sign area calculation for two differently shaped wall signs with individual
letters.
Figure D: Illustration of sign area calculations for multiple sign areas on a window sign
6-5.3.3 The calculation of sign area shall not include any supporting framework,
bracing, or decorative fence or wall unless such structural support is
determined to constitute an integral part of the sign design by means of text
or other commercial message, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
See Figure A.
6-5.3.4 In the case of a three-dimensional sign where the sign faces are not mounted
back-to-back, the sign area shall be calculated by the smallest square,
rectangle, triangle, circle, or combination thereof, that encompasses the
profile of the sign message. The profile used shall be the largest area of the
sign message visible from any one point. See Figure E.
6-11 Updated September 2019
Figure E: The sign area of a three-dimensional sign is measured measuring the largest profile of the sign.
6-5.3.5 Except for three-dimensional signs, the sign area for a sign with more than
one face (multi-faced signs) shall be computed by adding together the area
of all sign faces when the interior angle is greater than 45 degrees.
6-5.3.6 When two identically sized, flat sign faces are placed back to back or at
angles of 45 degrees or less, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any
one point at the same time, the sign area shall be computed by the
measurement of one of the sign faces. If the two faces are unequal, the sign
area shall be calculated based on the larger of the two faces.
6-5.4 Street and Façade Frontage Measurements
6-5.4.1 When calculating the permitted sign area based on street frontage, only the
street frontage that lies in the incorporated area of the Town of Warrenton
shall be used in the calculation.
6-5.4.2 When calculating the permitted sign area based on the width of any façade,
such calculation shall be based on viewing the façade from a 90-degree
angle (i.e., straight on), regardless of façade insets, offsets, or angles. See
Figure F.
Figure F: Illustration of façade width measurement on varied façade shapes.
6-12 Updated September 2019
6-6 General Regulations for All Sign Types
Unless otherwise specifically stated, the following regulations shall apply to all signs within the Town:
6-6.1 Permanent signs are considered accessory uses and shall be accessory to a principal use
provided for by this Ordinance.
6-6.2 Failure to adhere to the requirements of this Ordinance voids any permit approval,
requiring removal of the sign or structure. Exceptions shall be for signs permitted in the
right-of-way in accordance with this Article and temporary sidewalk and yard signs
allowed in Section 6-15.
6-6.3 All signs shall be constructed in compliance with the Uniform Statewide Building Code
and any other Town building regulations.
6-6.4 Allowances for signs in the Floodplain District (FPD) shall be that of the underlying base
district and shall otherwise be compliance with all other permitting requirements for
structure in the floodplain, in that district.
6-6.5 No sign or sign structure shall be placed on private or public property without the written
consent of the owner or agent thereof.
6-6.6 No sign may be placed or located so as to conflict with or impair line of sight for turning
movements on or onto public streets or conflict with the vision clearance or other
requirements of this Ordinance or applicable traffic ordinances, including Section 2-21.
6-6.7 All landscaping and lighting of signs shall conform to the provisions of Articles 8 and 9 of
this Ordinance as well as any applicable standards in this Article.
6-6.8 No sign shall obstruct or interfere with fire ingress or egress from any door, window, or
fire escape, nor shall it obstruct or interfere with traffic or traffic visibility, or resemble or
imitate signs or signals erected by the Town or other governmental agency for the
regulation of traffic or parking.
6-6.9 All signs shall be secured in such a manner as to prevent swinging or other significant
noticeable movement, not including movement related to electronic message centers.
Projecting signs shall be exempt from this requirement.
6-6.10 Neon signs may be used anywhere signs are permitted, except in residential districts, and
provided it is used on a permitted sign type (e.g., wall, monument, etc.). This shall not
include digital signs or LED signs that are intended to mimic neon signs.
6-6.11 The commercial message sign area allowed for any permanent sign permitted in this
chapter may be substituted with a noncommercial message. A sign permit shall not be
required for this substitution if there is no structural change to the sign.
6-6.12 Signs in Rights-of-Way
6-6.12.1 Signs shall be prohibited in the right-of-way with the exception of:
6-13 Updated September 2019
1. Signs installed by the Town, Fauquier County, State of Virginia, or
approved transit agency;
2. Any warning signs or traffic safety signs required by public utility
providers; or
3. Sidewalk signs as allowed in Section 6-15.
6-6.12.2 Any sign to be installed in the right-of-way by an agency other than the
Town shall require prior approval of the Public Works Director.
6-6.12.3 The Zoning Administrator may remove or cause to be removed any
unlawful sign in the public right-of-way. Such removal shall be
accomplished at the property owner’s expense.
6-7 Sign Illumination
All signs, unless otherwise stated in this Article, may be illuminated by internal or external light sources,
provided that such illumination complies with the following:
6-7.1 A lighting plan is submitted as part of a sign permit or site development plan application,
as applicable in Section 6-4.2. Such plan shall include all details of any illumination
proposed as part of a sign.
6-7.2 All sign illumination shall conform with the requirements for lighting as set forth in
Section 9-8 of this Ordinance;
6-7.3 Light fixtures illuminating signs shall be located, aimed, and shielded so that light is
directed only onto the sign face and is prevented from creating glare or light shining into
motorist or pedestrian field of vision. Shielding shall be accomplished with architectural
elements, landscaping, and/or specific lighting components, such as shields or louvers.
6-7.4 Lighting shall be designed so any exposed incandescent lamps used to illuminate ground
signs, painted signs, or wall signs shall be equipped with reflectors or other devices
arranged so as to concentrate the illumination upon the area of the sign and prevent glare
or the shining of light onto any adjoining property or public right-of-way.
6-7.5 Exposed lighting sources (e.g., bulbs that are not shielded) for signs shall not be directed
so as to shine directly into adjacent residential dwellings or to shine directly into the line
of sight for vehicles or pedestrians.
6-7.6 Illumination of any sign for a use in the C or I district located within 300 feet of any R
district, shall be extinguished between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. except
for any time during that period when the use is legally open for business. Illuminated
signs in the C and I district shall not be located within 50 feet of a residential zoning
district boundary.
6-7.7 The average level of illumination on the face or vertical surface of any sign shall not
exceed one foot-candle at the property line.
6-14 Updated September 2019
6-7.8 The sign shall consist of light lettering, symbols and logo on a medium to dark colored or
similar background that does not produce glare.
6-7.9 Light sources internally illuminating signs shall be located, aimed and shielded so that
light is directed onto the message only. Shielding shall be accomplished with architectural
elements and/or specific lighting components, such as shields or louvers within the sign.
Lettering or symbols shall constitute no more than forty percent of the surface area of the
sign.
6-8 Prohibited Signs
The following types of signs are specifically prohibited within the Town of Warrenton:
6-8.1 Any sign that copies or imitates an official sign, purports to have official status, or
threatens public safety;
6-8.2 Windblown devices, with the exception of flags as allowed in this ordinance;
6-8.3 Flags attached to vehicles for sale or lease that are not used for personal use by the
vehicle owner or lessee;
6-8.4 Signs that employ any parts or elements which revolve, rotate, whirl, spin or otherwise
make use of motion to attract attention. This shall not include changeable copy signs as
allowed in this Article;
6-8.5 Flags that flutter, similar to, and including feather signs;
6-8.6 Signs with moving or flashing lights, except as noted in the changeable copy sign section.
6-8.7 Beacons and searchlights, except for emergency purposes;
6-8.8 Pennants and streamers;
6-8.9 Signs that are applied to trees, bus shelters, utility poles, benches, trash receptacles,
newspaper vending machines or boxes, or any other unapproved supporting structure, or
otherwise placed in the public right-of-way except as provided for in Section 6-6.12;
6-8.10 Signs that obstruct or substantially interfere with any window, door, fire escape, stairway,
ladder, or opening intended to provide light, air, ingress, or egress to any building;
6-8.11 Signs which are not securely affixed to the ground or otherwise affixed in a permanent
manner to an approved supporting structure unless specifically permitted as a temporary
sign;
6-8.12 Signs mounted on or above the roofline of any building;
6-8.13 Portable signs with the exception of sidewalk signs authorized under Section 6-15;
6-15 Updated September 2019
6-8.14 Vehicle signs viewed from a public road with the primary purpose of providing signage
not otherwise allowed by this Article. Vehicles or trailers shall not be parked
continuously in one location to be used primarily as additional signage. This does not
apply to a vehicle parked at a driver’s residence and is the primary means of
transportation to and from his or her place of employment; and
6-8.15 Any sign not specifically allowed by this Article.
6-9 Special Standards for Signs in the Historic District
6-9.1 Signs in the Historic District shall be the same as those allowed in the underlying base
district.
6-9.2 Applicants for signs in the Historic District can increase the amount of signage permitted
in the underlying base district through bonuses achieved through one of the following:
6-9.2.1 If all proposed signs are constructed of sustainable, biodegradable materials,
the total amount of building sign area may be increased by 10 percent.
6-9.2.2 If the applicant submits a comprehensive sign plan for the applicable
building, illustrating all existing and proposed signs for the building, the
total amount of building sign area may be increased by five percent
provided the sign plan illustrates:
1. Compliance with the Historic District Design Guidelines and this
Article; and
2. A uniform approach to the design of all signs that will create a
harmonious sign package for the entire building through shape, color,
illumination, and other sign characteristics.
6-9.3 Illumination
6-9.3.1 Wall signs in the Historic District may be illuminated through the following
methods, if approved by the ARB as part of the Certificate of
Appropriateness:
1 . Indirect lighting methods such as gooseneck lighting;
2 . Individual reverse channel letters (halo-lit or reverse-lit); and
3 . Neon signage.
6-10 Permanent Signs at Entries
Permanent signs may be permitted within a subdivision, a nonresidential development park, a multifamily
development with over 25 units, or for large multi-tenant buildings with more than 10 acres in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
6-16 Updated September 2019
6-10.1 The placement and allocation of the permanent sign shall be reviewed and decided upon
during the subdivision platting process or as part of an amended easement plat, as
identified in Table 1 of this Article. A sign permit shall be required for the installation
and/or any changes to the signs in accordance with this Article.
6-10.2 One permanent monument sign shall be permitted for each subdivision, development
park, or multi-tenant building. For subdivisions, the Planning Commission may permit
additional signs if the subdivision has portions of the subdivision, or individual phases,
with separate access points off of an arterial road.
6-10.3 The sign shall be located within 150 feet of an entrance point into the subdivision,
development park, or multi-tenant center.
6-10.4 The monument sign shall comply with the standards in Table 2.
TABLE 2: SIGNS AT ENTRANCES
District Maximum Sign Area Maximum Sign Height Illumination
Residential, RO, and PSP 24 square feet 6 feet Externally illuminated
C or I 75 square feet 15 feet
Internally or externally
illuminated
6-10.5 Monument signs shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from the street curb and 25 feet
from any adjacent lot line in a R District.
6-10.6 The subdivision plat or site development plan shall include the location of the sign and
how the sign message area shall be allocated to individual lots or tenants. For the purpose
of identification of the subdivision or development by safety services, the sign shall be an
on-premise sign.
6-10.7 Signs permitted under this section may be located on a lot with another freestanding sign
as allowed in Section 6-13.4 without reducing the amount of other signage allowed on the
same lot in accordance with this Article.
6-10.8 For subdivisions, provided the subdivision is recorded and the zoning is for a
nonresidential zoning district, the sign may be placed even if no construction has taken
place on any of the lots.
6-10.9 Residential Sign Alternative
6-10.9.1 In a residential district, up to two wall signs may be permitted as an
alternative to the permitted monument sign above.
6-10.9.2 The wall signs shall be mounted to a decorative wall or fence that generally
runs parallel with the street and has a minimum length of 500 feet.
6-17 Updated September 2019
6-10.9.3 If two signs are utilized, the signs shall be separated by a minimum of 50
feet.
6-10.9.4 If an applicant proposes to use wall signs, no monument sign, as allowed in
above, shall be permitted.
6-11 Permanent Signs Permitted in PUD Districts
All development in a PUD District shall be subject to the standards of this Article unless otherwise
modified through the PUD public review and approval process.
6-12 Permanent Signs Permitted in Residential Districts and the RO District
The following are the permanent signs allowed in R-6, R-10, R-15, R-40, RT, R-E, and RMF residential
zoning districts, for residential uses within a PUD, and the RO District.
6-12.1 Signs for Individual Dwellings
6-12.1.1 One wall sign is permitted on each individual lot used for residential
purposes provided the sign is mounted flush to the façade of the principal
dwelling and does not exceed two square feet.
6-12.1.2 Such sign shall not be directly illuminated.
6-12.1.3 A sign permit shall not be required for this type of sign.
6-12.2 Signs for Nonresidential Uses in Residential Zoning Districts
6-12.2.1 One permanent monument sign may be permitted on a lot containing a
nonresidential use in a residential zoning district provided the sign meets the
following requirements:
1. The sign shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from the street rightof-
way and any adjacent lot lines.
2. The maximum sign area shall be 24 square feet.
3. The sign may include manual changeable copy.
4. No such sign or any portion of the structure shall exceed eight feet in
height.
5. The sign may only be illuminated through an external light source.
6-12.2.2 One additional permanent monument sign may be erected on an adjacent
street frontage (same lot) if such street frontage has a length of 100 feet or
more. Such additional sign shall meet the requirements of 6-12.2.1.
6-18 Updated September 2019
6-12.2.3 Building signs shall be permitted for all nonresidential uses in a residential
district in the same manner as permitted for nonresidential uses in the PSP
Commercial District. This shall not apply to signs located on lots used
exclusively for residential dwellings where signage is controlled by Section
6-12.1.
6-13 Permanent Signs Permitted in Nonresidential Districts
The following are the permanent signs allowed in the C, CBD, I, and PSP zoning districts or for
nonresidential uses within a PUD District.
6-13.1 Buildings, developments, or subdivisions that are 100 percent residential in any
nonresidential district, shall be subject to the permanent sign allowances established in
Section 6-12.
6-13.2 Window Signs
6-13.2.1 Window signs in the CBD shall comply with the standards of this section
and shall require a sign permit and applicable COA review in accordance
with Section 6-4.4.
6-13.2.2 Window signs in all other district shall not require a sign permit provided
they comply with the standards in this section.
1. Window signs shall not occupy more than 50 percent of the window
area in any nonresidential districts except the CBD District where the
maximum coverage shall be 25 percent of the window area. The sign
area is based on the window area, regardless of the presence of an
awning. See Figure G.
Figure G: The window area is illustrated within the dashed line areas for the storefronts in the above
images.
6-19 Updated September 2019
2. Where window areas as illustrated in Figure G, above have panes
mounted at various angles separated only by the window framing
structure, the window area shall include the total surface area of all
windows, including door windows, regardless of such angles. Where
windows are separated by portions of a building wall, the window area
shall include the total surface area of each window or door, separate
from the others.
3. Window signs may be temporarily or permanently attached.
4. Window signs are not permitted in any window of a space used for
residential uses or purposes unless allowed as a temporary banner sign
in accordance with Section 6-15.
6-13.3 Building Signs
Building signs are permitted on all principal structures in accordance with the following:
6-13.3.1 The building sign area allowed in Table 3 shall include the total amount of
all awning, canopy, marquee, projecting, suspended, or wall signs on each
façade wall. Standards for each individual building sign type are established
in this section. Window signs are regulated separately and are not included
in the calculation of building sign area.
6-13.3.2 Building signs shall not extend above the top of the roofline of the building
to which it is attached.
6-13.3.3 Building signs may not be attached to mechanical equipment or roof
screening.
6-13.3.4 Building signs shall not include electronic message centers.
6-13.3.5 Size
1. This section establishes the maximum sign area permitted for all
building signs based on the district, building, and/or use that they
serve.
2. There is no maximum number of building signs but the total square
footage of building signs located on a single façade shall comply with
the requirements of this section.
3. An applicant may provide signage on any façade but shall not combine
the total amount of building sign area permitted on each facade and
apply it to any single façade.
4. Any sign that is incorporated into a building as an architectural element
shall be classified as a building sign.
5. The amount of building signs permitted shall be based on the façade
width of the principal building regardless if the signs are to be attached
to accessory buildings, canopies covering gas pumps, or similar
accessory structures.
6-20 Updated September 2019
6. The amount of building signs permitted as part of a PUD shall be
established within the PUD approval. If a PUD approval does not
address the regulations for building signs, then the provisions of this
section shall apply.
TABLE 3: MAXIMUM BUILDING SIGN AREA ALLOWANCE PER FACADE
CBD and PSP Districts C and I Districts
132 square feet for each wall fronting on a street or 1.5
square feet per façade width, whichever is less
150 square feet for each wall fronting on a street or 1.5 square
feet per façade width, whichever is less
NOTE: For buildings with multiple tenants, the ratio shall be applied to each lineal foot of building facade width
assigned to each individual tenant.
6-13.3.6 Wall Signs
1. Wall signs shall be mounted on or flush with a wall and shall not
protrude more than 24 inches from the wall or face of the building to
which it is attached.
2. A wall sign may be painted directly on a building wall, mounted on the
façade wall, or mounted on a raceway or wireway.
3. Any wall sign, except for signs painted directly onto the wall, shall be
mounted so there is a minimum clearance of eight feet from the
sidewalk and 16 feet above any driveway or vehicular use area.
4. Wall signs shall not extend above the parapet of the main building to
which it is attached; nor beyond the vertical limits of such building.
5. The lettering of wall signs mounted on a cornice or transom shall not
exceed the breadth or height of the cornice or transom on which the
lettering is mounted.
6. The Town of Warrenton may install additional wall signage on
buildings, with written permission from the building owner, without
reducing the amount of building signage allowed by this Article for the
subject building.
7. Wall signs may be internally or externally illuminated in the C and I
Districts.
6-13.3.7 Awning, Canopy, or Marquee Signs
Any canopy, awning, or marquee sign allowed pursuant to this section shall comply with
the following standards:
1. Signage shall not cover more than 15 square feet of any individual
awning or canopy, or 50 percent of any marquee.
6-21 Updated September 2019
2. All components of the awning, canopy, or marquee shall have a
minimum clearance of eight feet from the sidewalk and 16 feet above
any driveway or vehicular use area.
3. Marquee signs may include manual changeable copy signs.
4. Only the area of the sign may be illuminated internally. The remainder
of any awning, canopy, or marquee shall not be illuminated.
6-13.3.8 Projecting or Suspended Signs
1. Only one projecting or one suspended sign shall be permitted for each
tenant on each street frontage where the tenant has building frontage.
2. A projecting sign shall be perpendicular to the wall of the building to
which it is attached and shall not extend more than four feet from the
façade wall to which it is attached.
3. A suspended sign may be attached to the ceiling of an outdoor arcade
or underneath a canopy, awning, or marquee if it complies with the
sign area, height, and clearance standards of this section.
4. Projecting and suspended signs shall maintain a minimum six-inch
clearance from the façade of any building.
5. Decorative supporting structures (e.g., brackets and posts) for
projecting signs are encouraged and shall not count toward the
maximum square footage of signs allowed, however, in no case shall
the supporting structure exceed six square feet.
6. The maximum sign area for a projecting sign shall be six square feet.
7. The maximum sign area for any single suspended sign shall be four
square feet.
8. All components of the projecting sign shall have a minimum clearance
of eight feet above a sidewalk or any walkway and 16 feet above any
driveway or portion of a private lot used for vehicular circulation.
9. Projecting signs shall not be internally illuminated.
10. Projecting and suspended signs must be suspended from brackets
approved by the Building Official and contain no exposed guy wires or
turnbuckles.
11. Projecting or suspended signs shall not extend to a point closer than
two feet from the curb line of any street.
12. The bracket supporting the sign shall be located below the eaves of a
one-story building or below the second-floor window of a multi-story
building.
13. The brackets of all projecting signs on one building must be
horizontally alighted to maintain a balanced and consistent appearance
in signage on one building.
6-22 Updated September 2019
6-13.4 Freestanding Signs
6-13.4.1 Any freestanding sign shall be a monument sign. A sign that is placed on
posts, which are no more than two feet in height to the base of the sign
cabinet or sign face, shall be considered a monument sign for the purposes
of this Article.
6-13.4.2 Up to 75 percent of any freestanding sign area may be a changeable copy
sign in all districts except in the CBD.
6-13.4.3 All signs shall be subject to the illumination of signs shall be subject to
Section 6-7 and Article 9.
6-13.4.4 All monument signs may be subject to review of line of sight to prevent the
sign from blocking visibility from vehicles at intersections of streets and
driveways or private drives and intersections in addition to the vision
clearance requirements. See Section 6-6.6. Such review shall be undertaken
by the applicable review board or the Zoning Administrator, as applicable.
6-13.4.5 Monument Signs in the CBD and PSP Districts
1 . Monument signs shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from the rightof-
way line of any street in the PSP District.
2. Monument signs in the CBD shall be located no closer to a street than
the right-of-way line.
3. Monument signs where permitted are subject to the following
limitations:
(1) Each sign shall be located at least 25 feet from any side or rear
property line adjacent to an R zone.
(2) Each sign located in a parking area shall have a concrete or
asphalt curb island protecting the sign against damage when
located in a parking area.
(3) All monument signs shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from
any side or rear property line when adjacent to an R district.
(4) Each sign shall not exceed eight feet in height.
(5) Each sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area.
(6) One monument sign of a size and height permitted in this section
shall be permitted on each street frontage. For street frontages
that are 100 feet or wider, one additional monument sign shall be
permitted in accordance with this section. The two signs shall be
separated by a minimum of 50 feet. Existing non-conforming
monument signage will not prevent the installation of a second
monument sign, so long as the new sign meets all ordinance
requirements and the existing sign meets Section 6-16.
6-23 Updated September 2019
6-13.4.6 Monument Signs in the C and I District
1 . Monument signs shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from the rightof-
way line of any street.
2. Monument signs where permitted are subject to the following
limitations:
(1) Each sign located in a parking area shall have a concrete or
asphalt curb island protecting the sign against damage when
located in a parking area.
(2) All monument signs shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from
any side or rear property line when adjacent to an R district.
(3) Each sign shall not exceed 20 feet in height in the C District and
10 feet in height in the I District.
(4) Each sign shall not exceed 40 square feet in area in the C District
and 50 square feet in the I District.
(5) One monument sign of a size and height permitted in this section
shall be permitted on each street frontage. For street frontages
that are 100 feet or wider, one additional monument sign shall be
permitted in accordance with this section. The two signs shall be
separated by a minimum of 50 feet. Existing non-conforming
monument signage will not prevent the installation of a second
monument sign, so long as the new sign meets all ordinance
requirements and the existing sign meets Section 6-16.
3. Electronic Message Centers
(1) One monument sign on each lot may have an electronic message
center.
(2) The maximum sign area of the electronic message center shall be
12 square feet or 25 percent or the total sign area, whichever is
less.
(3) No additional changeable copy sign area shall be permitted on a
monument sign if there is an electronic message center.
(4) Any message change shall be a static, instant message change.
(5) Messages can only change once every hour.
(6) Only Light Emitting Diodes (LED) technology or similar quality
signs shall be permitted for electronic message centers.
(7) The electronic message center shall come equipped with an
automatic dimming photocell, which automatically adjusts the
display’s brightness based on ambient light conditions.
6-24 Updated September 2019
(8) The brightness level shall not increase by more than 0.3 foot
candles (or 3.23 lumens per square meter or lux) (over ambient
levels) as measured using a foot candle meter at a pre-set
distance.
(9) The procedure and distances for measurement of brightness shall
be as established by the International Sign Association’s
Recommend Night- time Brightness Levels for On-Premise
Electronic Message Centers.
6-13.5 Signs at Private Driveway Entrances or Intersections
Permanent signs shall be permitted near driveway entrances to a street and at intersections of
internal drives under the following provisions:
6-13.5.1 Driveway signs are not permitted in the CBD District.
6-13.5.2 Driveway signs shall be set back at least five feet from all lot lines but in no
case shall the sign be set back more than 25 feet from the driveway entrance
or intersection of internal drives;
6-13.5.3 One sign may be permitted per individual driveway or internal intersection;
6-13.5.4 The sign may not exceed four square feet in area and three feet in height.
6-13.5.5 Driveway signs may be internally or externally illuminated.
6-13.5.6 Driveway signs shall not be included in the total calculated allowed signage
for a property under the remainder of this Article.
6-13.6 Drive-Through Signs
6-13.6.1 One freestanding drive-through signs shall be allowed for each stacking lane
in a drive-through facility provided the total aggregate sign area of all
drive-through signs, for each facility, does not exceed 72 square feet. In no
case shall a single drive-through sign exceed 36 square feet in sign area.
6-13.6.2 Drive-through signs are prohibited in the CBD District.
6-13.6.3 Up to two additional drive-through signs may be permitted for each stacking
lane if the additional signs are completely screened from view from any
right-of-way or adjacent residential uses.
6-13.6.4 Drive-through signs shall only be permitted in a side or rear yard.
6-13.6.5 Drive-through signage shall not be included in the total calculated allowed
signage for a property under the remainder of this Article. Any signs
attached to a wall of building or the structure shall be calculated as part of
the building signage allowance in Section 6-13.3.
6-13.6.6 No drive-through sign shall exceed six feet in height measured from the
grade of the adjacent driving surface to the top of the sign.
6-13.6.7 Drive-through signs may be internally or externally illuminated.
6-25 Updated September 2019
6-14 Master Sign Plan Option for Large Developments
6-14.1 The master sign plan allowance established herein is to provide for additional permanent
signage for large-scale developments. The master sign plan provides a review process
where any development that includes more than 25 acres, contains buildings with a
cumulative floor area of more than 300,000 square feet, or a single building with a gross
floor area of 50,000 square feet or more can submit a master sign plan package that
illustrates all the signage that will be used on the lot and the relationships of all these
signs to the development.
6-14.2 The Planning Director shall have the authority to permit the submission of a master sign
plan for a project that does not comply with the project size requirement above if:
6-14.2.1 The project is a stand-alone, mixed-use project that contains both
commercial or office uses with a residential component that contains a
density higher than allowed in any residential district; or
6-14.2.2 The master sign plan is part of a proposed planned unit development.
6-14.3 Master Sign Plan Requirements
6-14.3.1 Master sign plans may be submitted for any nonresidential or mixed-use
development that meets the acreage or square foot threshold above, and
where the applicant wishes to submit a single, comprehensive master sign
plan for review as part of a PUD or land use application, as applicable.
6-14.3.2 A master sign plan is intended to promote consistency among signs within a
development and enhance the compatibility of signs with the architectural
and site design features within a development, as well as with the
surrounding neighborhood.
6-14.3.3 A master sign plan may include the following bonuses where the proposed
sign plan shows that all the signs will contribute to the overall design of the
development as well as comply with any of the city’s adopted plans or
policies:
1. One additional freestanding sign per frontage that may exceed the
maximum freestanding sign height and sign area of the applicable
zoning district by 25 percent; and
2. An increase of up to 25 percent of the maximum building sign area
allowed in the applicable district pursuant to Section 6-13.3.
6-14.3.4 An application for review of a master sign plan shall include:
1. A master sign plan, drawn to scale, delineating the site proposed to be
included within the master sign plan and the general locations of all
permanent signs including freestanding and building signs and the
property lines, buildings and roadways;
2. Drawings and/or sketches indicating the dimensions in square feet,
location and sign area for all the permanent signs;
6-26 Updated September 2019
3. Drawings and/or sketches indicating the exterior surface details of all
buildings on the site on which wall signs, awning signs, canopy signs,
projecting signs, window signs or other building signs are proposed;
4. Samples or photos of colors and materials to be used for signs and the
relationship to the building materials; and
5. Information regarding the illumination of any signs.
6-14.3.5 In order for the applicable review boards to approve a master sign plan, it
must find all of the following:
1. That the plan's contribution to the design of the site and surrounding
area will be superior to the quality that would result under the
regulations and standards of this Article;
2. That the signs proposed as part of the master sign plan will create a
uniform sign package for the site related to materials, lighting, design
and other features of the individual signs; and
3. That the proposed signs are compatible with the style or character of
improvements and are well-related to each other in terms of location
and spacing.
6-14.3.6 The Planning Commission may impose reasonable conditions to a master
sign plan necessary to carry out the intent of this Article.
6-14.3.7 No sign permits, building permits, or other permits required for the
construction of any sign shall be issued unless the sign complies with the
approved master sign plan.
6-14.3.8 An approved master sign plan may only be amended or modified through
the same review process required for its approval.
6-15 Temporary Signs
The following temporary signs shall be permitted anywhere within the Town provided they meet the
established standards.
6-15.1 Standards that Apply to all Temporary Signs
6-15.1.1 Temporary signs shall not be mounted, attached, affixed, installed, or
otherwise secured in a manner that will make the sign a permanent sign.
6-15.1.2 No temporary sign shall be mounted, attached, affixed, installed, or
otherwise secured so as to protrude above the roofline of a structure.
6-15.1.3 Temporary signs shall not be posted in any place or in any manner that is
destructive to public property including, but not limited to, rights-of-way,
utility poles, public trees, etc.
6-15.1.4 Unless otherwise specifically stated, temporary signs shall not be
illuminated.
6-27 Updated September 2019
6-15.1.5 No temporary sign shall require a foundation, support, wiring, fittings, or
elements that would traditionally require a building permit or electrical
permit.
6-15.1.6 No streamers, spinning, flashing, or similarly moving devices shall be
allowed as part of or attachments to temporary signs.
6-15.1.7 All temporary signs shall be secured in such a manner as to prevent
swinging or other significantly noticeable movement resulting from the
wind that could pose a danger to people, vehicles, or structures.
6-15.1.8 Mobile signs on wheels, runners, casters, parked trailers, parked vehicles, or
other temporary or movable signs shall not be permitted unless otherwise
specifically stated in this Article.
6-15.1.9 Because of the nature of materials typically used to construct temporary
signs and to avoid the unsightliness of deteriorating signs and all safety
concerns which accompany such a condition, temporary signs shall be
removed or replaced when such sign is deteriorated.
6-15.2 Sign Permits for Temporary Signs
6-15.2.1 Unless otherwise stated, a sign permit for temporary signs shall be required
for temporary signs that exceed nine square feet.
6-15.2.2 Only one sign permit for a temporary sign shall be issued to the same
business license holder, on the same site, for the same business at any one
time.
6-15.3 Temporary Signs without a Commercial Message
Temporary signs without a commercial message do not require a sign permit provided they
comply with the following standards:
6-15.3.1 Temporary signs that do not contain a commercial message shall still be
required to comply with the vision clearance requirements. See Section 6-
6.6.
6-15.3.2 The maximum height of temporary signs without a commercial message
shall be six feet unless it is a banner sign mounted to a structure, in which
case, the banner sign shall not be mounted above the roofline or the top of
the structure.
6-15.3.3 The maximum sign area of any sign without a commercial message shall be
nine square feet.
6-15.3.4 Such signs shall be limited to yard signs or banner signs.
6-28 Updated September 2019
6-15.4 Temporary Signs with a Commercial Message in Residential Zoning Districts and
the RO District
The following temporary signs are allowed in the R-6, R-10, R-15, R-40, RT, R-E, RMF, and RO
zoning districts or on residential lots within a PUD along provided they comply with all
applicable standards:
6-15.4.1 One yard or banner sign with a commercial message shall be permitted on
any single lot.
6-15.4.2 The signs shall be subject to the sign-specific standards in Section 6-15.6.
6-15.4.3 The maximum sign area for any individual sign shall be six square feet with
a maximum height of four feet in the R-6, R-10, R-15, R-40, RT, R-E, and
RO zoning districts.
6-15.4.4 The maximum sign area for any individual sign shall be eight square feet
with a maximum height of six feet in the RMF district.
6-15.4.5 In lieu of the above regulations, any nonresidential use located in a
residential zoning district shall be permitted the same amount of temporary
commercial signs as allowed in the PSP district pursuant to Section 6-15.5.
6-15.5 Temporary Signs with a Commercial Message in Nonresidential Zoning Districts
The following temporary signs are allowed in the CBD, PSP, C, and I zoning districts or on lots
used for nonresidential purposes within a PUD:
6-15.5.1 Signs Allowed for an Unrestricted Time
The following temporary sings are allowed without any time restrictions subject to all
other applicable standards in this code:
1. A maximum of 18 square feet of aggregate temporary signs with
commercial messaging shall be permitted for every 100 feet of lineal
street frontage.
2. The signs are limited to yard signs or banner signs subject to the signspecific
standards in Section 6-15.6.
3. The maximum sign area for any individual sign shall be nine square
feet with a maximum height of six feet.
6-15.5.2 Additional Signs with Time Limitations
1. In addition to the temporary signs allowed in Section 6-15.5.1 above,
Table 4 establishes the total square footage, height, and allowances for
temporary signs allowed in the applicable nonresidential zoning
district.
2. Each sign shall be subject to the standards established for each
applicable sign type in this section.
6-29 Updated September 2019
6-15.6 Standards for Temporary Sign Types
6-15.6.1 A-Frame or T-Frame Sidewalk Signs
1. There shall be no time limit for sidewalk signs with the exception that
the sign shall only be placed outside during the hours of the
establishment’s operation.
2. Only one sidewalk sign is allowed per each first-floor business
establishment at one time. Such sign must be located within ten feet of
the entrance of the establishment that owns the sign.
3. A sign permit shall be required for the initial placement of the sign,
regardless of the size of the sign.
4. The sign may be located on a public sidewalk or private sidewalk (e.g.,
walkway adjacent to a building outside of the right-of-way) provided it
is placed on pavement and not in any landscaped areas or on pavement
used for vehicles (e.g., driveways and parking lots).
5. If the sign is placed on a sidewalk, the sign can only be placed where
the paved sidewalk width, not including curb top, is at least seven feet
wide. The width and placement of the sign shall be such so that there
shall be a minimum width of four feet of clear and passable sidewalk
for pedestrians.
6. Signs shall be placed in a manner so that its location in proximity to
other signs on the sidewalk shall provide for a clear and continuous
pathway that allows for the safe movement of pedestrians.
7. The sign must be freestanding and shall not be affixed, chained,
anchored, or otherwise secured to the ground or to any pole, parking
meter, tree, tree grate, fire hydrant, railing, or other structure.
8. The sign must not obstruct access to parking meters, bicycle racks and
other features legally in the right-of-way.
9. The sign must not interfere with the opening of car doors in legal
spaces, or with the operation of wheelchair lifts and ramps, cab stands,
loading zones or bus stops.
TABLE 4: TEMPORARY SIGNS ALLOWANCES IN NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Sign Type Districts
Allowed
Maximum Sign
Area (Square
Feet)
Maximum Sign
Height (Feet) Time Limits
A-Frame or T-Frame Sidewalk
Signs
All
Nonresidential
Districts
9 3
See Section 6-
15.6.1.
Banner Signs See Section 6-15.6.2.
Yard Signs 24 6
15 consecutive
days, four times
per calendar year
6-30 Updated September 2019
10. Any area designated for emergency access or off-street parking,
circulation and loading shall not contain a sign.
11. The sign shall be internally weighted so that it is stable and windproof
so as to resist wind gusts of up to ten miles per hour. Signs shall be
constructed of wood, metal, or other similarly sturdy materials.
Materials other than wood are subject to ARB approval per Section 6-
4.4.4.
12. The Town of Warrenton shall be held harmless from any liability
resulting from accident or injury caused by the placement and/or
maintenance of such sign.
13. Banners, pennants, streamers or similar wind or air driven devices
attached to or otherwise used in conjunction with the sign are
prohibited.
14. The sign shall not be illuminated.
6-15.6.2 Banner Signs
1. There shall be no maximum number of banner signs provided the
aggregate total square footage of all banner signs does not exceed the
maximum sign area allowed in Section 6-15.4 for residential uses or 36
square feet per establishment for nonresidential uses with the exception
of paragraph (6) below.
2. Banner signs may be attached to a building, fence, or other similar
structure. Banner signs attached to posts and mounted in a yard or
landscaped area shall be regulated as a temporary yard sign.
3. Banner signs in the Historic District may only be permitted to be
attached to a building if the banner can be attached to existing fixtures.
No additional holes or fixtures may be added to a building for the
purposes of supporting a banner sign.
4. The maximum height standard for temporary signs shall not apply to a
banner sign but such signs shall not be mounted in a manner that
extends above the roofline of a building or the top of the structure on
which it is mounted.
5. Banner signs shall be permitted for up to 15 consecutive days, four
times per calendar year with the exception of paragraph (6) below.
6. For zoning permit applications related to the establishment of a new
use within an existing building where there is existing permanent sign,
a banner sign may be approved for up to 60 consecutive days to cover
the existing permanent signs. Such banner sign shall not exceed the
sign area of the permanent sign and shall require a sign permit.
6-15.6.3 Yard Signs
1. There shall be no maximum number of yard signs provided the
aggregate total square footage of all yard signs does not exceed the
maximum sign area allowed in this section on temporary signs.
6-31 Updated September 2019
2. There shall be a maximum of two faces to the sign, mounted back-toback.
6-16 Nonconforming Signs
6-16.1 Any sign that was lawfully in existence at the time of the effective date of this Ordinance,
or amendment thereto, that does not conform to the provisions herein, shall be deemed a
legal nonconforming sign and may remain on a lot of record except as qualified below.
No legal nonconforming sign shall be enlarged, extended, structurally altered or
reconstructed in any manner, except to bring it into full compliance with these regulations,
except that these regulations shall not prohibit the replacement of the content of a sign
without the structural modification of its size, location or configuration.
6-16.2 A sign shall lose its legal nonconforming status and must be brought into compliance
with the provisions of this Article by an application for, and issuance of, a sign permit or
by complete removal, if any of the following occurs:
6-16.2.1 If such sign is damaged to an amount exceeding 50 percent of the sign's fair
market replacement value, as determined by appraisals prepared by at least
two sign companies as selected by the Town;
6-16.2.2 The structure of the sign is altered in any form;
6-16.2.3 The sign is relocated;
6-16.2.4 The sign is defined as a temporary sign and has been in use for more than
one year following the effective date of this amendment; or
6-16.2.5 The nonconforming sign and its structure (including support and frame and
panel) are determined by the Zoning Administrator to be unsafe or in
violation of this code and are declared a nuisance.
6-16.3 Failure to bring a sign into compliance after loss of a legal nonconformity status as
defined in above shall cause the sign to be considered an illegal sign.
6-16.4 Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs, such as repainting, electrical
repairs and neon tubing repair shall be permitted.
6-16.5 Sign face changes where there is no change to the nonconforming sign structure
including change in sign face area, height, or alteration of the sign cabinet, if applicable,
may be made without a sign permit and without losing the legal nonconforming status of
the sign. These actions include, but are not limited to, replacement of a sign face within a
pre-existing sign cabinet, repainting of a sign face where the message does not change, or
similar actions as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
6-32 Updated September 2019
6-17 Removal of Signs
6-17.1 After making a reasonable attempt to notify the property owner, the Town may order the
removal of a nonconforming sign that has been abandoned. Such notice shall conform to
Section 11-3.2.2 of this Ordinance. For the purposes of this section, a sign is considered
abandoned if the business for which the sign was erected has not been in operation for a
period of at least one year. If following such a one-year period, the Town has made a
reasonable attempt to notify the property owner, via certified mail to the last known
address, as listed in the property records, the Town may remove nonconforming signs
and charge the cost of removal to the owner.
6-17.2 The Zoning Administrator may order the removal of any illegal sign. Notice and
enforcement of such a violation shall be accordance with Article 11 of this Ordinance.
6-18 Maintenance
6-18.1 Every sign shall be maintained in a safe, presentable, and good structural condition at all
times, including the replacement of a defective part, painting, cleaning, and other acts
required for the maintenance of the sign.
6-18.2 Whenever a sign is to be removed pursuant to the requirements of this section, all parts of
the sign and supporting structure (e.g., pole, monument, cabinet structure, etc.), excluding
buildings for wall, projecting, or similar signage, shall be removed in its entirety. This
section shall not require the removal of a raceway if mounted to such structure on a
building.
6-18.3 The Zoning Administrator may order the removal or repair of any sign that, has become
insecure, in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe, or presents a threat to the public safety.
7 - 1 Updated April 2019
Article 7
Off-Street Parking and Loading
Amended April 9, 2019
Contents (Sections)
Contents (Sections) ....................................................................................................................................... 1
7-1 Legislative Intent ............................................................................................................................. 2
7-2 General Standards ............................................................................................................................ 2
7-3 Standards for Residential Uses ........................................................................................................ 3
7-4 Standards for Institutional and Community Service Uses ............................................................... 4
7-5 Standards for Recreational Uses ...................................................................................................... 5
7-6 Standards for Commercial Uses ....................................................................................................... 5
7-7 Standards for Industrial, Trade, Warehouse, and Utility Uses ......................................................... 7
7-8 Uses Not Specifically Covered By This Schedule ........................................................................... 7
7-9 Special Parking Considerations for the CBD District ...................................................................... 7
7-10 Space on Same Lot........................................................................................................................... 8
7-11 Alternate Location by Special Use Permit in Residential Districts ................................................. 8
7-12 Cooperative Parking......................................................................................................................... 9
7-13 Proximity to Municipal Parking Lots .............................................................................................. 9
7-14 Safe and Convenient Access ............................................................................................................ 9
7-15 Design Requirements for Residential Parking Lots ......................................................................... 9
7-16 Design Requirements for Industrial and Commercial Parking Lots .............................................. 10
7-17 Parking Space Size ......................................................................................................................... 10
7-18 Required Off-Street Loading and Unloading Space ...................................................................... 11
7-19 Handicapped Parking ..................................................................................................................... 12
7-20 Minimum Stacking Space Requirements ....................................................................................... 13
7 - 2 Updated April 2019
Article 7
Off-Street Parking and Loading
7-1 Legislative Intent
Any building or other structure erected, altered, or used, and any lot used or occupied, for any of
the following purposes shall be provided with the minimum off-street parking spaces as set forth
in this Article, together with adequate passageways or driveways or other means of circulation
and access to and from a street or way.
7-2 General Standards
7-2.1 When units of measurement used to determine the number of parking or loading spaces
result in a fraction of a space, any fraction greater than or equal to one-half (0.5) shall
require one (1) space.
7-2.2 When parking and loading requirements are based on gross leasable area, such area shall
include the total area for which a tenant owns or pays rents and which is designed for the
tenant's occupancy and exclusive use. Common hallways, stairwells, elevator shafts,
mechanical equipment rooms, and similar non-leasable floor area shall be excluded from
parking or loading tabulations.
7-2.3 When parking and loading requirements are based on gross floor area, such area shall be
measured from the outside edges of the building and shall include all enclosed space.
7-2.4 When parking or loading requirements are based on the number of seats, and benches or
pews are used, each eighteen (18) lineal inches of such seating shall be determined to
equal one (1) seat. In cases where fixed seats, pews, or benches are not used, but
temporary or portable seating is used, each seven (7) square feet of floor area available
for temporary seating shall equal one (1) seat.
7-2.5 All off-street parking and loading facilities shall be designed and constructed to provide
for adequate vehicular and pedestrian circulation within the site and safe and convenient
access onto adjoining streets and pedestrian walkways and to contiguous lots. Among
factors to be considered are the number and location of entrances, exits, and aisles; the
need for acceleration, deceleration, turning lanes, and other traffic control improvements;
the general arrangement and delineation of parking and loading areas; the quality and
quantity of landscaping provided; the means of access to buildings for fire fighting and
emergency vehicles and personnel; and the needs of the handicapped and the needs of all
pedestrians.
7 - 3 Updated April 2019
7-2.6 Driveway entrances shall be designed to accommodate all vehicle types having occasion
to enter the site, including delivery vehicles. There shall not be more than one (1)
entrance and exit or one (1) combined entrance and exit along any street frontage, unless
deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator, to alleviate traffic congestion and
interference along such street.
7-2.7 Off-street parking and loading areas shall be designed to prohibit the backing out of
vehicles into the public right-of-way. This requirement does not apply to driveways
serving single-family detached, two-family, or duplex dwellings, nor to diagonal parking
spaces on local streets. Direct access onto arterial roadways or primary collectors is
prohibited unless there are no alternatives for providing access to the site.
7-2.8 All off-street parking and loading areas, including aisles and entrances, shall be paved
with a durable and dust free hard surface, such as bituminous concrete or asphalt. Paving
of parking lots within the 100 year floodplain may be waived by authorization of the
Zoning Administrator if the applicant can show to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Administrator that the stormwater run-off from the parking area will be less in volume,
speed and pollutant content than it would if the surface was paved as otherwise required
by this Ordinance.
7-2.9 Curb and gutter shall be installed within off-street parking and loading areas where
deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator after consultation with the Town
Engineer, to control storm drainage, channelize traffic, protect buildings and landscaped
areas, and separate pedestrian and vehicular circulation areas.
7-2.10 Paved pedestrian walkways shall be provided on-site as necessary to protect pedestrians
and promote the safe, convenient and efficient movement of pedestrians and vehicles.
Such walkways shall have an unobstructed width of a minimum of four (4) feet.
7-2.11 Parking and loading spaces shall be marked by durable painted lines or curbs extending
the length of the space. Signs and/or pavement markings shall be used as necessary to
ensure safe traffic operation and to identify designated handicapped parking spaces and
loading spaces.
7-2.12 Uses that are combined on the same lot shall provide the number of parking spaces in
accordance with the cumulative total of each of the uses separately. The Planning
Director or Zoning Administrator may waive up to ten percent (10%) of the required
combined parking spaces based on the cumulative total to accommodate the reuse of
existing development or the development of new uses, which in combination will share
the parking load.
7-3 Standards for Residential Uses
7 - 4 Updated April 2019
The following are minimum parking standards for residential uses, all of which, except as
otherwise provided in this Ordinance, shall be on the same lot as the use specified.
Use Number of Spaces Required
Single family dwellings • two (2) all weather parking spaces per dwelling unit
Townhouses, duplexes, and
two-family dwelling units
• two all weather parking spaces per dwelling unit if on-street parking is
provided within 300 feet of the development; or
• two and one-half (2.5) all weather parking spaces per dwelling unit; or
• as provided for in a parking demand study submitted with the
development application
Multifamily dwellings • one (1) space per dwelling unit for efficiency units
• one (1) space per dwelling unit for one-bedroom units
• one and one-half (1.5) spaces per dwelling unit for two-bedroom units
• two (2) spaces per dwelling unit for three or more bedroom units
Dwellings for the elderly and
handicapped
• one and one-half (1.5) parking space for each four (4) dwelling units if
the facility contains central dining facilities
• two spaces for each four (4) dwelling units if without central dining
facilities
• and one (1) space per employee, calculated for the work period
containing the largest number of employees
Mobile Homes • two (2) spaces per unit
Bed and Breakfasts; Tourist
homes
• one (1) space for each accommodation (room or suite)
• and one (1) space for each employee, calculated for the work period
containing the largest number of employees
7-4 Standards for Institutional and Community Service Uses
The following are the minimum parking standards for Institutional and Community Service uses,
all of which shall be on the same lot as the use specified except as otherwise provided in this
Ordinance. When requirements are based on number of pews or seats design capacity, this shall
be in accordance with the designed occupancy load under the building code.
Use Number of Spaces Required
Auditorium or stadium • one (1) space per five (5) seats design capacity
Church or Place of
Worship
• one (1) space per five (5) seats design capacity of the principal place of worship.
However, required spaces may be provided on an off-site parking lot which is accessory to
another use which is not operating during the time of weekend and/or evening services if such
parking lot is within five hundred (500) feet of the place of worship and sufficient spaces are
7 - 5 Updated April 2019
available without charge by permission of the owners of the lot. A deed restriction, contract,
easement, or some form of written agreement between the parties and approved by the Zoning
Administrator is required to ensure that parking remains available at the off-site location.
Civic Club or Org. • one (1) space per four (4) members, based on the designed occupancy load
Hospital • one (1) space per three (3) beds, including infants cribs and children's beds, plus
• one (1) space per staff physician, plus
• one (1) space per other employee calculated for the work period containing the largest
number of employees.
Library • one (1) space per three (3) patrons, based on the designed occupancy load, plus
• one (1) space per employee calculated for the work period containing the largest
number of employees.
Use Number of Spaces Required
Medical Office • one (1) space per two hundred fifty (250) sq. ft. gross floor area.
Nursery School or Child
Care Center
• one (1) space per staff member or employee plus
• one (1) space per one thousand (1,000) square feet gross floor area
Nursing Home, Rest
Home, or Convalescent
Home
• one (1) space per four (4) beds plus
• one (1) space per employee calculated for the work period containing the largest
number of employees.
School, Elementary • one (1) space per twenty-five (25) classroom seats plus
• one (1) space per employee calculated for the work period containing the largest
number of employees.
School, Middle • one (1) space per fifteen (15) classroom seats plus
• one (1) space per employee calculated for the work period containing the largest
number of employees.
School, High • one (1) space per ten (10) classroom seats plus
• one (1) space per employee calculated for the work period containing the largest
number of employees.
7-5 Standards for Recreational Uses
Use Number of Spaces Required
Country Club one (1) space per four (4) members, based on the designed occupancy load
Golf Course • forty (40) spaces per nine (9) holes, plus one (1) space per employee.
Health or Fitness Club • one (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet gross floor area.
Swimming Pool • one (1) space per four (4) persons, based on design capacity of the pool.
Tennis or Racquet Club • two (2) spaces per court, plus one (1) space per employee calculated for the
work period containing the largest number of employees.
7-6 Standards for Commercial Uses
7 - 6 Updated April 2019
Use Number of Spaces Required
Animal Hospital • one (1) space per four hundred (400) square feet gross floor area
Appliance Sales • one (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet gross floor area
Bank or Financial Ctr. • one (1) space per four hundred (400) square feet gross floor area.
Bowling Alley • three (3) spaces per alley, plus additional spaces for any eating establishment.
Business Service or Supply • one (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet gross floor area
Car Wash • one (1) space per employee on the largest shift, plus required stacking spaces
Convenience Store • five (5) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet gross floor area.
Funeral Home • one (1) space per four seats, plus one (1) space per two (2) employees, plus one
(1) reserved space for each hearse, ambulance, or company vehicle.
Furniture Sales • one (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet gross floor area
Hardware Sales • one (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet gross floor area
Hotel or Motel • one (1) space per room, plus one (1) space for each employee calculated for the
work period containing the largest number of employees, plus additional spaces
for restaurants.
Landscaping, Lumber or
Building Material Sales,
Retail
• one (1) space per one thousand (1000) square feet gross floor area, plus one (1)
space for each employee calculated for the work period containing the largest
number of employees, plus one (1) space per company vehicle.
Office, General • one (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet gross floor area
Personal Services Estab. • one (1) space per four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor area.
Restaurants, Carry Out • one (1) space per one hundred (100) square feet gross floor area.
Restaurants, Fast Food • one (1) space per one hundred-fifty (150) square feet gross floor area.
Restaurants, Sit Down • one (1) space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet gross floor area.
Retail Sales, General • one (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet gross floor area for the first
twelve thousand (12,000) square feet, plus two (2) spaces per each additional
one thousand (1,000) square feet gross floor area, minimum four (4) spaces for
each establishment.
Service Station,
Automotive
• one and one-half (1.5) spaces per service bay, plus one (1) space per six fuel
pumps, plus one (1) space per employee calculated for the work period
containing the largest number of employees, plus additional spaces, as
required herein, for any auxiliary uses such as convenience food and retail
sales.
Shopping Center • same as for general retail sales, plus additional spaces, as required herein, for
offices, theaters, banks, personal services, and eating establishments; and
subject to the limitation of maximum parking spaces under Large Retail (over
50,000 square feet).
Theater, Indoor • one (1) space per three-and-one-half (3.5) seats; provided that indoor
theaters located in shopping centers with more than 450 parking spaces
located on shopping center property shall require one (1) space per four and
one-half (4.5) seats.
7 - 7 Updated April 2019
Wholesale Trade
Establishment
• one (1) space per one thousand (1,000) square feet gross floor area, plus one
(1) space per company vehicle.
Vehicular Sales and/or
Rental:
• one (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet enclosed sales area, plus
two and one-half (2.5) spaces per service bay, plus one (1) space per
employee, plus one (1) space per three thousand (3000) square feet of open
sales area.
Vehicle Service
Facilities/Repair Shops
• two and one-half (2.5) spaces per service bay, plus one (1) space per
employee.
7-7 Standards for Industrial, Trade, Warehouse, and Utility Uses
Use Number of Spaces Required
Assembly or
Manufacturing uses:
• one (1) space per employee on the largest shift, plus one (1) space per
company vehicle.
Building Contractors &
Similar Trades & Services
• one (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet gross floor area, plus one (1)
space per company vehicle.
Heavy Equipment Sales
and/or Services
• one (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet enclosed sales area, plus two
(2) spaces per service bay, plus one (1) space per employee, plus one (1)
space per three thousand (3000) square feet of open sales area.
Mini-Warehouse Facility • four (4) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet net floor area of office
space, plus one (1) space per employee, plus one (1) space for resident
manager quarters.
Utility Facility • one (1) space per employee calculated for the work period containing the
largest number of employees, plus one (1) space per company vehicle
domiciled on-site.
• Adequate parking for the emergency maintenance of the utility facility,
minimum of two (2) spaces.
7-8 Uses Not Specifically Covered By This Schedule
For any Residential, Commercial, Industrial, Community, and Public Facilities not directly
addressed by the above parking schedules, the Planning Director shall determine the appropriate
number of parking spaces based on a use listed above that most closely approximates the
proposed use, or through information provided by the developer or owner of the proposed use, or
through consultation with other communities containing uses similar to the one proposed, or
through a combination of these or other research methods.
7-9 Special Parking Considerations for the CBD District
7 - 8 Updated April 2019
7-9.1
Off-Site Parking in CBD
In the Central Business District, up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the parking
requirement for any use may be provided on an off-site parking lot located so long as it is
within five hundred (500) feet of the use and the owner or applicant for the use provides
to the Zoning Administrator a deed restriction, contract, easement, or some form of
written agreement showing that the parking lot will remain available at such off-site
location.
7-9.2
Parking Credit in CBD
In the Central Business District, in addition to the off-site parking provisions in Section
7-9.1, an owner or applicant may contribute to the Town’s Downtown Parking Fund in
lieu of providing up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the otherwise required parking for
the site. Such fee shall be in accord with a fee schedule adopted by the Town Council.
7-10 Space on Same Lot
Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, all off-street parking spaces appurtenant to any
residential use permitted in any R district shall be provided on the same lot with the use to which
it is appurtenant. Parking for townhouses and other dwelling units approved under a cluster
alternate or as part of a Planned Unit Development need not be on the same lot as the use to
which they are appurtenant but shall be located in accordance with the approved site development
plan. For dwelling units with enclosed garages, either attached or detached, the driveway area
shall not be considered in the calculation of off-street parking spaces unless additional width is
provided that permits the parking of a vehicle while still maintaining access to the garage.
7-11 Alternate Location by Special Use Permit in Residential Districts
All off-street parking space appurtenant to any nonresidential use permitted in any R district shall
be provided on the same lot with the use to which it is appurtenant except where practical
difficulties prevent such location or where the public safety or the public convenience would be
better served by the location thereof other than on the same lot. In such cases, the Town Council
may authorize a special use permit for such alternative location of required parking space as will
adequately serve the public interest, subject to the following guidelines:
7-11.1 Such space shall be located on land in the same ownership as that of the land on which is
located the use to which such space is appurtenant or, in the case of cooperative
7 - 9 Updated April 2019
provision of parking space, in the ownership of at least one of the participants in the
combination.
7-11.2 The entrance to such space shall be located within five hundred (500) feet walking
distance of an entrance to the use that such space serves.
7-11.3 Some portion of the common off-street parking area shall be within three hundred (300)
feet of an entrance regularly used by patrons into the building(s) served thereby.
7-12 Cooperative Parking
Parking space required under the provisions of this Ordinance may be provided cooperatively for
two (2) or more uses in a development or for two (2) or more individual uses that will assure the
permanent availability of such space. Cooperative parking agreements shall be submitted for
review with an application for zoning permit, site development plan, or subdivision for the use(s),
whichever is applicable.
The amount of such combined space shall be equal to the sum of the amounts required for the
separate uses; provided, that the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator may reduce the
amount of space required under the provisions of a combined parking area by reason of different
hours of operation than those of other uses participating in the agreement.
7-13 Proximity to Municipal Parking Lots
Any building or use located within three hundred (300) feet (measured along lines of public
access) of an existing municipally-operated parking lot shall be exempt from the provisions of
this Article.
7-14 Safe and Convenient Access
All off-street parking space and off-street loading space shall be provided with safe and
convenient access to a public street and safe internal circulation. If any such space is located
contiguous to a public street, the public street side thereof shall be curbed, and ingress and egress
shall be provided only through driveway openings through the curb not exceeding thirty (30) feet
in width and located and constructed in accordance with specifications of the Town of Warrenton
Public Facilities Manual, and designed to avoid any hazardous intersections.
7-15 Design Requirements for Residential Parking Lots
All parking areas in residential districts shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
accordance with all of the following conditions:
7-15.1 Parking areas shall not be constructed within required front yards, except for
single-family, two-family, and duplex dwellings.
7 - 10 Updated April 2019
7-15.2 All parking lots shall be arranged for functional efficiency and convenience and in
general shall be designed to present a pleasing appearance so as to reduce adverse impact
on surrounding public or private property. All parking lots shall be landscaped in
accordance with Article 8.
7-15.3 All parking lots shall be designed to safely and conveniently provide for pedestrian
access and circulation.
7-16 Design Requirements for Industrial and Commercial Parking Lots
All parking lots in industrial and commercial districts shall be operated and maintained in
accordance with all of the following conditions:
7-16.1 They shall not be used for the sale, repair, or dismantling of any vehicles, equipment,
materials or supplies.
7-16.2 They shall be properly graded for drainage; surfaced with concrete, asphaltic concrete or
asphalt, properly installed pavers, or durable, dust-free, permeable finished surface to
facilitate drainage for stormwater runoff, and maintained in good condition free of
weeds, dust, trash, or debris.
7-16.3 They shall be provided with entrances and exits so located as to minimize traffic
congestion and the effect of headlight glare.
7-16.4 They shall be designed to provide adequate stacking space for entry and egress onto
adjacent streets.
7-16.5 They shall be provided with wheel or bumper guards so located and arranged that no part
of any parked vehicles will extend beyond the boundaries of the lot upon which the
parking lot is located.
7-16.6 Lighting facilities shall be so arranged that they neither unreasonably nor unnecessarily
disturb occupants of adjacent residential properties, nor interfere with traffic, by either
location or glare.
7-16.7 All parking lots shall be landscaped in accordance with Article 8.
7-16.8 All parking lots shall be designed to safely and conveniently provide for pedestrian
access and circulation.
7-16.9 Parking lots in commercial and residential districts are encouraged to incorporate bicycle
racks and areas for Dockless Mobility Devices, motorcycle or moped parking in order to
facilitate personal forms of transportation where possible.
7-17 Parking Space Size
Each off-street parking area provided shall not be less than three hundred sixty-five (365) square
feet in area. The area of drives, aisles, landscaping, and such other provisions required for
adequate access shall be counted as part of the three hundred sixty-five (365) square feet.
7 - 11 Updated April 2019
Parking areas located in parking structures or buildings shall be designed on the basis of a
minimum of two hundred seventy (270) square feet per vehicle including moving and turning
space.
The dimensions for each individual parking space shall not be less than one hundred sixty-two
(162) square feet (18' x 9'), except for parallel parking spaces which shall be a minimum
twenty-two (22) feet in length.
The following minimum dimensions shall be used in the design and construction of all parking
lots:
Parking Angle
(Degrees)
Stall
Width
Stall
Depth
Aisle
Width
For two-way
aisles:
90 9 ft. 18 ft. 24 ft.
80 9 ft. 19 ft. 22 ft.
70 9 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft.
60 9 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft.
45 9 ft. 19 ft. 15 ft.
30 9 ft. 17 ft. 12 ft.
Parking Angle
(Degrees)
Stall
Width
Stall
Depth
Aisle
Width
For one-way
aisles:
45 9 ft. 19 ft. 12 ft.
30 9 ft. 17 ft. 12 ft.
Parking spaces designated for compact cars can be reduced to eight (8) feet in width and fifteen
(15) feet in length, except for parallel spaces which shall be nineteen (19) feet in length. Such
parking spaces may comprise of up to twenty-five (25) per cent of the total parking spaces
required, provided that they are grouped together and clearly identified through pavement
markings and/or signs. Compact spaces can only be used to meet nonresidential parking
requirements.
7-18 Required Off-Street Loading and Unloading Space
7 - 12 Updated April 2019
The adequacy of off-street loading and unloading shall be determined by the Zoning
Administrator, taking the following factors/standards into consideration:
7-18.1 The availability of access to an adjacent street, alley, lane, or driveway.
7-18.2 The location of the facility in relation to the vehicular circulation in adjacent parking
spaces.
7-18.3 The nature of the establishment of which the facility is appurtenant to.
7-18.4 The required schedule of loading and unloading.
7-18.5 All off-street loading space shall be provided on the same lot with the use to which it is
appurtenant.
7-18.6 Off-street loading space shall be provided in addition to and exclusive of the parking
requirement on the basis of:
- One (1) space (three hundred (300) square feet) for the first eight thousand (8,000)
square feet and one (1) space for each additional twelve thousand (12,000) square
feet of retail gross leasable area.
- One (1) space (three hundred (300) square feet) for the first eight thousand (8,000)
square feet and one (1) space for each additional sixteen thousand (16,000) square
feet of office space.
- One (1) space (three hundred (300) square feet) for each ten thousand (10,000)
square feet of industrial floor space.
7-18.7 Additional or fewer loading spaces may be required based upon Planning Commission's
review of the site development plan.
7-19 Handicapped Parking
Parking spaces designed to accommodate the needs of the handicapped shall be required as
provided herein and as required by the Uniform Statewide Building Code.
7-19.1 All non-residential uses where off-street parking spaces are required, as well as
apartment and townhouse developments, shall be required to provide parking for
handicapped persons. At least one (1) five-foot wide wheelchair access ramp or curb cut,
located in close proximity to the handicapped parking space(s), is required. The ramp or
curb cut shall be designed to provide access to sidewalks, walkways, or pedestrian paths
serving the use.
7-19.2 For uses requiring less than five (5) off-street parking spaces, at least one (1) space shall
be thirteen (13) feet wide and be marked with lines to provide a parking area eight (8)
feet in width and a loading area (access aisle) five (5) feet in width. For uses requiring
more than five (5) off-street parking spaces, accessible spaces shall be identified by
above-grade signs bearing the standard handicapped parking logo.
7 - 13 Updated April 2019
7-19.3 Handicapped parking spaces shall have a minimum width of eight (8) feet for the space
and five (5) feet for the access aisle, and a minimum length of eighteen (18) feet.
7-19.4 The number of required handicapped parking spaces shall be determined by the
following schedule:
Total Number of
Off-Street Parking Spaces Required
Total Number of Spaces
Accessible for Handicapped Use
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
More than 1,000 20 plus one for each 100 over 1,000
7-19.5 All handicapped parking spaces shall be located in close proximity to building entrances
and/or pedestrian walkways. If located next to curbs or steps, provisions shall be made to
provide an alternative means of access to the building and/or public sidewalk.
7-19.6 All handicapped parking spaces shall be clearly identified by placement of signs, a
minimum of four (4) feet in height and one-and-one-half (1.5) square feet in area, with
the words "Reserved Parking" and having a handicapped logo, meeting Virginia
Department of Transportation specifications.
7-19.7 All handicapped parking spaces shall be situated on a grade not to exceed two (2)
percent.
7-20 Minimum Stacking Space Requirements
7-20.1 All uses which include a drive-up window or which are characterized by patrons
remaining in their vehicles to receive service shall provide on-site stacking spaces in
order to alleviate traffic congestion.
7-20.2 Stacking spaces shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in
length.
7-20.3 All stacking areas shall be separate from other vehicular and pedestrian circulation aisles
and parking spaces. It is recommended that stacking lanes be separated through the use
of landscaped islands bounded by concrete curbing or other durable material, subject to
the availability of space and the safety of traffic circulation in the parking lot.
7-20.4 The number of stacking spaces required shall be determined by the following schedule:
7 - 14 Updated April 2019
- Restaurant, Fast Food: a minimum of ten (10) spaces as measured from the
drive-thru window.
- Car Washes: a minimum of three (3) spaces per car wash bay as measured from the
bay.
- Financial Institutions: a minimum of eight (8) spaces for one (1) drive-thru window,
plus four (4) spaces for each additional drive-thru window.
- Other Uses With Drive-Thru Windows or Similar Characteristics: for uses not
provided herein, the Planning Director shall determine the appropriate number of
stacking spaces based on a use listed above that most closely approximates the
proposed use, or through information provided by the developer or owner of the
proposed use, or through consultation with other communities containing uses
similar to the one proposed, or through a combination of these methods.
8 - 1 Updated March 2020
Article 8 Landscaping Requirements
Amended April 9, 2019, December 10, 2019, and March 10, 2020
Table of Contents
8-1 Legislative Intent
8-2 Applicability
8-2.1 Site Development Plans
8-2.2 Parking Lots and Streets
8-3 Review Procedures
8-4 Landscape Plan Requirements
8-4.1 Landscape Plan Required
8-4.2. Information Required on Landscape Plan
8-5 Street Tree Planting
8-5.1 Street Tree Planting Required
8-5.2 Responsibility for Planting and Maintenance
8-5.3 Location of Street Trees
8-5.4 Where Parking Lots abut public street rights-of-way
8-5.5 Street Tree Standards
8-5.6 Street Tree Specifications
8-6 Parking Lot Landscaping
8-6.1 Perimeter Parking Lot Landscaping
8-6.2 Interior Parking Lot Landscaping
8-6.3 Parking Lot Planting Specifications
8-6.4 Planting space requirements for parking lot trees shall be the same as those stated for
Street Trees, Article 8-5.7.
8-7 Tree Species
8-8 Screening and Buffer Yards
8-8.1 Application
8-8.2 Visual Screening
8-8.3 Buffer Yards, General Requirements
8-8.4 Uses Requiring Buffer Yards
8-8.5 Screening and Buffer Yard Specifications [table]
8-9 Conservation of Heritage and Specimen Trees
8-10 Retention and Replacement of Trees
8-10.1 Exemptions
8-10.2 Retention of Existing Trees
8-10.3 Tree Replacement Requirements
8-10.4 Tree Protection Zones
8-10.5 Trees Permitted to be Removed are not Considered as Existing Trees
8-10.6 Site Development Procedures
8-11 Planting Procedures
8-12 Maintenance Responsibilities
8-13 Penalties for Unauthorized Removal
8 - 2 Updated March 2020
Article 8 Landscaping Requirements
8-1 Legislative Intent
The purpose of this Article is to regulate the planting and preservation of natural vegetation and
landscape materials; to promote the general health, safety and welfare of Town citizens; to
facilitate the creation of an attractive and healthy environment; to protect property values; and to
further the urban design, economic development and other goals and objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan. To these ends, these regulations are intended to promote the planting and
preservation of landscape materials that:
8-1.1. provide visual screening and noise buffering between incompatible land uses;
8-1.2. provide parking lot landscaping to reduce the harmful effects of heat, noise, glare and
other disruptive effects associated with motor vehicle use;
8-1.3. provide for the creation of safe, attractively landscaped areas adjacent to public streets by
using landscape materials which separate vehicular and pedestrian areas; and
8-1.4. provide for useful, well-defined and attractive open space areas within the Town for the
use of its citizens.
8-1.5. enhance the convenience and safety of pedestrians.
8-1.6. maintain and enhance the overall quality and function of the tree cover and vegetative
canopy within the Town, including energy conservation, shade and windbreaks, and
8-1.7. promote traffic safety by controlling views and visually defining circulation patterns.
8-2 Applicability
8-2.1 Site Development Plans
The provisions of this Article shall apply to all site development plans approved after the
effective date of this Ordinance, including those which include the reconstruction or
enlargement of existing structures.
8-2.2 Parking Lots and Streets
This includes the enlargement of any parking lot, but does not include the resurfacing or
restriping of any existing parking lot. This Article shall apply to the construction of any
parking lot with more than five (5) spaces and to the construction, extension or widening
of any public or private street.
8-3 Review Procedures
The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the review of all landscape plans in accord
with the procedures and time frames for review of site development plans as set forth in Article
11. The Zoning Administrator shall approve or disapprove the plan with notice provided in
writing and addressed to the applicant, identified on the site plan application documents.
8 - 3 Updated March 2020
8-4 Landscape Plan Requirements
8-4.1 Landscape Plan Required
A landscape plan meeting the requirements of this Article is required for all site
development plans required under Article 10 of this Ordinance. Every landscape plan
required by this Article shall be prepared by a landscape professional who is trained in
the practice of landscape design and is registered as a landscape architect, or certified as a
professional landscape designer or professional horticulturalist by the Commonwealth of
Virginia, and shall contain the information set forth in Section 8-4.2.
8-4.2. Information Required on Landscape Plan
1. Scale. Plans shall be drawn to a scale of not less than fifty (50) feet to the inch on
sheets no less than eighteen by twenty-four inches (18" X 24") or greater than
thirty-six by twenty-four inches (36" X 24"). The Zoning Administrator may modify
this scale requirement if a different scale would aid the Town’s review and
processing of the application due to the size and/or configuration of the site. In no
case shall the scale be less than fifty (50) feet to the inch.
2. Contents. Plans shall illustrate with sufficient detail the location of all existing trees
of six inches caliper or greater, with proposed construction including streets,
driveways, parking areas, curbs, sidewalks, utility lines, structures, fences, walls and
landscape areas. Landscape areas shall indicate dimensions and all proposed
locations of trees and plants, clearly identified as to species, type, and size, crossreferenced
to the plant schedule required in 8-5.4.
3. Plant Schedule. Plans shall be accompanied by a schedule of plants proposed,
including the number and type proposed (i.e., ornamental, canopy, etc.), their height,
caliper, or container size, and both the common and botanical names, in accord with
the requirements of this Article.
4. Table of Open Space and Plant Calculations. Plans shall include a table calculating
the amount of open space and/or parking lot area and the number of plants and trees
required by the Ordinance and the amount of open space, trees and plants provided.
5. Protection of Vegetation. Any existing vegetation proposed to be saved shall be
identified on the Landscape Plan by name, location, and size. Methods of protecting
the vegetation during construction activities shall be illustrated and/or explained on
the Landscape Plan or on an attachment.
6. The professional seal with certificate or registration number; the original signature,
address, and telephone number of the landscape professional who designed the plan.
8-5 Street Tree Planting
8-5.1 Street Tree Planting Required
Street tree planting is required anytime a public street is constructed, extended, or
widened, in conjunction with development in a commercial or industrial district, and all
multifamily, townhouse, condominium and mixed-use developments in any district.
8 - 4 Updated March 2020
8-5.2 Responsibility for Planting and Maintenance
Street trees shall be planted in the public right-of-way in accord with Section 8-5.1 by the
owner or developer, who shall also be responsible for initial installation and for the
replacement of all trees that are found to be not viable within the stated warrantee period
– typically one year after installation, as well as all trees that are deemed by the Zoning
Administrator within the first year of planting to be of insufficient size or quality to meet
the provisions of this Ordinance.
8-5.3 Location of Street Trees
Where the Zoning Administrator determines that it is not physically possible to locate
street trees within the public right-of-way, the trees shall be planted in alternate locations
approved by the Zoning Administrator and shall be protected through either a landscape
easement or an open space easement, which shall be maintained by the owner or a
property owner's association approved by the Town. Maintenance responsibilities shall be
indicated and recorded with the instrument creating the open space or landscape
easement. A note setting forth the responsible entity shall be placed on the site
development plan/final plat as applicable. The entity responsible for the maintenance
shall repair or replace any landscape material that is dead or has been removed within
thirty (30) days upon written notice from the Zoning Administrator.
8-5.4 Where Parking Lots abut public street rights-of-way
Where parking lots abut public street rights-of-way, the provisions of Section 8-6 shall
apply.
8-5.5 Street Tree Standards
1. In reviewing plans for street tree plantings, the Zoning Administrator shall determine
whether the plans conflict with existing street trees and any Town-adopted design
studies, landscape plans, or other plans, designs or policies for the street.
2. The majority of street trees planted in conjunction with a specific site plan, or a final
plat, shall be canopy trees specified in Section 8-5.6 to provide shade. On any street
right-of-way on which the utility pole line for power, streetlights, and/or telephone
service is or will be located, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, ornamental
trees shall be used, including trees that are a species approved by the entity
responsible for maintaining such utility lines.
3. A minimum of one (1) canopy tree is required for every fifty (50) feet of street
frontage or part thereof. This provision does not require the planting of trees at even
intervals. Ornamental trees may be substituted for canopy trees on the basis of two
(2) ornamental trees for each canopy tree and planted in groups of two (2) or three (3)
trees no more than fifty (50) feet apart.
4. The following shall not be planted as street trees:
a. Linden, Silver Linden, or Littleleaf Linden
b. London Platetree or American Sycamore
8 - 5 Updated March 2020
c. Any variety of Callery Pear
d. Fruiting Sweetgum
e. Sawtooth Oak
f. Green or Blue Ash
g. Silver Maple and its cultivars
h. Norway Maple
i. Leyland Cypress
8-5.6 Street Tree Specifications
The following are the minimum specifications for plant materials:
1. Canopy street trees shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in height, at time of
planting. Such trees shall be expected to attain a height of at least fifty (50) feet at
maturity.
2. Medium street trees shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in height, at the time of
planting. Such trees shall be expected to attain a height of at least thirty (30) feet at
maturity.
3. Ornamental trees shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height, at the time of planting.
Such trees shall be expected to attain a maximum height of thirty (30) feet at
maturity.
8-5.7 Planting Space Requirements
The following are minimum specifications for planting space for street trees:
1. Canopy trees shall be planted in a space having no less than 100 square feet and
having no dimension less than five feet (5’).
2. Medium Street trees shall be planted in a space having no less than 90 square feet and
no dimension less than five feet (5’).
3. Ornamental and small street trees shall be planted in a space having no less than 75
square feet and no dimension less than five feet (5’).
8-6 Parking Lot Landscaping
All parking areas as described below and defined herein, unless explicitly exempted, shall be
landscaped as described in this Article.
8-6.1 Perimeter Parking Lot Landscaping
1. Perimeter parking lot landscaping shall include all landscaped areas outside the
perimeter of the paved area of the lot, including any landscaped area required
adjacent to a public right-of-way.
2. Street trees shall be planted in accordance with Section 8-5 along all public street
frontages which abut a parking lot, when such a street is constructed, extended or
widened. An additional continuous planting of evergreen or deciduous shrubs shall
be required between the public right-of-way and parking lot, located within a planting
bed with a minimum eight (8) foot width.
3. Edges of parking lots that do not abut public rights-of-way shall be planted with a
continuous landscaped area five (5) feet in width between the property line and the
8 - 6 Updated March 2020
parking lot. One (1) canopy tree and three (3) shrubs for every fifty (50) feet of
frontage shall be planted in this area. Where there are trees located on the adjacent
property within, ten (10) feet of the property line, that comply with this provision,
they can be documented and considered for credit in coordination with the
requirements of this section.
4. Alternate methods of landscaping designed to decrease the visibility of the parking
lot from the public right-of-way to an equal or better degree as would be achieved by
the standards set forth herein, such as low fences, walls, or earthen berms, may be
used, upon request of the applicant and approval of the Zoning Administrator.
5. No plant material, fence, wall, or berm may obstruct the view of motorists entering or
leaving the site.
8-6.2 Interior Parking Lot Landscaping
1. Interior parking lot landscaping shall include any landscaped area over fifty (50)
square feet in area within the perimeter of the paved parking area and more than five
(5) feet from any main structure.
2. Interior parking lot landscaping is required for the construction or enlargement of any
parking lot with five (5) or more additional spaces. Such landscaping shall be in
addition to any perimeter parking lot landscaping, street tree planting, and screening
otherwise required.
3. An area equal to or greater than ten (10) percent of the paved area for parking,
circulation, ingress, egress, and loading shall be landscaped with trees and/or shrubs.
Paved storage areas for such uses as lumber or storage yards and warehouses may be
subtracted from this total when such areas are screened from view of the public rightof-
way.
4. No landscaped area shall be less than fifty (50) square feet in area. Landscaped areas
shall be evenly distributed to provide shade throughout the parking area; however,
such areas may be consolidated in whole or in part if the Zoning Administrator
determines in writing that such even distribution of landscaped areas is not
reasonably possible.
5. There shall be one (1) tree and three (3) shrubs for every eight (8) parking spaces. At
least seventy-five percent (75%) of the trees shall be canopy trees.
8-6.3 Parking Lot Planting Specifications
For the purposes of this section, the following minimum specifications for parking lot
plant materials shall apply:
1. Canopy trees shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in height, at time of planting.
Such trees shall be expected to attain a height of at least fifty (50) feet at maturity.
2. Medium street trees shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in height, at the time of
planting. Such trees shall be expected to attain a height of at least thirty (30) feet at
maturity.
3. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in height with a full crown at
time of planting.
8 - 7 Updated March 2020
4. Ornamental trees shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height, at the time of planting.
Such trees shall be expected to attain a maximum height of thirty (30) feet at
maturity.
5. Shrubs shall be a minimum of two (2) feet in height at the time of planting. Shrubs
or hedges planted to form a continuous, solid visual screen along public
rights-of-way shall be at least two (2) feet in height within one (1) year of planting.
8-6.4 Planting space requirements for parking lot trees shall be the same as those stated for
Street Trees, Article 8-5.7.
8-7 Tree Species
8-7.1 Acceptable Tree Species
The following varieties of trees, listed by common name, are appropriate for meeting the
requirements of this Ordinance. Alternative species may be used if the Planning Director
determines that such alternatives will achieve the purposes as defined herein and will
provide equivalent characteristics regarding shading and resistance to disease and
drought.
1. Deciduous Trees Growing to Heights of 30 Feet or More (Canopy Trees)
Tree Species
Height
(in feet)
Spread
Native
Bald Cyprus (Taxodium distichum) 50’-70’ 20’-30’ Yes
Beech, American (Fagus grandifolia) 60’-80’ 25’-30’ Yes
Birch, River (Betula nigra) 40’ – 70’ 40’-60’ Yes
Black Gum (Nyssa sylvatica) 30’-50’ 20’30’ Yes
Cottonwood, Eastern (Populus deltoides) 65’-100’ 40’-50’ Yes
Dawn Redwood (Metasequoia glyptostroboides) 70’ – 100’ 25’
Elm, American (Ulmus americana) 65’-75’ 40’ Yes
Elm, Lacebark (Ulmus parvifolia) 40’-50’ 40’-50’
Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) (only male trees) 50’-80’ 50’+ - 80’+
Golden Raintree (Koelreuteria paniculata) 30’-40’ 30+’-40+’
Hackberry, Common (Celtis occidentalis) 40’-60’ 40’-60’ Yes
Hophornbeam, American (Ostrya Virginiana) 30’-40’ 20’-35’ Yes
Hornbeam, European (Carpinus betula) 40’-60’ 30’-40’
Kentucky Coffee Tree (Gymnocladus dioicus) 60’-75’ 40’-50’ Yes
Linden, American (Tilia americana) 60’-80’ 30’-50’ Yes
Locust, Thornless (Gleditsia triacanthos var. inermis) 40’-70’ 40’-60’ Yes
Magnolia, southern (Magnolia grandiflora 60’-80’ 30’-50’ Yes
Maple, Red (Acer rubrum) 40’-70’ 40’-70’ Yes
Maple, Sugar (Acer saccharum) 60’-70’ 40’-45’ Yes
Oak, Chestnut (Quercus prinus) 60’-70’ 60’-70’ Yes
8 - 8 Updated March 2020
Oak, Northern Red (Quercus rubra) 60’-75’ 60’+-75’+ Yes
Oak, Scarlet (Quercus coccinea) 70’-75’ 40’-50’ Yes
Oak, Shumard (Quercus shumardii) 80’-100’ 60’-80’ Yes
Oak, Southern Red (Quercus falcata) 70’-80’ 70’+ - 80’+ Yes
Oak, Swamp White (Quercus bicolor) 70’-75’ 50’+-75’ Yes
Oak, Water (Quercus nigra) 50’-80’ varies Yes
Oak, White (Quercus alba) 50’-80’ 50’+-80’+ Yes
Oak, Willow (Quercus phellos) 40’-60’ 30’-40’ Yes
Pagoda Tree, Japanese (Sophora japonica) 50’-75’ 50’-75’
Sweetgum, (Ligquidambar rotundiloba) 60’-75’ 40’-50’ Yes
Tulip Poplar or Tuliptree (Liriodendron tulipifera) 60’-80’ 40’-50’ Yes
Yellowwood, American (Cladrastris kentuckia lutea) 35’-50’ 40’-55’ Yes
Zelkova, Japanese (Zelkova serrata) 50’-80’ 50’-80’
2. Deciduous Trees Growing to Heights under 30 Feet (Medium or Ornamental Trees)
Tree Species
Height
(in feet)
Spread
Native
Buckeye, Red (Aesculus pavia) 10’-20’ 10’-20’+ Yes
Cherry, Flowering (Prunus serrulata) 20’-25’ 20’-25’+
Crabapple, Flowering (Malus “Prairiefire”) Yes
Dogwood, Korean (Cornus kousa) 20’-30’ 20’-30’+
Dogwood, Cornelian Cherry (Cornus mas) 20’-25’ 15’-20’
Fringetree, White (Chionanthus virginicus) 25’-30’ 25’-30’ Yes
Hawthorn, Green (Cretageus viridis) 20’-35’ 20’-35’
Hawthorn, Washington (Crataegus phaenopyrum) 20’-30’ 15’-25’
Hornbeam, American (Carpinus caroliniana) 20’-30’ 20’-30’ Yes
Crape Myrtle (Lagerstroemia indica or fauriei) 20’-30’ 15’-25’
Magnolia, Star (Magnolia stellata) 15’-20’ 10’-15’ Yes
Magnolia, Sweet Bay (Magnolia virginiana) 10’-20’ 10’-20’ Yes
Maple, Amur (Acer ginnala) 15’-20’ 15’+-20’+
Maple, Japanese (Acer palmatum) 15’-25’ 15’+-25’+
Maple, Paperbark (Acer griseum)) 20’-30’ 10’-30’
Maple, Trident (Acer buergeranum) 20’-25’ 20’-25’
Redbud (Cercis Canadensis) 20’-30’ 25’-30’ Yes
Silverbell, Carolina (Halesia carolina) 25’-30’ 20’-30’ Yes
Serviceberry, Downy (Amelanchier arborea) 15’-25’ varies Yes
Snowbell, Japanese (Styrax japonicus) 20’-30’ 20’-30’
Snowbell, Fragrant (Styrax obassia) 20’-30’ 20’-30’
Sourwood (Oxydendrum arboreum) 25’-30’ 20’ 20-30
8-7.2 Unacceptable Species
8 - 9 Updated March 2020
The following varieties of trees are not acceptable for meeting the requirements of this
Ordinance, due to the tendencies of such species to (i) negatively impact on native plant
communities, (ii) damage to nearby structures and infrastructure, or (iii) possess inherent
physiological traits that cause such trees to structurally fail. If the Zoning Administrator
determines that any proposed species is inappropriate due to any of the above three
characteristics, the Zoning Administrator may prohibit that species and require the
applicant to submit an acceptable alternative.
a) Ashes, Norway Maple, Washington Hawthorn, American Plum, Bradford Pear,
Pin Oak, Sycamores and London Planes are not appropriate for planting near
paved areas.
b) White Pine, Loblolly Pine, Virginia Pine, and Austrian Pine have been shown to
be unacceptable species for buffers in the Town.
8-7.3 Plantings within Stormwater Facilities and Drainage Structures
Species planted within stormwater facilities and drainage structures that are designed to
treat stormwater to improve water quality, including bioswales, bioretention facilities,
rain gardens and other best management practices (BMP) facilities, shall not be subject to
the type and species specifications listed in Article 8-7.1, but shall be as specified by the
professional in accordance with current practices under the regulations and requirements
of the Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System program (VPDES) as
administered by the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ). With Zoning
Administrator approval, these plantings may be counted toward meeting canopy
requirements and other landscaping requirements, as appropriate or applicable.
8-7.4 Noxious and Invasive Species
Any species that is listed on the Virginia Invasive Plant Species list, maintained by the
Department of Conservation and Recreation (DCR) with an “Invasiveness Rank” of
“High” shall be removed from property and shall not be utilized for Tree Preservation
Credits under Article 8-10.3.3. Any species that is listed on this list with an “Invasiveness
Rank” of “Medium” may remain at the option of the property owner but shall not be
utilized for Tree Preservation Credits under Article 8-10.3.3.
8-8 Screening and Buffer Yards
8-8.1 Application
1. The requirements of this Section shall apply to all new construction and all
reconstruction, as well as the enlargement of existing structures or uses constituting
more than fifty (50) percent of the total floor area of the structure or more than fifty
(50) percent of the total areas of the use.
2. Screening is to be provided and maintained when certain conflicting land uses are
located adjacent to or opposite from each other, to protect less intensive uses from the
effects of traffic, noise, glare, trash, activity, visual disorder, or other noxious effects
likely to be emitted by or associated with a more intensive use.
8 - 10 Updated March 2020
3. The burden to provide the necessary screening and buffer remains with the more
intensive use to be screened, and is a continuing obligation which runs with the land
as long as the original relationship between adjacent or opposite lots exists. In
instances where the adjacent or opposite property is vacant, requirements for buffer
yards shall be determined based on the uses permitted in the zoning district of the
vacant property or the uses shown on an approved site plan for that property.
4. Buffer yard requirements shall not apply to properties located within the Central
Business District (CBD) or on mixed-use parcels. However, visual screening shall
apply where indicated in Article 8-8.2.
8-8.2 Visual Screening
Visual screening is required for the areas, uses, and activities listed below. Screening
shall be achieved through the use of evergreen vegetation, a mixture of evergreen and
deciduous vegetation, or a combination of such vegetation in conjunction with fences,
walls or earthen berms.
1. Open storage areas, loading areas, and loading docks, and exposed machinery
associated with commercial or industrial activities shall be screened from view of
adjacent properties and the public right-of-way to a height of at least eight (8) feet
within one year of planting.
2. Satellite dishes shall be screened from view along at least three (3) sides, to a
minimum height of one-half the height of the satellite dish, from adjacent residential
properties and public rights-of-way.
3. Outdoor areas used for the storage and/or collection of refuse, including trash
dumpsters, shall be located in a paved area and screened from view of adjacent
properties, from the public right-of-way and from within the lot.
5. Temporary storage areas on construction sites shall be screened from public
rights-of-way and from adjacent properties that are used or zoned for residential
purposes. Such screening shall be put in place no more than thirty (30) days after the
establishment of the temporary storage area and shall be a height of no less than of
six (6) feet above grade. Such screening shall be removed immediately upon the
termination of the storage area or upon granting of an occupancy permit for the use
that the storage area serves, whichever occurs first.
8-8.3 Buffer Yards, General Requirements
1. Buffer yards shall not be used for materials storage buildings, parking and loading
areas for motor vehicles, or signs. Driveways and entrances connecting adjacent
parking lots, developments or other adjacent properties may interrupt the required
buffer yard only to the minimum amount necessary to provide a connection sufficient
to carry the expected traffic.
2. Buffer yards may be provided in the area required for setbacks except in residential
zoning districts or for residential uses. Buffer yards in residential zoning districts
shall be located in common open space.
8 - 11 Updated March 2020
3. If the buffer yard required by this Article exceeds the setback required by the zoning
district regulations, the required buffer yard must be provided.
4. Any existing buffer yard proposed to be saved by a site development plan
application, and that complies with the intention of this Article, as determined by the
Zoning Administrator, shall be deemed to meet these buffer yard requirements.
5. Whenever a proposed development plan is adjacent to a developed property that has
not provided any or all of the required buffer, the proposed development shall
provide sufficient buffer to achieve one half of the width of the required buffer yard.
6. No buffer yard shall be required to comprise more than fifteen (15) percent of the
gross area of the subject property.
7. For multifamily, commercial, and industrial uses where new fencing would create a
continuous surface greater than ten (10) feet in length, at least one evergreen shrub or
tree shall be planted every ten (10) feet along the fence.
8-8.4 Uses Requiring Buffer Yards
1. Commercial, office, public, semi-public, and institutional uses including associated
parking lots, shall provide a buffer yard where they are adjacent to residential and
recreational uses as specified in 8-8.5.
2. Industrial uses, including associated parking lots and storage areas, shall provide a
buffer yard where they are adjacent to residential and recreational uses as specified in
8-8.5.
3. Townhouses, condominiums, duplexes, two (2) family dwellings, mobile home
parks, PUDs and multifamily developments, including parking lots of ten (10) or
more vehicles, shall provide a buffer yard where they are adjacent to single-family
detached dwellings as specified in 8-8.5.
4. Residential uses shall provide a buffer yard where they are adjacent to major
collector or arterial streets as specified in 8-8.5.
8 - 12 Updated March 2020
8-8.5 Screening and Buffer Yard Specifications [table]
Type of Buffer Yard Minimum Width Minimum Screening
Commercial, office,
public, semi-public, and
institutional uses from
residential uses
Twenty-five (25) feet
plus one (1) foot for
each foot of building
height over thirty-five
(35) feet
Double staggered row of evergreen
trees planted fifteen (15) feet on
center, or a double staggered row of
evergreen shrubs planted ten (10) feet
on center, forming a dense,
continuous visual screen at least six
(6) feet in height within one (1) year
of planting.
or A fence or wall or earthen berm,
with a minimum six (6) foot
height, with evergreen plantings
interspersed every twenty-five
(25) feet along the side of the
wall facing the residential use
Industrial uses from
residential and
recreational uses
Fifty (50) feet plus one
(1) foot for each foot
of building height over
thirty-five (35) feet.
Double staggered row of evergreen
trees planted fifteen (15) feet on
center, or a double staggered row of
evergreen shrubs planted ten (10) feet
on center, forming a dense,
continuous visual screen at least six
(6) feet in height within one (1) year
of planting
or A fence or wall or earthen berm,
with a minimum six (6) foot
height, with evergreen trees
interspersed every twenty-five
(25) feet along the side of the
wall facing the residential use
Townhouses,
condominiums,
duplexes, two-family
dwellings, mobile home
parks, PUD's, and
multifamily
developments,
including parking lots
of ten (10) or more
vehicles, from
single-family detached
dwellings
Fifteen (15) feet. Double staggered row of evergreen
trees planted fifteen (15) feet on
center, or a double staggered row of
evergreen shrubs planted ten (10) feet
on center, forming a dense,
continuous visual screen at least six
(6) feet in height within one (1) year
of planting
or A fence or wall or earthen berm,
with a minimum six (6) foot
height, with evergreen trees
interspersed every twenty-five
(25) feet along the side of the
wall facing the residential use.
Residential uses from
adjacent major
collector or arterial
streets
(Adopted Town Council
3/16/99)
Twenty-five (25) feet;
unbroken strip
One large evergreen tree for every 15
linear feet, forming a dense,
continuous screen when mature.
or A fence or wall or earthen berm,
with a minimum of six (6) foot
height, with evergreen trees
interspersed every twenty-five
(25) feet along both sides of the
fence or wall.
Rear boundaries of
residential uses from
public right-of-ways
Twenty-five (25) feet,
unbroken strip
Double staggered row of evergreen trees planted fifteen (15) feet on center
forming a dense, continuous visual screen at least six (6) feet in height within
one (1) year of planting
If rear facades of dwellings face the property line, the above requirement shall
be increased to a triple row of evergreen trees planted fifteen (15) feet on center
forming a dense, continuous visual screen at least ten (10) feet in height within
one (1) year of planting
Properties that abut the
U.S. Route 29 Bypass
Required to install plantings on their property as shown on the Town of Warrenton U.S. Route 29, Bypass
Corridor Landscape Improvements plan prepared by Patton, Harris, Rust and Associates dated June 1996
and any subsequent amendments that may be adopted.
8 - 13 Updated March 2020
8-9 Conservation of Heritage and Specimen Trees
(In accord with § 10.1-1127.1 of the Code of Virginia, as amended)
8-9.1 Registry of Heritage and Specimen Trees
The Town shall compile and maintain a registry of designated Heritage and Specimen
Trees, which shall become a part of this Ordinance by reference. The registry shall
describe the species and character of each tree so designated and the basis for its
designation. It shall include a map showing the location of each tree. This registry shall
be updated from time to time by the Town Council, in consultation with an arborist or
urban forester selected by the Council. The individual owners of such trees so designated
shall be notified prior to the hearing on the adoption of such ordinance by certified mail
in accordance with Section 11-3.2.2 of this Ordinance.
8-9.2 Exemptions
The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
1. work conducted on federal or state property;
2. emergency work to protect life, limb or property;
3. routine installation, maintenance and repair of cable and wires used to provide cable
television, electric, gas or telephone service;
4. activities with minor effects on trees, including but not limited to, home gardening
and landscaping of individual homes; and
5. commercial silvicultural or horticultural activities, including but not limited to
planting, managing, or harvesting forest or tree crops.
8-9.3 Removal of Heritage and Specimen Trees
Prior to removing any tree listed on the Town’s Registry of Heritage and Specimen
Trees, the owner shall obtain a written approval from the Zoning Administrator. In order
to grant approval for removing a Heritage or Specimen Tree, the Zoning Administrator
shall find that the proposal meets at least one of the following criteria:
1. The proposed development or use of the site will produce an outcome that better
meets the purposes of these landscaping requirements, this Zoning Ordinance and the
comprehensive plan.
2. Due to solely to the requirements for conserving Heritage and Specimen Trees, the
property is so limited in use that no reasonable use remains.
3. Due solely to the requirements of conserving Heritage and Specimen Trees, the
public health and safety would be subjected to undue risk and danger.
8-10 Retention and Replacement of Trees
8-10.1 Exemptions
The following shall be exempt from the requirements of these tree replacement and
planting regulations: school sites, playing fields, other non-wooded recreation areas and
8 - 14 Updated March 2020
other facilities and uses of a similar nature, as determined by the Zoning Administrator to
be sites on which trees would prevent the site from being used for its intended and
permitted purpose.
8-10.2 Retention of Existing Trees
The applicant shall design and arrange lots in such a fashion as to preserve existing
woodlands and trees of six (6) inch caliper or greater and to place such existing trees
within required setbacks, buffer yards, and open space. The preservation of such existing
tree canopy may be used as a credit to canopy requirements as provided in Section 8-
10.3.3 of this Ordinance. When clearing individual building lots, trees shall be removed
only within the building envelope and shall not be removed from areas within required
setbacks, with the following exceptions:
1. Trees damaged by storms or disease, as determined by the Zoning Administrator or
their designee
2. Trees determined to be damaged or diseased by an ISO certified arborist
3. Trees located within required public utility easements
4. Trees located within an area planned for a driveway or entrance to the property
8-10.3 Tree Replacement Requirements
1. In instances where trees of six (6) inch caliper or larger are removed, they shall be
replaced by trees indigenous to the Warrenton region. Deciduous trees shall be
replaced by deciduous species and nondeciduous trees shall be replaced by
nondeciduous species.
2. The Landscape Plan shall provide for the planting or replacement of trees on the site
to the extent that, at 20 years, minimum tree canopies or covers will be provided in
areas designated in this ordinance, as follows:
a. Ten percent tree canopy for a site zoned business, commercial, or industrial;
b. Ten percent tree canopy for a residential site zoned for 20 or more units per acre;
c. Fifteen percent tree canopy for a residential site zoned for more than 10 but less
than 20 units per acre; and
d. Twenty percent tree canopy for a residential site zoned for 10 units or less per
acre.
The Landscape Plan shall specify the caliper size required at the time of planting
needed to achieve the above required canopies after 20 years of normal growth.
3. Credits and Reductions in Tree Canopy Requirements
Upon written request and justification of the applicant, the Zoning Administrator may
approve credits to reduce the on-site tree canopy requirements if in the judgment of
the Zoning Administrator, the purposes of this Ordinance and the goals of the
Comprehensive Plan can be better met through such credits. Such credits may
achieved through any of the following methods:
8 - 15 Updated March 2020
1. By preserving existing tree cover
Existing trees which are to be preserved may be included to meet all or part of
the canopy requirements, and may include wooded preserves, if the site plan
identifies such trees and the trees meet standards of durability, function and life
expectancy consistent with the species specifications of Section 8-7.
2. By Preserving Outstanding Trees
Upon approval of the Zoning Administrator, up to 50% of the tree canopy
requirements for the site may be met by preserving one or more trees of
outstanding age, size or other physical characteristics in comparison to the typical
specimen of that species normally found within the Town, if a certified arborist
provides a written determination that any such trees are in good health. The
canopy of each qualifying outstanding tree preserved shall count toward three (3)
times as much canopy requirement.
3. Exceptions and Deviations
The Zoning Administrator shall grant an exception to or deviation from these
requirements to allow for the reasonable development of farmland or other areas
devoid of healthy or suitable woody materials or when the strict application of
the requirements would result in unnecessary or unreasonable hardship to the
developer.
In such instances, the Zoning Administrator shall permit the applicant to provide
for a tree canopy bank whereby a portion of the development's tree canopy
requirements are met from off-site planting or replacement of trees on sites
within the Town that are determined by the Zoning Administrator to be
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
8-10.4 Tree Protection Zones
Tree protection zones shall be established for all trees and woodlands designated for
retention on the site development plan. The tree protection zone shall extend radially for
fifteen (15) feet from the trunk of the tree to be retained, or the distance from the trunk to
the dripline, whichever is greater. The owner or developer shall be responsible for
implementing such protection methods.
Tree protection zones shall meet the following requirements:
1. Grade changes and excavations shall not encroach upon the tree protection zone.
2. No toxic materials, including petroleum based or derived products, shall be stored
within one hundred (100) feet of the tree protection zone.
3. The area within the tree protection zone shall not be built upon, nor shall any
materials be stored, either temporarily or permanently. Vehicles and equipment shall
not be parked within the zone.
8 - 16 Updated March 2020
4. Tree stumps located within ten (10) feet of the tree protection zone shall be removed
by means of a stump grinder.
5. Severed tree roots adjacent to the tree protection zone shall be cut by a trenching tool
that can safely prune the roots without causing undue damage to the root system,
such as a “ditch witch”, or similar equipment, aligned radially to the tree. Roots shall
not be cut in such a way as to cause lateral movement of the root systems. All
severed roots shall be covered within four (4) hours and covered with moist peat
moss, moist burlap, or other moist biodegradable material until permanent cover is
installed.
6. Sediment, retention, and detention basins shall not be located or discharged into the
tree protection zone.
8-10.5 Trees Permitted to be Removed are not Considered as Existing Trees
Existing diseased trees or trees weakened by age, storm, fire or other injury, which are
dead or face imminent demise within a year, as determined in writing by a certified
arborist or horticultural report, may be removed without being subject to replacement
requirements.
8-10.6 Site Development Procedures
1. Trees scheduled to remain shall be marked. Where woodlands or groups of trees are
to be retained, only those trees on the perimeter shall be marked. Temporary fencing
or root pruning may be required along areas adjacent to heavy equipment operation.
2. Trees to be removed shall not be felled, pushed, or pulled into a tree protection zone
or into trees that are to be retained.
3. In addition to the tree protection zone, additional trees may be left standing between
the trunks of the trees to be retained and the limits of grading or construction activity.
These trees may be removed near the completion of the project to permit final
grading and landscaping to be accomplished.
4. When the original grade cannot be retained at the tree protection zone line and the
resulting grade change exceeds two feet, a retaining wall shall be constructed outside
the tree protection zone. The wall shall be constructed of large stones, brick, building
tile, concrete, or treated wood beams not less than six (6) inches by six (6) inches. A
means for drainage through the wall shall be provided so water will not accumulate
on either side of the wall. A layer of clean stone, sized three-quarter (3/4) to one (1)
inch, shall be placed at a thickness of one (1) foot along the base of the wall,
extending in height to twelve (12) inches below finished grade. The retaining wall
shall be four (4) inches above the finished grade line.
5. All trees which have experienced any disturbance or have had damage to roots or
branches shall be fertilized. This shall be accomplished in early fall
(September-October) or mid-spring (April-May), with fall application preferred.
Fertilizer shall be applied in a manner that will assist tree growth while limiting
nutrient runoff. Fertilizer grade shall have approximately three (3) parts nitrogen to
8 - 17 Updated March 2020
one (1) part phosphorous and one (1) part potassium (3-1-1 ratio) and be applied at a
rate equivalent to one (1) pound actual nitrogen per one thousand (1,000) square feet.
6. In instances where there is no alternative to locating underground utilities within a
tree protection zone, tunneling should be used wherever possible to avoid trenching.
Where trenches are to be used, they should be located as far away as possible from
tree trunks and tamped lightly to avoid air pockets.
8-11 Planting Procedures
All trees to be planted shall meet the specifications of the American Association of Nurserymen.
The planting of trees shall be done in accordance with the standardized landscape specifications
jointly adopted by the Virginia Nurserymen's Association, the Virginia Society of Landscape
Designers and the Virginia Chapter of the American Society of Landscape Architects. At a
minimum, all trees planted shall have rootballs adequate to enclose the entire root system, all
trees shall be mulched and staked, and all plants shall be watered at time of installation.
8-12 Maintenance Responsibilities
1. The owner, or the agent of the owner, of commercial and industrial uses, multifamily rental
units, and common open spaces controlled by homeowners associations shall be responsible
for the maintenance, repair, and replacement of all landscape materials, fences, berms, and
walls required by this Article.
2. All landscape materials shall be kept in a healthy condition free of all disease and infestation.
3. All fences, berms, and walls shall be maintained in a safe and attractive condition. The
owner or agent, upon written notification by the Zoning Administrator, shall repair or replace
any landscape materials, fences, berms, or walls not meeting the requirements of this Section
within thirty (30) days of receipt of said notice.
8-13 Penalties for Unauthorized Removal
Unauthorized removal shall be considered a violation of this Zoning Ordinance and shall be
subject to the penalties as set forth in Article 11.
9 - 1 Updated December 2019
Article 9 Supplemental Use Regulations
Amended by Town Council: February 12, 2013
July 8, 2014
August 9, 2016
December 11, 2018
April 9, 2019
December 10, 2019
Table of Contents
9-1 Accessory Structures and Uses; Parcel Limitations
9-2 Additional Regulations Where a Grouping or More than One Use is Planned for a Tract
9-3 Affordable Dwelling Unit Provisions
9-4 Apartment Buildings, Special Regulations
9-5 Bed and Breakfast Facilities
9-6 Cluster Development Provisions
9-7 Home Occupations and Home Businesses
9-8 Lighting
9-9 Manufacturing Buildings, Special Regulations
9-10 Mobile Homes (Manufactured Homes)
9-11 Office and Other Business Buildings, Special Regulations
9-12 Open Space
9-13 Outdoor Display
9-14 Performance Standards for All Non-Residential Uses
9-15 Recycling Facilities
9-16 Residential Use Limitations
9-17 Steep Slopes
9-18 Telecommunications Facilities
9-19 Temporary Uses
9-20 Traditional Neighborhood Development Option (TND)
9-21 Utility Lots
9-22 Yard and Garage Sales
9-23 Massage Therapy, Establishment of Provisions for Therapists and Businesses
9-24 Mobile Food Vendors
9 - 2 Updated December 2019
Article 9 Supplemental Use Regulations
9-1 Accessory Structures and Uses; Parcel Limitations
9-1.1 The aggregate gross floor area of an accessory structure (i.e., the total gross floor area of
all accessory structures) shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the area of the rear yard,
nor shall it exceed 25% of the total area of the principal structure.
9-1.2 Accessory structures shall not be located closer than five (5) feet to any rear or side
property line.
9-1.3 An accessory dwelling structure in a single-family dwelling or in an accessory building
may be permitted by Special Use Permit in an R-15 or R-10 Residential District,
provided that
1. Either the main dwelling or the accessory dwelling structure be occupied by the
owner of the property,
2. The accessory dwelling structure shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the
total floor area of the main dwelling nor contain less than five hundred (500) square
feet of floor area,
3. The general appearance of a single-family dwelling shall be maintained,
4. No exterior stairways to a second floor be constructed at the front or side of the main
building, and
5. At least three (3) off-street parking spaces are available on the property for use by the
owner-occupant and the tenant.
9-1.4 A temporary family health care structure per § 15.2-2292.1 of the Code of Virginia shall
be allowed accessory to a single-family dwelling located on a lot, provided that:
1. Only one temporary health care structure shall be permitted per lot;
2. No more than one person shall occupy the temporary health care structure;
3. The structure shall not exceed 300 gross square feet in area;
4. The structure shall comply with the setback requirements for primary structures in
the district;
5. The structure shall primarily be assembled at a location other than the lot on which it
is to be located;
6. The structure shall not be placed on a permanent foundation;
7. A physician licensed in Virginia has certified in writing that the person who occupies
or intends to occupy the structure is mentally or physically impaired because he/she
requires assistance with two or more activities of daily living during more than half
the year;
9 - 3 Updated December 2019
8. The caregiver for the mentally or physically impaired occupant of the temporary
health care structure lives in the primary residence on the lot, and is an adult related
by blood, marriage, or adoption or is the legally appointed guardian of the occupant
of the structure;
9. The structure shall be removed within thirty (30) days of the impaired person no
longer meeting the certification requirements or no longer residing within the
structure;
10. The structure shall not be used for, or converted to, another use;
11. No signage advertising or promoting the existence of the structure shall appear on the
structure or anywhere on the property;
12. The structure shall be required to connect to any water, sewer, and electric utilities
that are serving the primary residence on the property and shall comply with all
applicable codes and requirements, including permits and fees associated therewith
separated from the required permit fee set forth in Section 13 (v) of this section, for
such connection.
13. A zoning permit shall be obtained pursuant to Section 11-3.4.1 prior to placement of
such structure on the lot. In conjunction with the request for the zoning permit and
annually thereafter, the following shall be submitted to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Administrator:
i. documentation of the need for care for the mentally or physically impaired
person to include a letter of certification written by a licensed physician;
ii. documentation of the relationship of the mentally or physically impaired
person and caregiver;
iii. permission for the Zoning Administrator or representative to inspect, at
reasonably convenient times, the structure and the single family dwelling on
the lot to determine compliance with this section.
iv. any additional information deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator to
assure compliance with this section.
v. A permit to install the structure along with a $100.00 fee.
9-2 Additional Regulations Where a Grouping or More than One Use is Planned for a Tract
9-2.1 The development shall consist of a harmonious selection of use and groupings of
buildings, service and parking areas, circulation and open spaces, planned and designed
as an integrated unit, in such a manner as to constitute a safe, efficient, and convenient
neighborhood commercial center.
9-2.2. The proposed development shall be constructed in accordance with an overall plan and
shall be designed as a single architectural unit with appropriate landscaping. All
buildings shall be arranged in a group or groups.
9-2.3 The distance at the closest point between any two (2) buildings or groups or units of
attached buildings shall be not less than twelve (12) feet.
9 - 4 Updated December 2019
9-2.4 Adequate areas shall be provided for loading and unloading of delivery trucks and other
vehicles; servicing of shops by refuse collection, fuel, fire, and other service vehicles;
automobile accessways; and pedestrian walks. Service areas shall be screened from view
and abutting roadway, from within the parking area and from adjacent properties.
9-2.5 Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress to and from public
streets and highways serving the center without undue congestion or interference with
normal traffic flow.
9-3 Affordable Dwelling Unit Provisions
9-3.1 A density bonus system is offered to encourage private sector development of low and
moderate priced dwelling units. ADUs must be built so as to provide a convenient, safe,
pedestrian-friendly and accessible living environment in which the affordable dwelling
units blend in and are interspersed with market-rate dwellings. For the purposes of this
Article, persons eligible to rent or buy affordable dwelling units (ADU) shall include
those eligible for assistance under the following state or federal programs:
- Virginia Housing Development Authority
- Section 8 Rental Assistance Program
- Department of Housing and Urban Development Community Block Grant Program
- Farmer's Home Administration Program
- Other programs similar to those named herein as approved by Town Council
9-3.2 The applicant shall provide assurance to the Town that the affordable dwelling units will
continue to be available for this purpose for at least twenty-five (25) years following the
date of Town approval. This assurance will take the form of a deed restriction, restrictive
covenants, or other form of legal and binding agreement approved by the Town Attorney
and Town Council.
9-3.3 The density bonuses outlined in the District provisions in Article 3 shall be permitted in
conjunction with the ADU density bonus. The maximum density shall not exceed that
provided for in the provisions of each District. Percentages of density increase are to be
applied separately and are not to be compounded. The process for granting approval of
such density bonuses shall be in accord with the procedures and provisions for zoning
amendments provided for in Article 11.
9-3.4 The applicant shall design and develop the site using the traditional design techniques
provided for in Article 9, Section 9-20 and Article 3, Section. 3-5.2.10.
9-3.5 ADU's should first be made available to persons residing or working in the Town of
Warrenton or Fauquier County. The developer shall contact the appropriate local Social
9 - 5 Updated December 2019
Service and/or Housing Authority offices for identification and placement of residents
ninety (90) days prior to advertising the availability of the units.
9-3.6 Special Parking Considerations for Affordable Dwelling Units
In order for developers to achieve densities that are allowed under the ADU density
bonus, the following reductions may be allowed with the approval of Town Council:
- Single room occupancies: 1.0 parking space per unit
- Studio/Efficiency: 1.25 parking spaces per unit
- One Bedroom: 1.5 parking spaces per unit
- One Bedroom and Den: 2.0 parking spaces per unit
9-4 Apartment Buildings, Special Regulations
Apartment buildings shall be constructed in accordance with an overall plan and shall be designed
as a single architectural unit with appropriate landscaping.
Adequate areas shall be provided for loading and unloading of delivery trucks and for the
servicing of refuse collection, fuel, fire, and other service vehicles. These areas shall be so
arranged that they may be used without blockage or interference with the use of accessways or
parking facilities. Service areas shall be screened from view from any abutting roadway and from
within the parking area.
Provision shall be made for safe and efficient vehicular ingress and egress to and from public
streets and highways serving the center without undue congestion to or interference with normal
traffic flow. Provision shall also be made for safe and convenient pedestrian ingress and egress to
all adjacent public rights of way, as well as to adjacent properties. Where intersection
augmentation is required, the applicant shall bear the cost of any improvements made necessary
by his development.
9-5 Bed and Breakfast Facilities
The following establishments are permitted in designated districts subject to all applicable district
regulations of this Ordinance and the issuance of a zoning permit.
9-5.1 Bed and Breakfast
9-5.1.1 The owner of the premises shall reside in and manage the establishment.
9-5.1.2 The establishment shall not contain restaurant facilities, but may provide
morning food service for transient, overnight guests only.
9-5.1.3 Up to four (4) guest rooms without cooking facilities may be provided for paying
guests.
9 - 6 Updated December 2019
9-5.1.4 On-site, off-street parking shall be provided, not located in front yards, at a
minimum of one space per guest room, in addition to the minimum requirements
for the residents of the dwelling unit.
9-5.1.5 The establishment shall have safe access to and from a public road.
9-5.1.6 Commercial use or rental of the property for business meetings, seminars,
receptions and similar events shall not be permitted.
9-5.2 Inn
9-5.2.1 The owner or manager shall provide full-time management of the establishment
at all times when the facility is occupied by one or more guests.
9-5.2.2 The establishment shall not contain restaurant facilities, but may provide food
service for transient, overnight guests only.
9-5.2.3 Up to twelve (12) guest rooms without cooking facilities may be provided for
paying guests.
9-5.2.4 Outdoor events such as weddings, receptions, and similar activities may be
conducted for compensation subject to the provisions for temporary uses set forth
in Section 9-19.
9-5.2.5 On-site, off-street parking shall be provided, not located in front yards, at a
minimum of one space per guest room, in addition to the minimum requirements
for the residents of the dwelling unit.
9-5.2.6 The establishment shall have safe access to and from a public road.
9-6 Cluster Development Provisions
9-6.1 Intent
The site design and development of a cluster development shall preserve permanent open
space and achieve efficient and improved use of land by minimizing grading and
destruction of natural vegetation, particularly mature trees on steep slopes and in stream
valleys. Plans shall not be approved where the design subverts the purposes of these
regulations by inclusion of excessively unbalanced distribution of land among lots or
inclusion of open spaces which are inappropriately located or which will not contribute to
the future amenity of the development.
9-6.2 General Provisions and Applicability
9-6.2.1 The cluster development shall be designed to promote harmonious relationships
with surrounding adjacent and nearby developed or undeveloped properties, and
to this end may employ such design techniques as may be appropriate in a
particular case, including coordination of yard dimensions, location of lots of
various sizes, location of buildings with respect to project boundary lines,
location of open spaces, and maintenance of vegetation.
9 - 7 Updated December 2019
9-6.2.2 No resubdivision or sale by any means shall be permitted in a development
approved under this section which resubdivision or sale would in any way create
a violation of this Ordinance.
9-6.2.3 A minimum of thirty (30) percent of the subject tract shall be designated as
permanent common open space in accord with the provisions of Article 9. Such
land may include parks, woodlands, steep slopes, flood plains, bodies of water, or
any natural feature appropriate for preservation; provided, however, that no more
than thirty (30) percent of the required open space shall consist of bodies of
water. Private outdoor recreation facilities such as swimming pools and tennis
courts, the use of which is limited to the occupants of the development, may be
included as part of the required open space, as may those buildings, structures or
sites officially listed on the Virginia Landmarks Register. The land area to be set
aside for common open space shall be so located and shaped as to have a logical
and mutually beneficial relationship to additional open space in adjacent tracts,
whenever practical and feasible.
9-6.2.4 All open space land in or encompassed by a cluster development which is a part
of the same tract (either required or not required open space) and is not actually
used or planned for development shall be maintained as open space to be enjoyed
by the residents. Open space shall be provided and maintained either:
- under the provisions of Article 9;
- by the developer and/or management in the case of rental properties on either
a temporary or permanent basis;
- it may be sold as a separate, undevelopable parcel.
9-6.2.5 All required open space in a cluster development shall be placed under a
permanent conservation easement that precludes future development of the open
space areas, regardless of future ownership. Such easement shall be dedicated in
whole or in part to the Town and/or a conservation entity authorized to accept
such easements. The provisions and form of the easement must be satisfactory to
the Town.
9-6.3 Procedures
The cluster development alternative shall be permitted by special use permit subject to all
provisions of Article 11, Special Use Permits, provided there is also full compliance with
the standards for cluster development as set forth in the district regulations. In addition,
documentation shall be provided to demonstrate that the land to be developed is under
one (1) ownership or control, or in the case of several owners, that agreement has been
reached that the tract shall be developed under single direction and in the manner set
forth, and that the conservation easement required in Section 9-6.2.5 shall be recorded in
9 - 8 Updated December 2019
conjunction with approval of the cluster development subdivision record plat.
9-7 Home Occupations and Home Businesses
Home Occupations and Home Businesses, as defined in Article 12, are permitted in certain
districts as provided herein, subject to the following requirements.
9-7.1 Home Occupations
9-7.1.1 No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be
engaged in such occupation on the premises.
9-7.1.2 The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental
and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by the family, and the total
area used for the occupation on the site, in the residence and/or in any accessory
structures, shall not exceed an amount equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the
gross floor area of the dwelling unit.
9-7.1.3 There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises or
other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation.
9-7.1.4 There shall be no on-site sales in connection with such home occupation, other
than items handcrafted on the premises or client meetings for the provision of
professional services, and there shall be no group instruction, assembly or
activity, or no display that will indicate from the exterior that the building is
being utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling.
9-7.1.5 No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than
would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood (ten [10] vehicle trips
per day per dwelling). Any need for parking generated by the conduct of such
home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front
yard, unless located on that property’s existing driveway.
9-7.1.6 No equipment or activity shall be used or conducted in such home occupation
which creates noise, vibrations, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference
detectable from off the lot.
9-7.2 Home Businesses
9-7.2.1 Members of the family residing on the premises are permitted to be engaged in
such home business.
9-7.2.2 For activities meeting the definition of Home Business, in addition to family
members residing on the premises, up to three (3) non-resident, non-family
employees shall be permitted to work on the premises up to 40 hours per week
each, subject to the requirements for parking and traffic as provided herein.
9-7.2.3 The use of the dwelling or accessory building for the home business shall be
clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the dwelling for residential
purposes. The total area used for the business on the site shall not exceed an
9 - 9 Updated December 2019
amount equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling
unit.
9-7.2.4 Signs shall be allowed in accordance with Article 6, and specifically
Section 6-12.1.
9-7.2.5. No traffic shall be generated by such home business in greater volumes than
would normally be expected from a residential use (10 vehicle trips per day per
dwelling). Any need for parking generated by the conduct of the home
occupation or business shall be met by off street parking other than in a required
front yard unless located on an existing driveway. One additional off-street
parking space shall be provided for each non-family resident employee. Such
parking space(s) shall not be located in the required front yard, unless located on
an existing driveway, and shall not result in any reduction in the normal
minimum required parking for residential dwellings. Such parking spaces also
shall not create any impact on the parking requirements or supply of parking of
adjacent properties in the neighborhood.
9-7.2.6. In connection with such home business, there shall be no client or customer visits
that generate traffic in excess of what would normally be expected from a
residential use (10 vehicle trips per day per dwelling). Also, there shall be no
items sold on-site other than items handcrafted on the premises. There shall be no
group instruction, assembly, activity, or display that indicates from the exterior
that the building is being used for any purpose other than that of a dwelling.
9-7.2.7. No equipment or activity used or conducted in such home occupation or business
shall create noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference
detectable to neighbors or passersby, or the use of radio, TV, audio, computer or
telephone equipment off the lot or in adjacent dwelling units.
9-8 Lighting
9-8.1 Purpose
The purpose of these lighting regulations is to establish minimum standards for outdoor
lighting in order to:
1. Ensure the provision of lighting that provides safety, utility, and security;
2. Prevent dangerous glare on public roadways and nuisance glare onto adjacent
properties;
3. Protect the privacy of neighbors by limiting light trespass to neighboring properties;
4. Limit light pollution; and
5. Protect and retain the established historic character of the Town.
9-8.2 Applicability
9-8.2.1 These outdoor lighting regulations shall apply to each outdoor lighting fixture
9 - 10 Updated December 2019
installed or replaced after the date of adoption of these regulations which:
1. Is located on property within a commercial, mixed-use, multi-family
residential or industrial zoning district, including sign, architectural,
landscape, and recreational lighting;
2. Is to be installed in conjunction with a use for which a site plan is required by
this Ordinance;
3. Is to be installed in conjunction with a public or municipal use such as
schools, parks, fire / rescue stations and libraries;
4. Involves the use or installation of a high intensity discharge lamp, regardless
of its initial lumens or location; or
5. Involves the replacement of inoperable bulbs, fixtures or other components
which shall be subject to the subdivision or site plan requirements of this
Ordinance. However, if the failed component is part of a multi-fixture
installation, it may be replaced with a similar fixture if necessary to maintain
the appearance or performance of the entire existing installation.
9-8.2.2 The lighting standards set forth in Section 9-8.6 shall apply to all uses in the
Town.
9-8.3 Conformance with Codes
All outdoor illuminating devices shall be installed and maintained in conformance with
the provisions of the Building Code, the Electrical Code, and the sign regulations of this
Ordinance.
9-8.4 Exemptions
The following outdoor lighting and related activities shall be exempt from the
requirements of these outdoor lighting regulations:
9-8.4.1 Seasonal decorative lighting.
9-8.4.2 Lighting which is not subject to this chapter by state or federal law.
9-8.4.3 Construction, agricultural, emergency or holiday decorative lighting, provided
that the lighting is temporary, and is discontinued within seven (7) days upon
completion of the project or holiday for which the lighting was provided.
9-8.4.4 Security lighting controlled by sensors which provides illumination for ten (10)
minutes or less.
9-8.4.5 Light sources on public utility poles in the public rights of way.
9-8.4.6 Public street lights.
9 - 11 Updated December 2019
9-8.5 Lighting Plan Required
For subdivision, site plan, signs (see Article 6), and other land-development applications
where site lighting subject to these provisions is required or proposed, lighting plans shall
be submitted to the Town for review and approval in conjunction with such development
applications, and shall include:
9-8.5.1 The location of all structures, parking spaces, building entrances, traffic areas
(both vehicular and pedestrian), vegetation that might interfere with lighting,
adjacent uses that might be adversely impacted by the lighting, and a layout of all
proposed fixtures by location, mounting height and type. The submittal shall
include all lighting sources, including but not limited to, area lighting,
architectural lighting, building-entrance lighting, landscape lighting and sign
lighting.
9-8.5.2 Description of the proposed equipment, including fixture catalog cuts,
photometrics, glare reduction devices, lamps, on/off control devices, mounting
heights, pole foundation details and mounting methods.
9-8.5.3 A visual-impact plan that demonstrates that appropriate steps have been taken to
mitigate on-site and off-site glare and light trespass and to protect the Town’s
character.
9-8.5.4 Lighting Plan Approval. If the zoning administrator determines that the proposed
lighting plan does not comply with these regulations, the plan shall not be
approved. The Zoning Administrator shall provide the applicant with a written
description of the deficiencies of the plan, and the applicant may submit a revised
plan for review and approval. Decisions by the Zoning Administrator may be
appealed in accord with the provisions of Article 11 of this Ordinance.
9-8.6 Lighting Standards
9-8.6.1 Control of Nuisance and Disabling Glare
1. All outdoor lighting, whether or not required by this Ordinance, on private,
residential, commercial, industrial, municipal, recreational or institutional
property, shall be aimed, located, designed, fitted and maintained so as not to
present a hazard to drivers or pedestrians by impairing their view or ability to
safely traverse the area and so as not to create a nuisance by projecting or
reflecting objectionable light onto neighboring uses or property.
2. Directional fixtures such as flood lights, spot lights and sign lights shall be
installed or aimed so that they do not shine directly into the window of a
neighboring residence, directly into a roadway, or skyward.
3. All outdoor light fixtures, including those that light the area under outdoor
canopies, shall be shielded in such a manner that no light is emitted above a
horizontal plane passing through the lowest point of the light-emitting
9 - 12 Updated December 2019
element, so that direct light emitted above the horizontal plane is eliminated.
4. All outdoor lighting fixtures, including display lighting, shall be turned off
after close-of-business, excluding automated or motion operated security
lighting.
5. Vegetative screens shall not be the primary means for controlling glare.
Rather, such control shall be achieved primarily through the use of full cutoff
fixtures, the appropriate application of mounting height, wattage, aiming
angle, fixture placement and fixture design, and the addition of louvers,
shields and baffles as necessary.
6. Externally illuminated signs shall be lighted by fixtures mounted at the top of
the sign, shielded and aimed down or by fixtures mounted at the bottom of
the sign and aimed and shielded such that the light falls only on the sign
surface so as to limit sky-lighting impacts, and no glare is created off the sign
face.
7. Lighting for commercial, industrial, public recreational and institutional uses
shall be controlled by automatic switching devices such as time clocks or
combination motion detectors and photocells, to permit extinguishing after
hours outdoor lighting fixtures, to mitigate nuisance glare and sky-lighting
consequences.
8. Lighting proposed for use after 11 p.m., or after normal hours of operation of
a business, which ever is earlier, for commercial, industrial, institutional or
municipal uses, shall be reduced by at least 50% from then until dawn.
9. All illumination for advertising signs, buildings and/or surrounding
landscapes for decorative, advertising or esthetic purposes is prohibited
between 11:00 p.m. and sunrise, except that such lighting situated on the
premises of a commercial establishment may remain illuminated while the
establishment is actually open for business, and until one hour after closing.
10. Illuminated signs shall have an indirect lighting source or shielded source.
Fixtures used for architectural lighting, such as façade, feature and landscape
lighting, shall be aimed or directed so as to preclude light projection beyond
the immediate objects intended to be illuminated.
11. Glare shall be prevented through the use of light diffusers such as translucent
glass, or lenses which direct lights rays to prevent glare.
12. Outdoor lighting of sports fields and facilities shall be extinguished after the
completion of the event.
9-8.6.2 Installation and Maintenance
1. The applicant shall install or cause to be installed all lighting fixtures, poles
and related facilities in accord with the lighting plan approved by the Zoning
Administrator. The applicant and subsequent landowner shall be responsible
for all costs involved in the maintenance, upkeep and operation of all
lighting, parking and loading areas and other elements required by this
9 - 13 Updated December 2019
Ordinance.
2. In no case shall a lighting fixture be mounted in excess of twenty-five (25)
feet above grade.
3. Light poles shall be no greater than twenty (20) feet in height in a residential
district or mixed-use district, nor twenty-five (25) feet in a commercial or
industrial district.
4. Except as otherwise provided for herein, fixtures meeting IESNA full-cutoff
criteria shall not be mounted in excess of twenty (20) feet above finished
grade. Fixtures not meeting IESNA cutoff criteria shall not be mounted in
excess of sixteen (16) feet above grade.
5. Electrical feeds for fixtures mounted on poles shall be run underground, not
overhead.
6. All light fixtures that are required to be full cut-off fixtures shall be installed
and maintained so that the shielding is effective as described in the definition
of a full cut-off fixture, as defined herein.
7. Lamp types that are required to have full cut-off fixtures include Low/High
Pressure Sodium, Mercury Vapor, Metal Halide and Fluorescent over 50
watts and Incandescent (including tungsten-halogen (quartz) lamps) over 160
watts.
8. Lamp types that are not required to have full cut-off fixtures include
Incandescent 160 watts or less, fossil fuel, any light source of 50 watts or
less.
9. All lights in open areas such as parking lots are required to have full cut-off
fixtures.
10. Lighting fixtures shall be maintained so as always to meet the requirements
of this Ordinance.
9-8.6.3 Design
1. Except as provided herein, each outdoor luminaire subject to these outdoor
lighting regulations shall be a full cut-off luminaire or a decorative luminaire
with full cut-off optics.
2. If a luminaire is equipped with more than one lamp, the lumens of the lamp
with the highest initial lumens shall determine the lumens emitted.
3. Light sources shall not cast glare upon adjacent property or upon a public
right of way. The intensity at adjoining streets and commercial or industrial
properties shall not exceed 1.0 foot candles, and the intensity at adjoining
residential or institutional property boundaries shall not exceed 0.5 foot
candles.
4. For auto/truck service stations and convenience retail uses, lighting in island
canopy ceilings for the purposes of security and safety below the canopy
shall be recessed and have full cut-off fixtures with flat lenses, and shall not
exceed 40 initial output lumens per square foot of canopy. The canopy
9 - 14 Updated December 2019
structure shall not be lit.
9-8.7 Prohibitions
The following lighting types are prohibited:
9-8.7.1 Laser source light when projected above the horizontal plane.
9-8.7.2 Searchlights for advertising or for other non-public safety purposes, except for
openings and temporary events as defined in Section 9-19 of this Ordinance and
limited to ten (10) days as approved with a temporary permit.
9-8.7.3 Reflective mountings.
9-8.7.4 Exposed neon tube lighting, except in signs as allowed in Article 6.
9-8.7.5 Flashing lights, except as specifically permitted in this Ordinance.
9-8.8 Waivers and Modifications
The Town Council, in conjunction with the approval of a special permit, may modify or
waive one or more of the standards set forth in this section, and may impose conditions
on such a modification or waiver which it deems appropriate to further the purposes of
these outdoor lighting regulations, in accord with the procedures and standards for
Special Use Permits set forth in Article 11, Section 11-3.11, in the following
circumstances:
9-8.8.1 Upon finding that strict application of the standard would not forward the
purposes of this chapter or otherwise serve the public interest, or that alternatives
proposed by the owner would satisfy the purposes of these outdoor lighting
regulations at least to an equivalent degree.
9-8.8.2 Upon finding that an outdoor luminaire, or system of outdoor luminaries,
required for a publicly owned baseball, softball, football or soccer field cannot
reasonably comply with the standard and provide sufficient illumination of the
field for its safe use, as determined by recommended practices adopted by the
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) for that type of
field and activity or other evidence if a recommended practice is not applicable.
9-8-9 Nonconforming lighting
Any lighting fixture lawfully existing on the effective date of this Ordinance that does not
conform with the requirements of this Ordinance shall be considered a lawful
nonconformance subject to the following:
A nonconforming lighting fixture shall be made to conform with the applicable
requirements of this Ordinance when:
9 - 15 Updated December 2019
1. It is replaced, abandoned or relocated.
2. There is a change in use of the property on which the area being illuminated is
located, which change of use requires a site plan.
9-9 Manufacturing Buildings, Special Regulations
9-9.1 General Standard
All uses shall be conducted so as not to produce hazardous, objectionable, or offensive
conditions at property line boundaries by reason of odor, dust, smoke, cinders, fumes,
noise, vibration, heat, glare, wastes, fire, or explosion.
9-9.2 Enclosed Buildings
All uses shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building of permanent and
durable construction, with no open storage of raw, in process, or finished material and
supplies or waste material. Finished or semi-finished products manufactured on the
premises may be stored in the open if screened from the street or from a residence district
by landscaping, fences, or walls.
9-9.3 Landscaping and Fencing
Where approval of a site plan is required, the landscape plan shall be designed to promote
harmonious relationships with adjacent and nearby residential properties, developed or
undeveloped, and to this end shall provide effective screening along side and rear
property lines by means of fences, walls, hedges, planting screen, or natural vegetation as
outlined in Article 8 General Provisions for Landscaping. All fencing shall have a
uniform and durable character and shall be properly maintained.
9-10 Mobile Homes (Manufactured Homes)
9-10.1 Purpose
Mobile homes for residential use are not permitted as a new use. The intent of this
section is to prescribe standards and conditions for the use of existing mobile homes as of
the date of adoption of this Ordinance.
9-10.2 General Requirements for Existing Mobile Homes
9-10.2.1 A mobile home shall not be used for the purpose of an accessory use, such as a
separate storage facility.
9-10.2.2 The attachment of a mobile home to another mobile home or attachment to a
single-family dwelling is prohibited.
9 - 16 Updated December 2019
9-10.2.3 Mobile homes manufactured before 1976 shall not be located or relocated
within the Town.
9-10.3 Temporary or Emergency Use Of Mobile Homes
9-10.3.1. Temporary use of mobile homes shall meet all other requirements in the zoning
district for lot size, setbacks, etc.
9-10.3.2 Emergency uses of individual mobile homes only will be allowed in residential
districts where a natural disaster or fire has destroyed or damaged normal
dwellings. Approval of a temporary mobile home placement permit shall be
required prior to the placement of the mobile home and may be approved by
the Zoning Administrator for a period of up to one (1) year. The Zoning
Administrator may grant one (1) extension of the time period of up to six (6)
months.
9-10.3.3 Use of mobile homes for office or storage for construction projects
Mobile homes are permitted as temporary offices or storage structures in
business, industrial or residential districts in the construction phase of buildings
in such districts. Approval of a temporary mobile home placement permit shall
be required prior to the placement of the mobile home and may be approved by
the Zoning Administrator for a period of up to one (1) year. The Zoning
Administrator may grant one (1) extension of the time period of up to six (6)
months.
9-11 Office and Other Business Buildings, Special Regulations
9-11.1 The principal means of vehicular access for any office or business use containing more
than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area shall be from arterial, primary, or
collector thoroughfares. In no case shall the principal means of access for such building
be from a minor or local residential street. Access points shall be designed to minimize
traffic hazard and congestion in accordance with accepted principles of traffic
engineering and established Town policies.
9-11.2 Convenient, comfortable and safe pedestrian access shall be provided to adjacent public
rights of way and to adjacent properties when appropriate, through the provision of
sidewalks or trails.
9-11.3 Loading operations shall be conducted within a building and screened from general
public view from fronting streets or shall be conducted at the side or rear of buildings.
9-11.4 Any part of the lot or project area not used for buildings or other structures, parking,
loading, and accessways, shall be landscaped with appropriate planting, or with
9 - 17 Updated December 2019
pedestrian walks in accordance with an approved landscaping plan, in accord with Article
8, Landscape Requirements.
9-11.5 Refuse containers or refuse storage areas shall be located in a paved area and hidden from
general public view, either from within or outside the lot, by means of fences, walls, or
landscape planting.
9-12 Open Space
9-12.1 Open Space, General. Where Open Space is required within any R district, the PUD
district, or elsewhere at the developer's option, there are two (2) alternate arrangements
possible for the ownership, maintenance, and perpetuation of the Open Space as follows.
9-12.2 Open Space Deeded to Town. Open Space may be deeded to the Town if the open space
is to serve the public in general and is consistent with the policies for acquisition of open
space as presented in the Comprehensive Plan and any applicable Town regulations. The
Town Council shall determine whether or not to accept all such open space based upon
conformity to the Comprehensive Plan, size, location, character, and general suitability.
Such open space must consist of parks and recreation areas; conservation, utility, and
drainage easements; greens or squares; or other similarly appropriate area as determined
by the Town Council. Nothing herein shall deem it inappropriate for the Town to accept
other lands by deed such as public building sites and right-of-way; however, such lands
shall not be considered as fulfilling the acreage requirements for Open Space.
9-12.3 Open Space Lands in Corporate Ownership. Open Space not serving the public in
general, not consistent with the open space policies as presented in the Comprehensive
Plan or Town regulations; and not needed, desired, or dedicated to the Town shall be
conveyed and duly established under the laws of Virginia to maintain and manage such
Open Space. Agreements and covenants running with the land must assure its proper
maintenance. All such arrangements are subject to the review and approval of the Town.
Such covenants shall provide that the assessments, charges, and costs for the maintenance
of the open space lands shall constitute a pro rata lien upon the individual lots, parcels, or
other units of the development which can be sold, second only to taxes and any prior lien
on each lot or parcel. The members of such nonprofit corporate ownership shall be the
owners of all lots within the development, and the said land is to be held and used for the
benefit of all residents. Such open space lands shall not be denuded, defaced, or
destroyed in any manner.
9-12.4 General Location, Binding. All open space lands approved and adopted by the Town
Council including, but not limited to, lands approved in conjunction with a concept
development plan, preliminary sketch, plat or other development plan, are binding as to
location, acreage, and uses proposed.
9 - 18 Updated December 2019
9-12.5 Indication of Final Plat. All final plats and development plans shall indicate in the title
block, by section as recorded, the open space areas by type of use, the acreage, and the
percentage of the total project included on each plat.
9-12.6 Streets, Lots, Parking Bays Not Included. Streets, alleys, service drives, parking bays,
stormwater management facilities, and all lots to be transferred for sale, where provided
as required, shall be computed as a part of the lot coverage, and shall not be credited as
open space.
9-13 Outdoor Display
An outdoor display area may be used for the display of equipment, machinery, vehicles and other
merchandise or property for sale or lease, permitted to be sold on such property, hereafter the
“merchandise”. The following conditions shall apply to the outdoor display of merchandise:
9-13.1 Merchandise shall be displayed on an impervious surface, not within designated parking
areas for customers.
9-13.2 Vehicles, trailers, or other mobile merchandise displayed for sale, resale, or rent, shall be
operable.
9-13.3 Merchandise being displayed shall be in a ready state of purchase or resale
9-13.4 Damaged, unassembled, or inoperable merchandise, must be stored on an impervious or
gravel surface. No gravel surface shall be used to park vehicles to meet the minimum
parking requirements of this Ordinance or otherwise.
9-13.5 No displays shall be permitted in public rights-of-way.
9-14 Performance Standards for All Non-Residential Uses
9-14.1 Performance Standards. Performance standards for each non-residential use will be in
conformance with standards adopted by the Town Council and in no case shall standards
relative to water, air, sound, and land pollution control be less than those standards
adopted by the Virginia Department of Health, the Virginia Water Control Board, and the
Virginia Air Pollution Control Board.
9-14.2 The sound pressure level of sound radiated from an establishment, measured at the lot
line of the site thereof that is the nearest thereto, shall not exceed the values in any octave
band of frequency that are specified in Table 9-1 below, or in Table 9-1 as modified by
the correction factors set forth in Table 9-2. The sound pressure level shall be measured
with a sound level meter and an associated octave band analyzer conforming to standards
prescribed by the American National Standards Institute.
9 - 19 Updated December 2019
Table 9-1
Maximum Permissible Sound Pressure Levels Measured
re 0.0002 dyne per CM2
Frequency Band
Cycles per Second
Along Residential District
Boundaries – Maximum
Permitted Sound Level
In Decibels
At Any Other Point on the
Lot Boundary – Maximum
Permitted Sound Level
In Decibels
63 64 72
125 60 70
250 54 65
500 48 59
1000 42 55
2000 38 51
4000 34 47
8000 30 44
Table 9-2
Correction Factors
Condition
Correction
in Decibels
On a site contiguous to or across a street from the boundary of any
R-district established by this chapter.
Minus 5
Operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Minus 5
Sound of impulsive character (e.g., hammering) Minus 5
Sound of periodic character (e.g., sawing) Minus 5
Tone (e.g., hum or screech) Minus 5
Sound source operated less than:
20% in any one hour period Plus 51
5% in any one hour period Plus 101
1% in any one hour period Plus 151
1. Apply only one of these corrections. All other corrections (including any one of the footnoted) are cumulative.
9-14.3 Smoke Control
1. No smoke shall be emitted from any chimney or other source a visible gray greater
than No. 1 on the Ringlemann Smoke Chart as published by the U. S. Bureau of
Mines.
9 - 20 Updated December 2019
2. Smoke of a shade not darker than No. 2 on the Ringlemann Chart may be emitted for
not more than four (4) minutes in any thirty (30) minutes.
3. These provisions, applicable to visible gray smoke, shall also apply to visible smoke
of a different color, but with an equivalent apparent opacity.
9-14.4 Control of Dust and Dirt, Fly Ash and Fumes, Vapors and Gases
1. No emission shall be made which can cause any damage to health, to animals or
vegetation, or to other forms of property, or which can cause any excessive soiling at
any point.
2. No emission of liquid, other than water, or solid particles from any chimney or
otherwise shall exceed the following:
3. For less than eight (8) million Btu/hr: a maximum of 0.3 grains per standard cubic
foot corrected to twelve (12) percent carbon dioxide, seventy (70) degrees F., and one
(1) atmosphere pressure.
4. For over eight (8) million Btu/hr: a maximum of .08 grains per standard cubic foot
corrected to twelve (12) percent carbon dioxide, seventy (70) degrees F., and one (1)
atmosphere pressure.
5. For measurement of the amount of particles in gases resulting from combustion,
standard correction shall be applied to a stack temperature of five hundred (500)
degrees F. and fifty (50) percent excess air.
9-14.5 Control of Odors
There shall be no emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as
to be offensive at lot boundary line. Any process which may involve the creation or
emission of any odors shall be provided with a secondary safeguard system, so that
control will be maintained if the primary safeguard system shall fail. There is hereby
established as a guide in determining such quantities of offensive odors, Table Ill (Odor
Thresholds) in Chapter 5 "Air Pollution Abatement Manual" copyright 1951 by
Manufacturing Chemists' Association, Inc., Washington, D.C.
9-14.6 Control of Glare or Heat
Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within an enclosed
building or behind a solid fence in such manner as to be completely imperceptible from
any point beyond the lot lines.
9 - 21 Updated December 2019
9-14.7 Control of Vibration
No vibration which is discernible to the human sense of feeling shall be perceptible
without instruments at any point beyond the lot line.
9-14.8 Control of Radioactivity or Electrical Disturbance
There shall be no activities which emit dangerous or harmful radioactivity. There shall
be no electrical disturbances (except from domestic household appliances) adversely
affecting the operation of any equipment located beyond the property of the creator of
such disturbances.
9-14.9 Outdoor Storage and Waste Disposal
1. No flammable or explosive liquids, solids, or gases shall be stored in bulk above
ground, provided, however, that tanks or drums of fuel directly connecting with
energy devices, heating devices, or appliances located on the same lot as the tanks or
drums of fuel are excluded from this provision.
2. All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products and all fuel, and all
raw materials and products stored outdoors shall be enclosed by a fence adequate to
conceal the facilities from any adjacent properties.
3. Refuse containers or refuse storage shall be located in a paved area and hidden from
general public view, either from within or outside the premises, by means of fences,
walls, or landscape planting.
4. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or manner that it
may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces.
5. All material or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which constitute a fire
hazard or which may be edible or otherwise be attractive to rodents or insects shall be
stored outdoors only in closed containers.
9-14.10 Electric, Diesel, Gas, or Other Power
Every use requiring power shall be so operated that the service lines, substation, etc.,
shall conform to the most acceptable safety requirements recognized by the Virginia
Bureau of Labor and Industry, shall be so constructed, installed, etc., to be an integral
part of the architectural features of the plant, or if visible from abutting residential
properties, shall be concealed by coniferous planting.
9-14.11 Industrial Waste or Sewage
No use shall be conducted in such a way as to discharge any treated or untreated sewage
or industrial waste treatment and disposal except as shall be approved by Sanitary
Engineers or other qualified persons at the expense of the owner of the premises. The
9 - 22 Updated December 2019
Town of Warrenton may require sewage pre-treatment facilities to be installed, at the cost
of the owner of the premises, to ensure that hazardous materials do not enter into the
sewage collection and treatment facilities operated by the Town. Such facilities, and all
monitoring procedures and required documentation, shall comply with all applicable state
and federal approval procedures and regulations.
9-14.12 Drainage
Provision shall be made for proper storm water drainage from parking and loading areas.
Water shall not be permitted to drain from such areas onto adjacent property except into a
natural watercourse or a drainage easement. Provision shall be made for protection
against erosion and sedimentation in accord with applicable Town ordinances.
9-14.13 Provision and Use of Water
All water requirements shall be stated in the application. If water is to be supplied from
wells, an approved or accepted geologic study shall be furnished by the applicant with a
certification by a professional geologist that the underground capacity for water supply
and water table levels will not be appreciably altered in such a way as to endanger the
available supply for other properties.
9-14.14 Other Uses
Any use, which in the opinion of the Planning Commission and Town Council might be
injurious or noxious by reason of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, vibration, noise, or other
cause shall be prohibited unless the applicant can substantially prove that such
environmental impacts can be eliminated or controlled to meet the performance standards
established by the Town.
9-15 Recycling Facilities
9-15.1 Recycling Collection Facilities shall be subject to the following restrictions:
9-15.1.1 The facility shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from the right of way of
any public street or any lot zoned, used or planned for residential purposes.
9-15.1.2 Collection sites shall be maintained free of litter and debris.
9-15.1.3 Operation hours for collection sites may be established by the Town Council.
9-15.1.4 All facilities shall be screened from the view of abutting residential uses or
districts by fences and landscaping conformance with the requirements of
Article 8 of this Ordinance for light industrial uses abutting a residential use.
9-15.1.5 Containers shall be at least 200 feet from any residential dwelling.
9-15.1.6 No hazardous or toxic materials shall be accepted or permitted at such sites.
9-15.1.7 No noxious odors shall be emitted beyond the boundaries of the facility.
9 - 23 Updated December 2019
9-16 Residential Use Limitations
9-16.1 Public Water and Sewer Service
All development within the Town is required to be served by public water and sewer
facilities in accord with engineering and design standards set forth in the Public Facilities
Manual, as well as all provisions of the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinances and all other
Town regulations.
9-16.2 Open Space Requirements
9-16.2.1 Upon rezoning to any Residential District, at least ten (10) percent of the gross
acreage of the tract shall be preserved as permanent, useable common open
space, and developed for active recreation, passive recreation, or as a
community green, regardless of other minimum requirements set forth in the
districts.
9-16.2.2 All open space acreage shall be in addition to any required stormwater
management facilities.
9-16.2.3 All active recreation space shall be graded and equipped for active recreational
facilities to serve the residents of the development, in accord with Town
engineering and design standards set forth in the Town PFM.
9-16.2.4 All passive recreation space shall preserve, environmentally sensitive areas,
including, but not limited to, 100-year floodplains, existing tree canopy and
existing specimen or heritage trees.
9-16.3 Pedestrian Circulation Requirements
All lots and uses within residential districts shall be designed to provide convenient and
safe access for pedestrians through the use of sidewalks, trails and landscaping. The main
entrances of buildings shall be oriented to the public sidewalk to an equal or stronger
degree than to the driveway or garage.
9-16.4 Garages
Garages which serving single family detached dwellings shall be the same or smaller in
height and bulk than the main dwelling. Garage entrances shall be set back a minimum
of 12 feet behind the front line of the dwelling.
9-17 Steep Slopes
Development on steep slopes shall be designed to minimize grading and off-site impacts,
including erosion and sediment on other properties and the Town’s stormwater systems. No
9 - 24 Updated December 2019
building or structure, nor any land disturbing activity to establish such building or structure, shall
be located on a steep slope as defined in Article 12, except as may be permitted by this section.
Nothing in this section shall prevent the following from being located on steep slopes where
necessary to meet other zoning or subdivision requirements, or to provide for public safety and
connections:
a. unimproved portions of lots,
b. open space,
c. public rights-of-way,
d. retaining walls, or
e. the installation of utilities and other services
9-17.1 Where slopes appear to be evident from topographic information available to the public
and to the Planning Director, applicants shall provide slope calculations that clearly show
the extent and ratio of slopes with applications for land disturbance permits, site
development plans, and subdivisions. In evaluating proposals where grading and
development is proposed on slopes of twenty-five percent (25%) or greater, the Planning
Director, in consultation with the Town’s Engineer, Erosion and Sediment Control
Administrator, Stormwater Administrator, and where applicable, the Subdivision Agent,
shall consider the following factors:
9-17.1.1 The extent in terms of cubic volume (cut and fill) of grading proposed to
accommodate this development;
9-17.1.2 Whether the soils are particularly prone to erosion and likely to be subject to
accelerated erosion rates due to alteration of the natural topography and
disturbance or removal of existing ground cover;
9-17.1.3 Whether the proposed placement of buildings relates to the contour lines and
natural form of the terrain and seeks to retain these natural features of the site.
Development on steep slopes shall be designed to minimize grading;
9-17.1.4 Whether adequate protective measures are provided for steep slopes that are
graded or temporarily denuded of existing ground cover, including the use of
terracing, retaining walls, replanting or supplemental planting with suitable
vegetation, or a combination of these methods, to reduce excessive runoff and
soil erosion, provided further that provisions for the maintenance of and
responsibility for any structural slope control is provided for in a manner
deemed acceptable to the Planning Director and, where applicable, the
Subdivision Agent;
9-17.1.5 Whether adequate protection exists for structures and properties that lie below
the steep slopes in case of slope failure or excessive runoff and sedimentation;
and
9-17.1.6 Whether the design of the proposed development uses other innovative design
techniques that might eliminate or reduce the need for grading and/or
development on steep slopes.
9 - 25 Updated December 2019
9-18 Telecommunications Facilities
9-18.1 Use Regulations for Telecommunications Towers.
The purpose of these provisions is to establish requirements for the siting of towers and
antennas and to: (i) avoid the location of towers in residential areas and minimize the
total number of towers and tower sites throughout the Town; (ii) encourage the joint use
of new and existing tower sites; (iii) encourage users of towers and antennas to locate
them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is
minimal; (iv) encourage users of towers and antennas to configure or camouflage them in
a way that minimizes adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas; and (v) determine
adequate sites for the provision of telecommunication services with minimal negative
impact on the resources of the Town.
9-18.2 Applicability.
9-18.2.1 District location and height limitations. The requirements set forth in this
section shall govern the location and height of all telecommunications towers
and antennas within the Town. All towers or antennas shall also comply with
applicable Federal and State regulations. Amateur radio towers and antennas
shall be regulated by the Town under existing State law and applicable Town
regulations.
9-18.2.2 Existing structures and towers. The placement of an antenna on an existing
structure such as a building, sign, light pole, water tank, or other free-standing
nonresidential structure or existing municipal, utility or commercially owned
tower or pole may be permitted with the approval of a special use permit so
long as the height of the tower or structure is not increased and the addition of
the antenna shall not add more than fifteen (15) feet in height to the structure or
tower. If the use includes the placement of additional buildings or supporting
equipment used in connection with the antennas, the building or equipment
shall be placed within the existing structure and shall be screened from view.
Existing or proposed structures shall not be altered to circumvent this
provision.
9-18.3 General requirements
9-18.3.1 Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered either
principal or accessory uses when determining area requirements on a given
parcel of land. A different existing use or an existing structure on the same lot
shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot. For
purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna
complies with district development regulations, and other applicable
requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the
9 - 26 Updated December 2019
antennas or towers may be located on leased areas within such lots.
9-18.3.2 Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall
provide to the Zoning Administrator an inventory of its existing and potential
future facilities that are either within the Town or surrounding jurisdictions or
within five (5) miles of the border thereof, including specific information about
the location, height, and design of each tower and/or antenna. Information
submitted to the Town may be shared with other applicants applying for
approvals or special exception permits under this provision or other entities
seeking to locate towers or antennas within the Town. By sharing such
information, the Zoning Administrator is not in any way representing or
warranting that such sites are available or suitable for tower or antenna use.
9-18.3.3 A Commission Permit in accord with Section 15.2-2232 of the Code of
Virginia is required for any tower or antenna prior to or in conjunction with
any Special Use Permit approvals, if any, that may be required by the district
regulations of this Ordinance.
9-18.4 Appearance; lighting
The guidelines set forth in this section shall govern the appearance, location and
installation of all towers and antennas governed by this Ordinance.
9-18.4.1 Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any
applicable standards of FAA, be painted a neutral color, to reduce visual
appearance and obtrusiveness and to blend in with the surrounding
environment. Dish antennas and covers will be of a neutral, nonreflective color
with no logos or other markings.
9-18.4.2 At a facility site, the design of any buildings and related structures must use
materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower
facilities to the natural setting and the surrounding environment.
9-18.4.3 If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and
supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that
is the same as the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna
and related equipment visually unobtrusive and blend with the surrounding
environment.
9-18.4.4 Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other
applicable governing authority. If lighting is required, the Town Council may
review the available lighting alternatives in conjunction with a Special Use
Permit application and approve the lighting design that would cause the least
disturbance to the surrounding views and properties.
9-18.5 Federal and state requirements
All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC,
9 - 27 Updated December 2019
and any other agency of the federal or state governments with the authority to regulate
towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of
the towers and antennas governed by this division shall bring such towers and antennas
into compliance with such revised standards as required. Failure to bring towers and
antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute
grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. All towers and
antennas constructed on property owned or leased by the federal or state government but
used by non-governmental, commercial companies or operators, must comply with all
requirements of the Town Zoning Ordinance.
9-18.6 Building Codes
To ensure the structural and operating integrity of antennas and towers, the owner of an
antenna or tower shall ensure that it, and any supporting buildings and structures, are
constructed and maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable federal,
state and local buildings codes and regulations.
9-18.7. Information Required.
Each applicant requesting a special use permit under this section shall submit a scaled site
plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other
documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals in the
Commonwealth of Virginia, showing the location and dimensions of all improvements,
including information concerning topography, existing vegetation, proposed clearing and
grading, radio frequency coverage, tower height and antenna location requirements,
setbacks, ingress/egress, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other
information deemed by the Town Planning Commission or Town Staff to be necessary to
assess compliance with this division. Additionally the applicant shall provide actual
photographs of the site from designated relevant views that include a simulated
photographic image of the proposed tower and antennas. The photograph with the
simulated image shall include the foreground, the mid-ground and the background of the
site.
9-18.7.1 An engineering report, certifying that the proposed antenna or tower is
compatible for co-location when more than one user is proposed for the same
tower, must be submitted by the applicant.
9-18.7.2 The applicant shall pay all costs associated with notifying adjoining property
owners and other nearby residents by certified letter concerning the project
prior to public hearings before the Planning Commission and/or, on appeal, the
Town Council.
9-18.7.3 The applicant shall provide copies of its co-location policy. The applicant shall
provide copies of propagation maps using proposed antenna tilt demonstrating
that antennas and sites for possible co-locator antennas are no higher in
9 - 28 Updated December 2019
elevation than necessary to serve the intended area.
9-18.7.4 The applicant shall provide a report and drawings identifying its coverage area
within the Town and surrounding 10-mile area.
9-18.8 Factors to be Considered in Granting Special Use Permits for New Towers and Antennas
The Town Council shall consider the following factors, in addition to others herein, in
determining whether to approve a Special Use Permit:
9-18.8.1 Height of the proposed tower: No tower shall ever exceed 199 feet.
9-18.8.2 Proximity of the tower or pole to residential structures and residential district
boundaries, historic structures and districts, or other manmade or unique
natural areas within or adjacent to the Town
9-18.8.3 Nature of the adjacent uses and nearby properties.
9-18.8.4 Surrounding topography.
9-18.8.5 Impact on surrounding tree coverage and foliage. Impacts shall be kept to the
minimum for the installation of the facility.
9-18.8.6 Design of tower or pole, with particular reference to design characteristics that
have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness.
9-18.8.7 Proposed ingress and egress.
9-18.8.8 Compliance with the Town’s co-location policy.
9-18.8.9 Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan and the purposes of the zoning
district of the facility and areas from which the antenna or tower will be visible.
9-18.8.10 Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures as provided for in
Section 9-18.9 herein.
The Council may waive or modify one (1) or more of these criteria if the Council
concludes that the goals of this Ordinance are better served by the facility as it is
proposed by the applicant.
9-18.9. Availability of Suitable Existing Towers or Other Structures.
Co-location is the preferred solution to the need for additional antennas. No new tower
shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates that no existing tower or structure
can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence to be considered in
determining whether existing towers or structures cannot accommodate the applicant's
proposed antenna include the following:
9-18.9.1. No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required
to meet applicant's engineering and coverage requirements under the
Telecommunications Act (TCA).
9-18.9.2. Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's
engineering and coverage requirements under the Telecommunications Act
9 - 29 Updated December 2019
(TCA).
9-18.9.3. Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to
support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment and cannot be
made or reconstructed to support additional antennas.
9-18.9.4. The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference
with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the
existing tower or structures would cause interference with the applicant's
proposed antenna.
A written statement of justification with supporting documentation is required from any
applicant claiming that no existing facility can accommodate its antenna. The Town
Council may use its own staff, it’s own consultants or other independent authorities to
review and verify information submitted by the applicant.
9-18.10 Setbacks.
Towers shall be set back a distance of at least one hundred (100) percent of the height of
the tower from the boundaries of the property on which the tower is located.
9-18.11 Security fencing.
Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six (6) feet in height and shall
be equipped with an anti-climbing device.
9-18.12 Landscaping.
The following requirements shall govern the landscaping surrounding towers.
9-18.12.1 Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a mix of deciduous and evergreen
trees that effectively screens the view of the support buildings from adjacent
property. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip of at least ten
(10) feet wide outside the perimeter of the facility compound.
9-18.12.2 Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be
preserved to the maximum extent possible.
9-18.13 Removal of abandoned antennas and towers.
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of two (2) years shall
be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove same
within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the Zoning Administrator notifying the
owner of such removal requirement. Removal includes the removal of the tower, all
tower and fence footers, underground cables and support buildings.
9 - 30 Updated December 2019
If there are two (2) or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become
effective until all users cease using the tower. If the tower is not removed per this
section, the Town may require the landowner to have it removed.
9-19 Temporary Uses
9-19.1 Permitted Temporary Uses in Commercial Districts
Notwithstanding the specific use regulations of the individual commercial zoning
districts, the following uses may be permitted on a temporary basis on property located
within any commercial zoning district when such uses are in conformance with the
regulations of this subsection:
9-19.1.1 Temporary retail sales stands limited to the primary sale of Christmas trees,
Halloween pumpkins, fireworks, or merchandise sold by civic or non-profit
groups and with sale of accessory items clearly secondary to the primary items.
(For the purpose of this subsection the term civic or non-profit group shall
include any organization which meets regularly in the Town or which has
"Warrenton" or a Town location in its name, and which has demonstrated
service to the Town.
9-19.1.2 Carnivals, festivals, fairs or similar outdoor entertainment events.
9-19.1.3 Outdoor retail sales events, provided that such sales shall be conducted by an
existing retail business located on the same property and shall not interfere
with or restrict designated access drives or parking for the existing facility.
9-19.1.4 Construction activities. Temporary non-residential buildings and storage of
materials necessary to support on-site activities for constructing buildings and
structures are permitted when located on the same parcel where the
construction is taking place and when limited to the duration of the
construction.
9-19.2 Use Restrictions
Uses permitted under this subsection shall conform with the following regulations:
9-19.2.1 Temporary retail sales stands shall not operate for a period of more than thirty
(30) days.
9-19.2.2 Carnivals, festivals, fairs or similar outdoor entertainment events shall not
operate for a period of more than five (5) days for any event.
9-19.2.3 The uses enumerated in this subsection shall operate between 9:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m.; provided, however, that based upon a lighting plan submitted by the
applicant, the Zoning Administrator may approve additional evening hours. In
no event shall such use operate after 11:00 p.m.
9-19.2.4 Outdoor retail sales events shall not operate for a period of more than four days
9 - 31 Updated December 2019
for any event.
9-19.2.5 All temporary uses shall be provided convenient off-street parking spaces in
sufficient number for the use, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
Notwithstanding other requirements of this Chapter, such parking may be
located off-site.
9-19.2.6 All temporary uses which include the operation of amplified sound shall adhere
to the regulation set forth in Section 11-19, Noise of Chapter 11. Offenses -
Miscellaneous of the Town Code.
9-19.2.7 A temporary use may restrict through traffic on a public right-of-way,
including streets, drives in commercial areas and sidewalks, provided that the
permit establishes clear limitations on such restrictions, including limits as to
the number of days and hours of each day in which restrictions may apply, and
that adequate alternative access ways are identified and maintained during this
time period, and that emergency access is coordinated with the Zoning
Administrator and Town public safety officials.
9-19.2.8 No structure shall exceed four hundred square feet in floor area nor be closer
than thirty-feet to a public road right-of-way.
9-19.2.9 Entrances and exits to public roads shall be clearly marked, and located so as to
provide safe access to the site.
9-19.2.10 Adequate on-site parking is provided for the activity intended.
9-19.2.11 Removal of temporary structures and all signs, materials and debris shall be
guaranteed in writing and such structures shall be removed upon termination of
the activity.
9-19.2.12 Permits shall be valid for a period not to exceed thirty consecutive (30) days
unless extended by the Zoning Administrator, and each event or activity on a
site shall be separated by a period of not less than thirty (30) consecutive days.
9-19.3 Permit and Application Requirements
A Zoning Permit shall be required for a temporary use with the exception of the uses set
forth in Article 11. Application for such permit shall be made at least one week prior to
the date on which the permit is to take effect. The application shall be made on a form
provided by the Zoning Administrator and shall include information about the proposed
use, products to be sold, signs subject to the regulations in Article 6, and related licenses
and permits.
9-19.4 Maximum Number of Permits
During a calendar year, no more than the following number of permits shall be permitted
for each parcel of land or business:
9-19.4.1. Temporary retail sales stands - Three permits per parcel.
9-19.4.2. Carnivals, festivals, fairs or similar outdoor entertainment events - four permits
9 - 32 Updated December 2019
per parcel.
9-19.4.3. Outdoor retail sales events - four permits per retail business.
9-19.4.4. Additional permits for temporary uses may be authorized by the Town Council.
9-19.5 Public Uses Excluded
Any use located on government-owned property which is approved by the Town shall not
be considered a temporary use subject to these restrictions.
9-19.6 Signs
Notwithstanding other regulations governing signs in this Chapter, the Zoning
Administrator may approve temporary signs for each temporary use, in accord with
Article 6, which shall be displayed only during the period approved for the temporary
use.
9-19.7 Revocation of Temporary Permit
The Zoning Administrator may revoke a temporary permit at any time subsequent to the
failure of the owner or operator of the permitted use to observe all requirements of the
law with respect to the maintenance and conduct of the use, and all conditions of the
permit that were designated by the Zoning Administrator when issued. Upon receipt of
notice of revocation of the permit, the property owner or operator of such activity shall
cease operation of the activity immediately. The foregoing provisions shall not be
deemed to preclude the use of any other remedy prescribed by law with respect to
violations of the provisions of this Ordinance.
9-19.8 Civic or Non-Profit Organization
The operation of a temporary use by a civic or non-profit organization shall be exempt
from the requirements of Section 9-19.3. Such organization or its members shall also be
exempt from the requirements of Section 9-19.2 when cookies, candy, baked goods or
similar small items are sold on commercial properties in areas devoted to pedestrian use.
9-20 Traditional Neighborhood Development Option (TND)
9-20.2 Purpose
The purpose of the Traditional Neighborhood Development Option (TND) as a
supplemental use is to provide opportunities for the creation of new neighborhoods in
areas of the Town for which the PUD overlay district is not applicable, but where TND
features may be appropriate and would help achieve the goals of the Comprehensive
Plan.
9 - 33 Updated December 2019
The purposes of TND provisions for supplemental uses are the same as the purposes for
such provisions as an option in the PUD District, set forth in Article 3, Section 3-5.2.11,
as follows:
• Provide opportunities for the creation of new neighborhoods that have the desirable
qualities of the Town’s older neighborhoods that were developed before the late 20th
century. These neighborhoods feature a mix of land uses and building types, closely
linked by an interconnected network of streets that are framed by buildings, and thus
comfortable for pedestrians.
• Provide optional provisions is to allow a flexible set of land use and design
regulations that will allow traditional neighborhoods to be built subject to Town
review and approval through the Special Use Permit process.
• Allow residents to carry out many of life’s activities within their neighborhood,
including working, shopping, education and recreation.
• Provide a range and mix of land uses and dwelling types.
• Provide a transportation system that provides safe and convenient movement for all
forms of traffic, including motor vehicles, pedestrians and bicycles.
• Provide a system of civic spaces including parks, squares and public structures to
create a sense of community.
• Provide a strong sense of identity to the neighborhood by creating public streets and
outdoor spaces that are convenient for people to be in and travel through.
9-20.2 Applicability
TND provisions may be used within any district in which such an option is listed as a
permissible use subject to Special Use Permit approval.
9-20.3 Standards
The development standards for TND development are as provided for in Article 3,
Section 3-5.2.11. In no case, however, shall the TND provisions allow the applicant to
exceed the overall density that is otherwise permitted in the underlying zoning district.
9-21 Utility Lots
Provisions for Modifying Area Regulations. The Town Council may approve, in conjunction
with the approval of a Special Use Permit, the waiving of the minimum area regulations for
installation of treatment plants, water storage tanks, major transmission lines or pipelines,
pumping or regulator stations, communication towers, storage yards and substations and cable
televisions facilities and accessory buildings, but only in accordance with the following:
9 - 34 Updated December 2019
1. Such lot has not been reduced in width or area since the effective date of this Ordinance to a
width or area less than required by this Ordinance.
2. It shall be demonstrated that development of the subject lot will not have any deleterious
effect on the existing or planned development of adjacent properties.
3. Such modification shall be approved only if the remaining provisions of this Ordinance can
be met.
4. In no case shall any building be located closer to any lot line than a distance equal to the
height of the building, as measured to its highest point.
5. If the lot is accessed by a private access way, a permanent easement shall be established to
guarantee access to the utility.
6. The lot area is sufficient to operate the utility.
9-22 Yard and Garage Sales
Yard or garage sales for disposal of used household items, shall not be held more frequently than
once a year on the same lot, shall not be conducted for more than three (3) consecutive days total,
and shall include items assembled only from the household of the site and/or its adjoining
neighbors.
9-23 Massage Therapy, Establishment of Provisions for Therapists and Businesses
9-23.1 General Provisions
The following words and phrases, when used in this Chapter shall, for the purpose of this
Chapter, have the meanings set forth below except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
Client means any person receiving a massage from a massage therapist who has been
compensated for administering the massage.
Disqualifying offenses means offenses which disqualify an applicant from obtaining a
permit pursuant to this Chapter or, if the offender already holds a permit, which mandate
revocation of the permit. Disqualifying offenses are:
9-23.1.1 Conviction, plea of nolo contendere or a forfeiture on a charge of
violating any provision of §§ 18.2-346, 18.2-347 through 18.2-349,
18.2-355 through 18.2-358, 18.2-361, 18.2-368, 18.2-370, 18.2-370.1,
18.2-371, 18.2-386.1 or 18.2-387 of the Code of Virginia, which laws
relate to sexual offenses, or any provision of an ordinance of the Town
or a law or ordinance of another jurisdiction which prohibits the same
conduct, within the past ten (10) years.
9 - 35 Updated December 2019
9-23.1.2 Conviction, plea of nolo contendere or a forfeiture on a charge of
violating any provision of this Chapter, or on a charge of violating a
similar law in any other jurisdiction, within the past five (5) years.
9-23.1.3 Making a false statement on a permit application.
9-23.1.4 Erogenous areas means the genitals and the nipples and areolae.
Massage means the treatment, for compensation, of soft tissues for therapeutic purposes
by the application of massage and bodywork techniques based on the manipulation or
application of pressure to the muscular structure or soft tissues of the human body.
Massage establishment means any fixed place of business where a massage is
administered to a client.
Massage therapist means any individual certified as a massage therapist by the Board of
Nursing of the Commonwealth of Virginia.
Out-call massage means any massage administered for compensation at a location other
than at a massage establishment.
Town means the town of Warrenton government.
9-23.1.1 Exclusions
The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to the following massages, and
such massages are expressly excluded from the requirements of this Chapter:
(a) A massage administered only to the scalp, face, neck, shoulders, arms,
hands, and/or the feet.
(b) A massage of the upper body while the client is fully clothed and seated
in a chair.
(c) A massage administered in a hospital or medical clinic or in the office of
a physician, chiropractor, osteopath or physical therapist licensed by the
Commonwealth of Virginia.
(d) A massage administered in a nursing home, convalescent care facility,
assisted living facility, progressive care facility or life care facility.
(e) A massage administered by a physician, chiropractor, osteopath, physical
therapist or nurse, licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia, in any
9 - 36 Updated December 2019
location.
(f) A massage administered at an organized public event, such as a health
fair or sporting event, which is open for participation or viewing by the
general public.
(g) A massage administered at a school which offers a massage therapy
program that has received programmatic approval from the Virginia
Board of Education, Office of Proprietary Schools, or that has been
certified or approved by the Virginia Board of Education, Office of
Proprietary Schools or the Virginia State Council of Higher Education;
provided, however, that this exclusion applies only if the individual
administering the massage is a student enrolled at the school and receives
no compensation for doing so.
9-23.2 Massage Therapist Permit
9-23.2.1 Permit required
(a) It is unlawful for any person, operator or manager of any massage parlor
establishment to offer or administer a massage in Town of Warrenton
unless he or she has a valid massage therapist permit issued by the town.
(b) It is unlawful for the owner, operator or manager of any massage
establishment to allow any person who does not have the permit required
by this section to administer any massage in the establishment.
(c) The Town of Warrenton shall not issue a massage therapist permit to any
person, operator or manager of any massage parlor establishment who is
not certified by the Board of Nursing of the Commonwealth of Virginia as
a massage therapist.
9-23.2.2 Permit application, duty to update
Each application for a massage therapist permit shall be upon a form prepared
by the town. The applicant shall provide full answers to all questions on the
application under oath. The completed application shall contain the following
information, as well as other information which the town deems necessary to
properly evaluate the application:
(a) The applicant's full name, names by which the applicant previously was
known, date and place of birth, and current residential and business
9 - 37 Updated December 2019
addresses and telephone numbers.
(b) A copy of the applicant's massage therapist certification from the Board
of Nursing of the Commonwealth of Virginia.
(c) The applicant's personal characteristics, such as height, weight, eye
color, hair color, sex and race.
(d) The names and addresses of all massage establishments where the
applicant has been employed as a massage therapist within the past three
years.
(e) Whether the applicant currently holds or previously held a permit or
license to offer or administer massages anywhere in Virginia or in any
other state. If the applicant holds or has held any such permit or license,
the applicant shall provide the license or permit number and the identity
of the issuing authority, and whether such permit or license has ever been
revoked or suspended and the reason therefore.
(f) The applicant's criminal record, if any, other than misdemeanor traffic
violations or traffic infractions, a complete set of the applicant's
fingerprints which shall be taken, a consent form allowing the Warrenton
Police Department to obtain a search of the Central Criminal Records
Exchange, and an investigation fee in the amount established by the
Virginia State Police for conducting the records search.
(g) Three full-face and one profile photograph.
(h) The application fee of $50. The fee is in addition to any business or
occupation license tax imposed by the town and any other taxes or fees
which may be required to engage in the business. During the term of the
permit, each person to whom a massage therapist permit is issued under
this Section must report to the town any change in status.
9-23.2.3 Issuance or denial
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall act upon the application for a massage
therapist permit within thirty days (30) days from the date the Town
receives the application.
(b) If the Zoning Administrator determines from the information contained in
the permit application and from the Warrenton Police Department’s
investigation that the applicant has committed no disqualifying offenses
9 - 38 Updated December 2019
and that the applicant is otherwise qualified under this Chapter to
administer massage therapy in the town, the Zoning Administrator shall
issue the permit. Each permit issued by the town shall be the property of
the town of Warrenton and it shall be returned to the town in the event the
permit is suspended or revoked. The permit must be returned within 7
days.
(c) If the town determines from the information contained in the permit
application and from the Warrenton Police Department’s investigation that
the applicant has committed one or more disqualifying offenses or is
otherwise unqualified under this Chapter to administer massage therapy in
the town, the Zoning Administrator shall deny the application.
(d) If an application is denied, the Zoning Administrator shall provide the
applicant with written notice setting forth the grounds for the denial. Any
appeal shall be filed by the applicant within thirty (30) days after the
applicant receives the notice and shall specify the grounds for appeal. An
appeal hearing shall be held within sixty (60) days after the appeal is filed.
9-23.2.4 Term
A massage therapist permit shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of
issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked. Within thirty (30) days before
the expiration date, a permitted massage therapist may apply for a new permit.
9-23.2.5 Validity of permit dependent upon validity of state certification
The validity of a massage therapist permit issued under this Chapter is
dependent upon the validity of the state certification as a massage therapist.
Suspension of a massage therapist's certification by the Commonwealth of
Virginia shall result in the automatic suspension of the permit issued under this
article. Revocation of a massage therapist's certification by the Commonwealth
of Virginia shall result in the automatic revocation of the permit issued under
this article. Automatic suspensions and revocations are not subject to the
appeal procedures established in § 28.1-5-3.
9-23.2.6 Not transferable
Massage therapist permits are not transferable.
9-23.2.7 Permit display
Every person to whom a massage therapist permit has been granted shall
9 - 39 Updated December 2019
display the permit while in a massage establishment.
9-23.3 Massage Establishment Permit
9-23.3.1 Permit required
It is unlawful for any person to own or operate a massage establishment in the
Town of Warrenton unless he or she has a valid massage establishment permit
issued by the town.
9-23.3.2 Permit application, duty to update
Each application for a massage establishment permit shall be upon a form
prepared by the town. The applicant shall provide full answers to all questions
on the application under oath. The completed application shall contain the
following information, as well as other information, which the Zoning
Administrator deems necessary to properly evaluate the application:
(a) Full application process.
(1) A description of the facilities and services to be available on the
premises of the proposed establishment.
(2) The location and mailing address of the establishment.
(3) The name under which the establishment will operate.
(4) The applicant's full name, names by which the applicant previously
was known, date and place of birth, incorporation or organization,
and current residential and business addresses and telephone
numbers, as applicable. If the applicant is a privately-held
corporation or company, it must supply the information for the
corporation or company, each officer and each director. If the
applicant is a publicly-held corporation, it must supply the
information for the corporation and for the officer or agent who
will have responsibility for the daily operations of the
establishment. If the applicant is a partnership, it must supply the
information for the partnership and for each partner.
(5) Whether the applicant currently holds or previously held a permit
or license to operate a massage establishment or to administer
massages anywhere in Virginia or any other state. If the answer is
affirmative, the license or permit number, the identity of the
9 - 40 Updated December 2019
issuing authority and whether such permit or license has ever been
revoked or suspended and the reason therefor. If the applicant is a
privately-held corporation or company, it must supply the
information for the corporation or company, each officer and each
director. If the applicant is a publicly-held corporation, it must
supply the information for the corporation and for the officer or
agent who will have responsibility for the daily operations of the
establishment. If the applicant is a partnership, it must supply the
information for the partnership and for each partner.
(6) The criminal record, if any, other than misdemeanor traffic
violations or traffic infractions, of the applicant and a consent form
allowing the Warrenton Police Department to obtain a search of
the Central Criminal Records Exchange. If the applicant is a
privately-held corporation or company, it must supply the
information for each officer and each director. If the applicant is a
publicly-held corporation, it must supply the information for the
officer or agent who will have responsibility for the daily
operations of the establishment. If the applicant is a partnership, it
must supply the information for each partner. Each application
shall be accompanied by an investigation fee in an amount equal to
the fee established by the Virginia State Police for conducting a
records search multiplied by the number of persons making
disclosures and providing consent forms.
(7) The name of the operator or manager of the massage
establishment. If the operator or manager of the massage
establishment is not an applicant, then the operator or manager
must provide the information required in this section relative to the
applicant.
(8) The application fee of $75.00. This fee is in addition to any
business or occupation license tax imposed by the Town, and any
other taxes or fees which may be required to engage in the
business.
(b) Streamlined application process - If any individual required by
Subsection (a) to disclose information holds a massage therapist permit
issued under this Chapter, that individual may supply, in lieu of the
information required by Subsections (a)(4), (a)(5) and (a)(6), his or her
name and permit number and either a statement that no changes have
occurred since he or she completed the application for the massage
therapist permit or a list of any such changes.
9 - 41 Updated December 2019
(c) During the term of the permit, the applicant must report to the Zoning
Administrator any change in the information required in the permit
application within twenty-one (21) days of learning of the change.
9-23.3.3 Issuance or denial
(a) The Zoning Administrator shall act upon the application for a massage
establishment permit within sixty (60) days from the date the town of
Warrenton receives the application.
(b) If the Zoning Administrator determines from the information contained in
the permit application and from the Warrenton Police Department’s
investigation that the proposed establishment will meet the requirements of
this Chapter, that neither the applicant, nor any officers or directors thereof,
or its operator or manager, have committed any disqualifying offenses and
are otherwise qualified under this Chapter to engage in such business in the
Town, the Zoning Administrator shall issue the permit. Each permit issued
by the Zoning Administrator shall be the property of the Town of
Warrenton and shall be returned to the town in the event it is suspended or
revoked. Permits must be returned within 7 days.
(c) If the Zoning Administrator determines from the information contained in
the permit application and from the Zoning Administrator’s investigation
that the proposed establishment will not meet the requirements of this
Chapter, or that the applicant, an officer or director thereof, or an operator
or manager have committed one or more disqualifying offenses or are
otherwise unqualified under this Chapter to engage in such business in the
Town, the Zoning Administrator shall deny the application.
(d) If an application is denied, the town shall provide the applicant with
written notice setting forth the grounds for the denial. Any appeal shall be
filed by the applicant within thirty (30) days after an applicant receives the
notice and shall specify the grounds for appeal.
9-23.3.4 Term
A massage establishment permit shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of
issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked. Within sixty-five (65) days
before the expiration date, a permitted massage establishment may apply for a
new permit.
9-23.3.5 Permit transfer or change of location
9 - 42 Updated December 2019
(a) Massage establishment permits are not transferable from one (1) person to
another, whether by sale, lease, merger or otherwise.
(b) If a privately-held corporation or company or a partnership holds a
massage establishment permit issued under this Chapter, the transfer of
more than ten percent (10%) of the ownership of the corporation, company
or partnership to a person or entity who was not an owner when the
application was made shall cause the automatic expiration of the permit.
The expiration shall occur on the date of the transfer.
(c) A change of location of a massage establishment may be approved by the
Director and the establishment's permit transferred to the new location,
provided the establishment continues to comply with all applicable
provisions of this Code.
9-23.3.6 Permit display
Every person to whom a massage establishment permit is issued shall display
the permit in a conspicuous place in the massage establishment, so that it may
be readily seen by persons entering the premises.
9-23.4 Minimum Standards
9-23.4.1 Compliance with Zoning Ordinance
Massage establishments shall be located in a proper zoning district, as specified
in the Town of Warrenton Zoning Ordinances.
9-23.4.2 Requirements for massage establishments
(a) All massage establishments shall comply with all applicable provisions of
the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, including those provisions
relating to lighting, ventilation, toilet facilities and accessibility.
(b) Non-disposable tools of the trade shall be disinfected after use upon one
client.
(c) Walls, ceilings, floors, bathrooms, and all other physical facilities for the
establishment shall be kept in good repair and maintained in a sanitary
condition.
(d) All towels and tissue, all sheets or other coverings shall be used singularly
9 - 43 Updated December 2019
for each client and discarded for laundry or disposal immediately after use.
9-23.4.3 Cleanliness of therapists
Every massage therapist shall cleanse his or her hands thoroughly with soap
and hot running water immediately before administering each massage.
9-23.4.4 Massaging clients with skin inflammation or eruptions prohibited
No massage therapist may knowingly massage any client infected with any
fungus or other skin infections, nor shall service be performed on any client
exhibiting skin inflammation or eruptions, unless a licensed physician certifies
that a client may be safely served.
9-23.4.5 Massaging clients while therapist ill prohibited
No massage therapist may massage any client when the massage therapist is
suffering from any communicable disease transmitted by skin-to-skin contact
or through the secretions of the respiratory tract, including, but not limited to,
infectious tuberculosis, measles, meningococcal disease, mumps, chicken pox
and Hemophilus Influenzae Type b, or from any skin lesions or disease on the
hands or arms, or any nasal or ear discharge or inflamed eyes.
9-23.4.6 Massaging, touching, exposing erogenous areas
(a) It is unlawful for any person, in a massage establishment or during the
course of an out-call massage transaction, to touch, with any part of his or
her body or with any object, another person's clothed or unclothed
erogenous area.
(b) It is unlawful for any person, in a massage establishment or during the
course of an out-call massage transaction, to fail to conceal his or her
erogenous areas with a fully opaque covering while in the presence of
others.
(c) It is unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a massage
establishment or out-call massage business to knowingly cause or allow, in
or about such massage establishment or as part of an out-call massage
business, any agent, employee or any other person under his control or
supervision to perform any act prohibited by this section.
9-23.4.7 Restrictions on out-call massage
9 - 44 Updated December 2019
Out-call massage may be administered only in the residence of the client.
"Residence" means one (1) or more rooms in a residential building or
residential portion of a building which are arranged, designed, used or intended
for use as a complete, independent living facility which includes permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. "Residence"
shall not include a motel, hotel, or other accommodation used for transient
occupancy.
9-23.5 Penalties and Enforcement
9-23.5.1 Violations of Chapter
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor.
9-23.5.2 Right of entry to enforce Chapter
The Planning Director, the chief of police, the zoning administrator and the
building official, or their duly authorized agents, are hereby authorized to enter,
examine and survey, during business hours, any premises in the town of
Warrenton for which a massage establishment permit has been issued pursuant
to this Chapter for the purpose of inspection and to enforce the provisions of
this Chapter. The town shall inspect each massage establishment at least one
(1) time per year to determine whether it is being operated in compliance with
this Chapter. This section shall not restrict or limit the right of entry vested in
any law enforcement agency.
9-23.5.3 Revocation or suspension of permits
(a) Grounds for revocation of any permit granted under this Chapter exist if
the permittee, operator or manager has committed any disqualifying
offense or repeatedly has had a permit issued under this Chapter
suspended. If the permittee is a privately-held corporation or company,
grounds for revocation exist in the event of such conduct by the
corporation or company or by any officer or director. If the permittee is a
publicly-held corporation, grounds for revocation exist in the event of such
conduct by the corporation or by any officer or agent who has
responsibility for the daily operations of the establishment. If the permittee
is a partnership, grounds for revocation exist in the event of such conduct
by the partnership or any partner. If the town believes that grounds for
revocation of a permit exist, the town shall give the permittee written
notice enumerating the grounds and declaring the town’s intent to hold a
hearing at a specified date and time to determine whether revocation is
9 - 45 Updated December 2019
warranted. The notice shall be mailed, by certified mail, to the permittee's
last known address, at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the
hearing. At the hearing, the permittee may be represented by counsel, may
cross-examine witnesses and may present evidence in his favor. If the town
finds that any ground for revocation in fact exists, the Zoning
Administrator shall revoke the permit. The town shall issue a written notice
of his findings and decision within ten (10) work days of the hearing. Any
appeal shall be filed by the permittee within thirty (30) days after a
permittee receives the notice and shall specify the grounds for appeal. The
Zoning Administrator’s action remains in effect during the pendency of the
appeal. The Town of Warrenton Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold an
appeal hearing no later than sixty (60) days after the appeal is filed.
(b) Grounds for suspension of any permit granted under this Chapter exist if
the permittee has failed to comply with any provisions of this Chapter other
than those which mandate revocation. If the permittee is a privately-held
corporation or company, grounds for suspension exist in the event of such
failure to comply by the corporation or company or by any officer or
director. If the permittee is a publicly-held corporation, grounds for
suspension exist in the event of such failure to comply by the corporation
or by any officer or agent who has responsibility for the daily operations of
the establishment. If the permittee is a partnership, grounds for suspension
exist in the event of such failure to comply by the partnership or any
partner. The Zoning Administrator or any person with a right of entry
under § 28.1-5-2 may order the suspension of the permit with or without
notice. The order shall set forth the reasons for the suspension. A copy of
the suspension order shall be hand delivered or mailed by certified mail to
the permittee's last known address. The Zoning Administrator may end a
suspension at any time if the reason for the suspension is corrected. Any
appeal shall be filed by the permittee within thirty (30) days after a
permittee receives the suspension order and shall specify the grounds for
appeal.
9-24 Mobile Food Vendors
9-24.1 Purpose
The purpose is to provide regulations for mobile food vendors in order to provide economic
development and entrepreneurial opportunities, while protecting the public health, safety, and
welfare and mitigating fiscal impacts to existing brick and mortar restaurants and related
businesses.
The Town of Warrenton shall administer a program to receive, review and approve permit
9 - 46 Updated December 2019
applications for Mobile Food Vendors that desire to vend in designated zoning districts. The
associated policy and procedures document sets out guidelines for the permitting process for
vending in designated Mobile Food Vendor areas in specified zoning districts. This policy does
not cover participation in Special Events (such as, festivals). To participate in Special Events, all
vendors must comply with the rules and regulations laid forth in the Special Event permit
provided to the event organizer.
9-24.2 Allowable Zoning Districts
Mobile Food Vendors are allowable in public parks and in any district that allows restaurant uses,
provided these Vendors and their equipment shall meet all location and operational requirements
outlined in this ordinance, Article 9-24.3.
9-24.3 Operation Requirements
Mobile Food Vendors may operate on private property within the Industrial (I) zoning
district from an existing, improved parking-area with the expressed, written consent of
the property owner. All operations, on public or private property, must comply with the
Mobile Food Vendor policy and procedures document.
9-24.2.2 Operation on Public Property
1. Mobile Food Vendors may operate on private or public property from an
existing, improved parking area with expressed written consent of the
property owner.
2. The entire operation of a Mobile Food Vendor must fit in the allowed
public parking area. Vehicles that do not fit within the designated parking
area will not be permitted to operate in the program.
3. Each Mobile Food Vendor parking area shall not be within 10 feet of an
intersection, crosswalk, driveway, bus stop, taxi stand or handicapped
parking space. Nor will any Mobile Food Vendor be situated in any part of
a designated loading zone or fire lane.
4. Mobile Food Vendors are to comply with the vending hours between 8:00
AM and 9:00 PM, or lesser time as administered by the Planning Director,
and not leave Mobile Food Vendor vehicles beyond the allowable vending
hours. Mobile Food Vendor vehicles left beyond these hours are subject to
towing.
5. The Town may adjust these sites in cases of construction or other
circumstances, as approved by the Planning Director.
9 - 47 Updated December 2019
6. The Town may consider additional locations based on demand and impact,
as approved by the Planning Director.
7. There shall be a five (5) foot setback from right of ways and entrance
drives.
8. There shall be a minimum three (3) foot clearance around the food vending
vehicle for safety.
9. There shall be accessibility to restrooms.
10. There shall be a minimum distance of:
(a) 100 feet from any residential district or district that does not allow
restaurant uses;
(b) 50 feet from any existing restaurant or provide a letter of “no
objection” from the restaurant as to a closer location.
(c) 25 feet from any other permitted Mobile Food Vendor.
9-24.4 Program Fees and Operation Costs
Participants are subject to annual program and business license fees as specified in the Mobile
Food Vendor policy and procedures document, including routine collection of meals and
consumption taxes. Mobile Food Vendors are required to comply with all other applicable local,
state and federal taxes including remittance of sales tax in accordance with state law. Fees are
subject to change with Town Council approval.
9-24.5 Rules and Regulations
9-24.5.1 Allowable vehicles include, but are not limited to, Mobile Food Vendor
vehicles from which service is provided to customers through the side of the
vehicle or trailer.
9-24.5.2 Mobile Food Vendors are required to maintain minimum Mobile Food Vendor
vehicle standards for continued participation in the program. Standards include,
but are not limited to, the following:
1. Floors, walls, ceilings and food contact surfaces must be easily cleanable
(i.e. stainless steel, aluminum or other approved non-corrosive and nonrusting
metal).
2. Surfaces must be waterproof, smooth, readily cleanable, and resistant to
dents and scratches.
3. All outer openings must be screened and/or sealed when not operating.
9 - 48 Updated December 2019
4. Serving areas on top of carts and truck serving windows may be made of
whatever material is appropriate for food preparation: metal, tile, synthetic
countertop, etc.).
5. There should be no structural defects (i.e. holes, openings, rust, seams or
broken parts).
6. The business name should be affixed to the back or side of the operation
and clearly visible to customers.
7. Mobile Food Vendor vehicles must be sized to fit into designated parking
areas.
8. Shall not sell anything other than food and nonalcoholic beverages, with
the exception that up to 15% of the business may be accessory items
related to the business such as hats, mugs, decals, tee shirts, and the like.
9. Shall not place or utilize any signage not permanently affixed to the
vehicle.
10. Shall not display any balloons or windblown signs or attach any such items
to the vending vehicle.
11. Shall not display any advertisements for other businesses.
12. Shall not cause any liquids to be discharged from the mobile food vehicle.
13. Shall provide proper receptacles for trash and waste disposal during
operation and remove all trash and dispose of all waste as part of site
cleanup.
14. Shall not be allowed to be in place for more than four (4) hours.
15. Shall post permit so it can be seen from the outside of the mobile food
vehicle.
16. Shall not receive any deliveries at point of sale site.
17. Shall not be left unattended while in a vending location.
18. Shall be removed from the lot when not in operation.
9-24.5.3 If any area is closed for an emergency or other permitted activity, no vendors
will be allowed to set up. Areas will be monitored for compliance and any
violations could result in a permit being suspended or revoked.
9-24.5.4 The entire operation must be fully mobile. Generators should be whisper or
quiet models that do not present a nuisance.
9-24.6 Prohibited Items
9 - 49 Updated December 2019
9-24.6.1 Radio or sound-amplifying devices;
9-24.6.2 Flashing signs or signs that move or give the appearance of moving;
9-24.6.3 Sign, menu board, tables, chairs, waste receptacles or other objects in the
roadway or sidewalk;
9-24.6.4 Water, sewer, gas or electrical connections to a building.
9-24.7 Refuse Control
9-24.8.1 Participants must ensure that no pollutants, including waste/grease, liquid
wastes, gray water garbage/debris, and other materials are discharged to the
Town’s storm drain system (including gutters, curbs, and storm drains).
9-24.7.2 A waste receptacle shall be provided for the use of customers and shall be
affixed to the Mobile Food Vendor Vehicle or be placed on the ground near the
Mobile Food Vendor, so long as they meet Article 9-24.7.3. All trash must be
removed from the site by the Mobile Food Vendor. Use of Town waste
receptacles by Mobile Food Vendors is prohibited.
9-24.7.3 Participants are required to pick up, remove and dispose of all garbage, refuse
or litter consisting of foodstuffs, wrappers, and/or materials dispensed from the
vending vehicle and any residue deposited on the street from the operation
thereof, and otherwise maintain in a clean and debris-free condition the entire
area within a 25-foot radius of the location where Mobile Food Vending is
occurring. Assistance in cleaning any public eating spaces is appreciated.
9-24.8 Violation and Penalties
Any violation of this Article and the penalties for all such violations shall be as set forth in the
Zoning Ordinance, in accord with Article 11 of this Ordinance and §15.2-2286 (A) (5) of the
Code of Virginia.
10 - 1 Updated December 2019
Article 10 Site Development Plans
Amended by Town Council: February 12, 2016
April 9, 2019
December 10, 2019
Table of Contents
10-1 Purposes and Intent
10-2 Development or Land Use Requiring a Site Development Plan
10-3 Presubmission Meeting Required
10-4 Site Development Plan - Information Required
10-5 Site Development Plan - Preparation Procedure and Specific Items to be Shown
10-6 Minimum Standards and Improvements Required
10-7 Administration and Procedures for Processing Site Development Plans
10-8 Required Bonds and Surety
10-9 As-Built Site Plans Required
10 - 2 Updated December 2019
Article 10 Site Development Plans
10-1 Purposes and Intent
The purpose of this Article is to set out procedures and requirements for site plans and
improvements to assure compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and all other applicable
ordinances and statutes, to encourage innovative and creative design and facilitate use of the most
advantageous techniques in the development of land within the Town of Warrenton, and to ensure
the efficient use of the land to promote high standards in the layout design, landscaping, and
construction of development.
10-2 Development or Land Use Requiring a Site Development Plan
10-2.1 A site development plan is required and shall be submitted for the following:
1. Any new or improved parking lot containing more than five (5) spaces, any
commercial parking lot, or any development in which automobile parking space is to
be used by more than one (1) establishment. However, where the existing and
proposed uses are permitted by-right, and no other requirements under this Article
would apply, different parking requirements for the uses that comprise an increase in
the required parking of less than 25% shall not trigger the requirement for a site
development plan.
2. Except as exempted in this section, any change from one category of use to a
different category of use, any special use permit use, or any development in all
Zoning Districts except single-family detached dwelling units. However, a site plan
in sufficient detail to determine compliance with the applicable standards and
specifications of the Town of Warrenton may be required for the construction of
single-family detached dwellings if more than two (2) dwelling units are proposed to
be constructed, or where any of the following conditions exist:
- Where natural and storm water courses are located on the proposed site or where
a proposed driveway or entrance intersects existing natural or storm water
courses.
- Where a cluster alternate design is proposed.
- When a change is proposed in a previously approved site development plan.
- When an existing residential use is proposed for change to a commercial,
industrial, or multifamily residential use.
3. All public and/or semi-public buildings and other uses involving a structure required
to be reviewed by the Planning Commission under §15.2-2232 of the Code of
Virginia as amended.
10 - 3 Updated December 2019
4. For enlargements of existing structures equal to or greater than 25% of the structure's
gross floor area, required parking must equal the sum of those spaces prior to the
enlargement plus the number of spaces required by these regulations for any
additional use area, unless waived by Town Council. Where the enlargement is less
than 25% of the use or structure's gross floor area, and less than 25% additional
parking is required, the additional parking may be waived by the Planning Director
and a site development plan may not be required unless other requirements of this
Ordinance apply. For a change of use within an existing structure where there is no
enlargement of the existing structure, no additional parking is required unless the
proposed change of use involves an increase of more than 25% over the required
parking for the current use, according to Article 7.
5. Notwithstanding the requirement for a site development plan, nothing in this section
shall prevent or preclude all other applicable zoning ordinance and subdivision
ordinance requirements, including Article 8, Landscaping, Article 9, Supplemental
Regulations, Article 4, Site Conservation Manual, and Article 5, Stormwater
Management, from being applied where a change of use, expansion, or enlargement
of a structure or parking lot occurs on a property subject to these requirements that is
nonconforming or in violation. In these cases, amendments an existing approved site
development plan may be approved where appropriate.
10-2.2 Exceptions. No formal site plan shall be required for any special use conducted on a
temporary basis, not to exceed two (2) years duration, as approved by the Board of
Zoning Appeals or Town Council pursuant to Article 11 of the Zoning Ordinance.
10-2.3 Waivers. The Planning Director may waive the site plan approval requirement when all
of the following determinations are made:
1. No improvement would be required for the proposed use which might involve surety
bonding under this ordinance.
2. Applicant agrees in writing to make other improvements required under the
Ordinance.
3. The proposal will not involve an increase in the intensity over the existing use with
respect to entrances, travelways, parking or impact on neighboring lands.
4. The proposal will result in not more than a twenty-five percent (25%) increase in
either the gross floor area of the structure housing the use or in the outdoor area used.
5. The requirement of a final site plan would not forward the purposes of this ordinance
or otherwise serve the public interest.
10-3 Presubmission Meeting Required
A presubmission conference with the Planning Director is required prior to sub-mission of a site
development plan. The intent of the conference is to clarify the requirements of this Ordinance,
10 - 4 Updated December 2019
and other ordinances of the Town that may be applicable, in order that the site development plan
can be prepared in an efficient manner, and to facilitate plan review by the Planning Director.
10-4 Site Development Plan - Information Required
10-4.1 Every site development plan, as hereafter provided shall contain the following
information:
1. A boundary survey of the tract or site plan limit with an error of closure within the
nearest second related to the true meridian, and showing the location and type of
boundary evidence except where a tract or site is a part of a subdivision of record.
2. All horizontal dimensions shown on the site development plan shall be in feet and
decimals of a foot to the closest one hundredth of a foot; and all bearings in degrees,
minutes and seconds to the nearest second.
3. A certificate signed by the engineer or surveyor setting forth the source and title of
the owner of the tract and the place of record of the last instrument in the chain of
title.
4. The name, phone number, and mailing address of the owner, or their authorized
agent, of the subject parcel to whom which all correspondence regarding review of
the site plan will be addressed.
10-4.2 Site development plans shall also contain the following information as determined
appropriate by the Planning Director:
1. Existing and proposed streets and easements, their names, numbers, and widths;
existing and proposed property lines; existing and proposed utilities of all types;
water courses and their names; flood plain limits; owners, zoning, and present use of
adjoining tracts; and the present zoning of the subject parcel.
2. Location, type, and size of ingress and egress to the site, including the projected
number of vehicle trips per day generated by the proposed development.
3. Location, type, size, and height of all fencing, screening and retaining walls where
required under the provisions of applicable ordinances.
4. All off-street parking and parking bays, loading spaces, and walkways indicating type
of surfacing, size, angle of stalls, width of aisles, and a specific schedule showing the
number of parking spaces provided and the number required in accordance with the
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Warrenton.
5. Number of floors, floor area, height, and location of each building, including building
setback lines, and proposed general use for each building B if a multifamily
residential building, townhouse, or patio house, the number, size, and type of
dwelling units shall be known.
6. Front elevations shall be shown on all commercial, industrial, and multifamily
developments, regardless of height.
7. Existing and proposed water and sanitary sewer facilities indicating all pipe sizes,
types, and grades and where connection is to be made to an existing or a proposed
10 - 5 Updated December 2019
central water and sewer system.
8. Provisions for the adequate disposition of natural and storm water in accordance with
the Town of Warrenton Public Facilities Manual and the standards of the Virginia
Stormwater Management Program, indicating location, sizes, types, and grades of
ditches, catch basins, and pipes, and connection to the existing drainage system, and
showing that all requirements of Article 5, Stormwater Management and, where
applicable, Article 3-5.1, Floodplain District Overlay, shall be met.
9. Provisions and schedules for the adequate control of erosion and sedimentation,
indicating the proposed temporary and permanent control practices and measures
which will be implemented during all phases of clearing, grading, and construction,
in accordance with the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook and the
State law, and showing that all requirements of Article 4, Erosion and Sediment
Control Site Conservation
10. Existing topography accurately shown with a maximum of two (2) foot contour
intervals at a scale of not less than fifty (50) feet to the inch. The requirement for a
contour map may be waived where existing grades are less than three (3) percent and
spot elevations are provided.
11. Proposed finished grading by contour supplemented where necessary by spot
elevations.
12. A landscape design plan based upon accepted professional design layouts and
principles as required by Article 8 of the Zoning Ordinance shall be submitted.
13. The proposed location of all outside trash receptacles and dumpsters and proposed
methods of screening. Refuse containers or refuse storage areas shall be located in a
paved area and hidden from general public view, either from within or outside the lot,
by means of fences, walls, or landscape planting.
14. The location and method of lighting for parking lots, pedestrian walkways, public
spaces, and common areas designed or intended for use during evening hours.
15. The location of all trees on the site with a caliper of six (6) inches or greater shall be
indicated, and shall meet the requirements of Article 4-8.1.2, Tree Survey, Article 8-
7.4, Noxious and Invasive Species, and Article 8-10, Retention and Replacement of
Trees. Existing trees shall be identified in a table listing their species, caliper, and
canopy size. Wooded areas shall be designated by symbols that indicate the perimeter
of the area covered by the canopy of the trees. Invasive species and other trees
proposed to be removed shall be indicated clearly. Trees and/or wooded areas to be
retained, and methods to be used to assure adequate protection for trees adjacent to
disturbed areas, shall be indicated. Such methods shall conform to Section 3.38, Tree
Preservation and Protection of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook
and Article 8-10.4, Tree Protection Zones.
10-5 Site Development Plan - Preparation Procedure and Specific Items to be Shown
10-5.1 Site development plans, or any portion thereof, involving engineering, architecture, city
planning, urban design, landscape architecture, or land surveying, will be prepared by
persons qualified to do such work. Final site plans shall be certified by an architect or by
10 - 6 Updated December 2019
an engineer or by a land surveyor within the limits of their respective licenses authorized
to practice by the State of Virginia.
10-5.2 The Planning Director may waive the requirement for the certification of the site
development plan or portions thereof by these professionals in those cases where no
action proposed by the developer falls within their professional purview; however, the
person(s) principally responsible for the preparation of the site development plan shall
sign said drawings, regardless of professional registration status.
10-5.3 The site plan shall show the name and address of the owner or applicant, city or town,
county, state, north point, date, and scale of drawing and number of sheets. In addition it
shall reserve a blank space four (4) inches by four (4) inches in size on the plan face for
the use of the approving authority.
10-5.4 Site development plans shall be prepared to the scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet
or larger; sheets shall measure eighteen by twenty-four inches (18" X 24") at a minimum
and no larger than thirty-six by twenty-four inches (36" X 24").
10-5.5 The site development plan may be prepared on one (1) or more sheets. If prepared on
more than one (1) sheet, match lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join.
All information required under Section 27-3 need not be included on the basic plan but
may be submitted on additional sheets which may be of varying sizes.
10-5.6 A minimum of twelve (12) clearly legible blue or black line copies of a site development
plan shall be submitted to the Planning Director for the Town of Warrenton, as well as a
digital copy in a form suitable to the Planning Director.
10-5.7 Profiles shall be submitted for all sanitary and storm sewers, streets and curbs adjacent
thereto, and other utilities, and shall be submitted on standard federal aid plan and profile
sheets. Special studies as required may be submitted on standard cross section paper and
shall have a scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet horizontally and one (1) inch
equals five (5) feet vertically. No sheet width shall exceed thirty-six by twenty-four
inches (36" X 24"). Flood plain limit studies required shall be shown on profile sheets
with reference to properties affected and center line of stream.
10-5.8 A minimum of two (2) datum references for elevations used on plans and profiles and
correlated, where practical, to U. S. Geological Survey datum. At least one (1) datum
reference shall be on-site.
10-5.9 Submitted plans shall include a completed application checklist and payment of review
fees, as established by the Town.
10 - 7 Updated December 2019
10-6 Minimum Standards and Improvements Required
10-6.1 All improvements required by this Article shall be installed at the cost of the owner or
applicant. Where cost sharing or reimbursement agreements between the Town of
Warrenton and the owner or applicant are requested and deemed appropriate by the
Town, the same shall be entered into by formal agreement prior to final site development
plan approval, and shall be subject to the Virginia Department of Transportation review
and acceptance where appropriate. Where specifications have been established by the
Town of Warrenton or by the Virginia Department of Transportation for streets and
related facilities, or by this Ordinance for other facilities and utilities, such specifications
shall be followed. The owner or applicant's performance bond shall not be released until
construction has been inspected and accepted by the authorized engineer or Planning
Director for the Town and by the Virginia Department of Transportation where
appropriate.
10-6.2 All streets and highway construction standards and geometric design standards shall be in
accordance with the Town’s Public Facilities Manual and Subdivision Ordinance unless
such geometric design standards are specifically modified by the Town Council upon
recommendation of the Planning Director. The Town Council may modify street
geometric design standards for local, collector, and minor loop streets. Half-streets along
the boundary of land proposed for development or subdivision shall not be permitted. All
new streets must be platted and constructed to meet the full width required by this Article
and such construction is the sole responsibility of the applicant or subdivider.
Construction of private streets is not permitted unless permission is granted by Town
Council.
10-6.3 Adequate easements shall be provided for drainage and all utilities. Minimum easement
width shall be fifteen (15) feet. If two (2) utilities are located within one (1) easement
area, the minimum easement width shall be twenty (20) feet. If more than two (2)
utilities are located within an easement area, the easement width shall be established by
the Warrenton Utilities Director.
10-6.4 Adequate drainage for the disposition of storm and nature waters both on-site and off-site
shall be provided. Drainage structures and treatment facilities designed for treatment of
stormwater runoff from multiple building lots shall not be located on or within an
individual building lot or lots, but shall be within commonly-owned area, and shall be
located so as to be easily accessed for maintenance purposes. The extent and nature of
both on-site and off-site treatment is to be in accordance with the Town of Warrenton
Public Facilities Manual, the Town’s Virginia Stormwater Management Permit (VSMP),
and the standards and requirements of the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality.
10-6.5 Provisions shall be made for all necessary temporary and permanent erosion and
sedimentation control measures, both on-site and off-site. The extent of the control
measures, both on-site and off-site, are to be in accordance with the Virginia Erosion and
10 - 8 Updated December 2019
Sediment Control Handbook adopted by the Town (see the Town’s Erosion and Sediment
Control Ordinance). Slopes of twenty-five (25) percent or greater may be unsuitable for
development and shall be reviewed in accordance with Section 9-17 of the Zoning
Ordinance, for grading or development. Urban Best Management Practices shall be used
to reduce storm water volumes and transport of sediment off-site.
10-6.6 Adequate provision shall be made by the owner or applicant to construct all utilities,
required to service the development, both on-site and off-site. Design requirements shall
follow the provisions of the Town of Warrenton Public Facilities Manual.
10-6.7 Percolation tests and/or other methods of soil evaluation deemed necessary by the
Administrator for the Town shall be the responsibility of the owner or applicant.
10-6.8 When central water and/or sewer systems having sufficient capacity either exist or are
proposed within a reasonable distance of the area of the site development plan, provisions
shall be made to connect to the system as provided in the Code of the Town of
Warrenton.
10-6.9 Landscape planting, screening, fences, walks, curbs, gutters, and other physical
improvements as required by this Ordinance or other ordinances of the Town of
Warrenton, Virginia, and the regulations of the Virginia Department of Transportation
shall be provided by the owner or applicant.
10-6.10 Where required on site development plans, sidewalks and curb and gutter shall be
provided along both sides of all public streets, private streets, and public access areas;
however, these requirements may be waived for sites with a density of less than four (4)
dwelling units per acre. A written request for such waiver is required for Town Council
consideration and action after a recommendation by the Planning Commission and public
hearings, in accordance with the procedures established in Article 11-3.10.
10-6.11 Lighting will be provided by the developer along all newly constructed public roads,
private roads, within parking lots, along pedestrian walkways, and within public common
areas, designed to ensure the safe and convenient movement of vehicles and pedestrians
during evening and nighttime hours.
10-6.12 A Tree Protection Plan that indicates the location of trunks and driplines for trees or
wooded areas that are to be retained. In the case of wooded areas, the trunks and
driplines of perimeter trees shall be sufficient indication of location. Methods of
protection shall be clearly indicated, including details of all retaining walls, tree guards,
tree wells, indications that grading changes will not alter surface water movement to or
from trees to be retained, and methods to mark trees and wooded areas to be preserved
during grading and construction activities.
10 - 9 Updated December 2019
10-6.13 One (1) set of approved plans, profiles, and specifications shall be at the job site at all
times when work is being performed.
10-7 Administration and Procedures for Processing Site Development Plans
10-7.1 The Planning Director shall be responsible for the receipt, review, processing, and
approval of site development plans.
10-7.2 The Planning Director may request opinions and/or decisions, from other departments,
divisions, agencies, or authorities of the Town and County government; from officials,
departments, or agencies of the Commonwealth of Virginia; or from other qualified
persons as may from time to time be retained.
10-7.3 The Planning Director, subject to the approval of the Town Council, may from time to
time establish reasonable procedures for the administration of this Article.
10-7.4 Site development plans, including any modifications which conform to the standards and
requirements in this Article shall be approved by the Planning Director.
10-7.5 Approval, approval with modifications, or disapproval of a site development plan by the
Planning Director shall occur within sixty (60) days of official acceptance. If
disapproved, written notification shall be provided to the applicant stating the
deficiencies in the plan that cause the disapproval by reference to specific adopted
ordinances, regulations, or policies and identifying the modifications or corrections that
would permit approval of the plan. Approval, approval subject to modifications, or
disapproval of a revised and resubmitted site development plan shall occur within fortyfive
(45) days of official acceptance.
10-7.6 Any person aggrieved of any decision of the Planning Director pursuant to this Article
may, within thirty (30) days of such decision, file an appeal to the Board of Zoning
Appeals specifying the grounds upon which aggrieved. Appeals shall be in writing and
shall be filed in the Office of the Zoning Administrator, and shall be in accord with
§15.2-2211 of the Code of Virginia as amended and Article 11 of the Zoning Ordinance.
10-7.7 No public easement, right-of-way, or public dedication shown on any site development
plan shall be accepted for dedication for public use until such proposed dedication shall
first be approved by the Town Council and evidence of such approval is shown on the
instrument to be recorded.
10-7.8 Approval of a site development plan pursuant to this Article shall expire five (5) years
after the date of approval or the established period of validity per § 15.2-2261 and 15.2-
2209.1 of the Code of Virginia as amended. Extensions may be granted upon written
request by the applicant to the Planning Director, forty-five (45) days prior to lapse of
approval, and extension of all bond and surety agreement. A six (6) month extension
10 - 10 Updated December 2019
may be granted at the discretion of the Planning Director. Further extensions may be
authorized only by Town Council approval upon showing a good cause. Modifications to
an approved site plan during the period of validity shall be in accordance with § 15.2-
2261 C and D of the Code of Virginia, as amended.
10-7.9 No permit shall be issued by any administrative officer or agent of Warrenton for the
construction of any building or improvement requiring a permit in any area covered by
the site development plan except to the provisions of this Article and the duly approved
site development plan.
10-7.10 The Town and State agencies responsible for the supervision and enforcement of this
Article shall periodically inspect the site during the period of construction.
10-7.11 Upon compliance with the terms of this Article and the satisfactory completion of
construction, as determined by an on-site inspection by Town staff, the Planning
Director for the Town of Warrenton shall furnish a certificate of approval. Certificates
of approval, upon ratification by the Governing Body, shall release all of the bonds
which may have been furnished.
10-7.12 Any requirement of this Article may be waived by the Town Council where the
applicant establishes that an undue hardship would be created by the strict enforcement
of this Article, providing such a waiver, as requested, shall not be adverse to the
purpose of this Article.
10-7.13 No change, revision, or erasure shall be made on any pending or final site development
plan or on any accompanying data sheet where approval has been endorsed on the plat
or sheets unless authorization for such changes is granted in writing by the approving
body or the Planning Director.
10-7.14 Any approved site development plan may be revised, provided request for revision
shall be filed and processed in the same manner as the original site development plan.
Approval, approval subject to modifications, or disapproval of revisions to a site
development plan shall occur within sixty (60) days of their official acceptance. If
disapproved, written notification shall be provided to the applicant or the applicant’s
designated agent stating the deficiencies in the plan that cause the disapproval by
reference to specific adopted ordinances, regulations, or policies and identifying the
modifications or corrections that would permit approval of the plan.
10-7.15 The fee for processing a site development plan, and revisions to an approved site plan,
shall be as prescribed by Town Council by resolution.
10-8 Required Bonds and Surety
10-8.1 All site plans and subdivision plats must be accompanied, at the time of submission, by a
10 - 11 Updated December 2019
detailed estimate of the costs for installation of on-site and off-site improvements
intended or designed to be dedicated for public use, and maintained by the Town of
Warrenton, the Commonwealth, or other public agency, when such improvements are to
be financed in whole or in part by private funds, including:
1. the acceptance of dedication for public use of any right-of-way located within any
subdivision or section thereof, which has constructed or proposed to be constructed
within the subdivision or section thereof, any street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, bicycle
trail, drainage or sewerage system, waterline as part of a public system, or other
improvement dedicated for public use; and
2. site-related improvements required by this Ordinance for vehicular ingress and
egress, for public access streets, including traffic signalization and control, for
structures necessary to ensure stability of critical slopes, and for storm water
management facilities.
10-8.2 The estimated cost of construction shall be based on unit prices for new public or private
sector construction in the Warrenton region, and a reasonable allowance for estimated
administrative costs, inflation, and potential damage to existing roads or utilities, which
shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the estimated construction costs. An estimated
time frame for phasing and completion of all improvements will be submitted for review
and approval by the Planning Director.
10-8.3 Cost estimates will be reviewed and approved, approved with revisions, or disapproved
by the Director of Planning and Community Development with notice provided in writing
and addressed to the owner, or their designated agent, as identified on the site plan
documents.
10-8.4 Upon approval of the aforesaid cost estimates, the owner or developer shall (i) certify to
the Council that the construction costs have been paid to the person constructing such
facilities; (ii) furnish to the Council a certified check or cash escrow in the amount of the
estimated costs of construction or a personal, corporate or property bond, with surety
satisfactory to Planning Director in an amount sufficient for and conditioned upon the
construction of such facilities, or a contract for the construction of such facilities and the
contractor's bond, with like surety, in like amount and so conditioned; or (iii) furnish to
the Council a bank or savings institution's letter of credit on certain designated funds
satisfactory to Planning Director as to the bank or savings institution, the amount and the
form. The amount of such certified check, cash escrow, bond, or letter of credit shall not
exceed the total of the estimated costs and an administrative fee as provided herein. All
instruments affecting the bonding of a project shall be in a form satisfactory to the Town
of Warrenton, and approved by the Town Attorney.
10-8.5 The Town shall grant periodic partial releases of any bond, escrow, letter of credit, or
other performance guarantee required for the completion of improvements which are to
10 - 12 Updated December 2019
be bonded, under the following provisions:
1. Upon written request by the subdivider or developer, the Council shall make periodic
partial releases of such bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee
in a cumulative amount equal to no less than ninety percent of the original amount for
which the bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee was taken,
and may make partial releases of such lower amounts as may be authorized by the
Council based upon the percentage of facilities completed and approved by the
Council, or the state agency having jurisdiction. Periodic partial releases may not
occur before the completion of at least thirty percent of the facilities covered by any
bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee.
2. The Director of Planning and Community Development shall not be required to
execute more than three periodic partial releases in any twelve-month period. Upon
final completion and acceptance of said facilities, the Planning Director shall release
any remaining bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee to the
subdivider or developer, provided that the Director may require a maintenance bond
in an amount determined reasonable by the Director not to exceed fifteen per cent
(15%) of the originally posted bond amount, as a maintenance bond to ensure all
facilities were constructed properly. For the purpose of final release, the term
"acceptance" is deemed to mean: when said public facility is accepted by and taken
over for operation and maintenance by the state agency, local government department
or agency, or other public authority which is responsible for maintaining and for
operating such facility upon acceptance.
3. Releases shall be made within thirty days after receipt of written notice by the
subdivider or developer of completion of part or all of any facilities required to be
constructed hereunder, unless the Planning Director notifies said subdivider or
developer in writing of non-receipt of approval by applicable state agency, or of any
specified defects or deficiencies in construction and suggested corrective measures
prior to the expiration of the thirty-day period.
4. If no such action is taken by the Planning Director within the time specified above,
the request shall be deemed approved, and a partial release granted to the subdivider
or developer. No final release shall be granted until after expiration of such
thirty-day period and there is an additional request in writing sent by certified mail
return receipt to Town Manager. The Town Manager or the Planning Director shall
act within ten working days of receipt of the request; then if no action is taken, the
request shall be deemed approved and final release granted to the subdivider or
developer.
5. After receipt of the written notices required above, if the Planning Director takes no
action within the times specified above and the subdivider or developer files suit in
the local circuit court to obtain partial or final release of a bond, escrow, letter of
credit, or other performance guarantee, as the case may be, the circuit court, upon
finding the governing body or its administrative agency was without good cause in
failing to act, shall award such subdivider or developer his reasonable costs and
10 - 13 Updated December 2019
attorneys' fees.
6. Neither the Council nor any administrative officer of the Town shall refuse to make a
periodic partial or final release of a bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other
performance guarantee for any reason not directly related to the specified defects or
deficiencies in construction of the facilities covered by said bond, escrow, letter of
credit or other performance guarantee.
7. For the purposes of this ordinance, a certificate of partial or final completion of such
facilities from either a duly licensed professional engineer or land surveyor, as
defined in and limited to Va. Code Ann. 54.1-400 or from a department or agency
designated by the Council, may be accepted without requiring further inspection of
such facilities.
10-9 As-Built Site Plans Required
Upon completion of all required improvements shown on the approved site development plan, the
owner or applicant shall submit to the Planning Director for the Town of Warrenton a vellum or
sepia transparency plus three (3) copies of the completed as-built site plan, or building location
plat certified by an engineer, architect, or surveyor. The "as-built site plan" shall be submitted
within a year of issuance of occupancy permits for the review and approval by the Public Utilities
Director and Planning Director for conformity with the approved site plan and the ordinances and
regulations of the Town of Warrenton and state agencies. Final approval of as-built plans shall be
required before the final release of applicable bonds.
11 - 1 Updated March 2020
Article 11 Administration, Procedures and Enforcement
Amended by Town Council: February 12, 2013
December 11, 2018
December 10, 2019
March 10, 2020
Table of Contents
11-1 Administration
11-2 Board of Zoning Appeals
11-2.1 General Provisions (Purpose, Authority and Membership)
11-2.2 Rules and Regulations
11-2.3 Powers and Duties
11-3 Procedures for Application Review and Approval
11-3.1 Types of Permit Applications
11-3.2 Public Hearing Procedures
11-3.3 Land Disturbance Permit
11-3.4 Zoning Permits
11-3.5 Building Permits
11-3.6 Occupancy Permit
11-3.7 Site Development Plan
11-3.8 Commission Permit (“2232 Review”)
11-3.9 Zoning Amendments
11-3.10 Special Use Permits and Waivers
11-3.11 Variances
11-3.12 Appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals
11-3.13 Sign Review
11-4 Non-Conforming Uses and Structures
11-5 Enforcement and Penalties
11 - 2 Updated March 2020
Article 11 Administration, Procedures and Enforcement
11-1 Administration
11-1.1 Zoning Administrator.
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be enforced by the designated agent of the Town
of Warrenton, who shall be known as the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning
Administrator shall have all necessary authority on behalf of the Town Council to
administer and enforce the Zoning Ordinance. His authority shall include:
1. ordering in writing the remedying of any condition found in violation of this
Ordinance;
2. insuring compliance with the ordinance, bringing legal action, including injunction,
abatement, or other appropriate action or proceeding subject to appeal pursuant to §
15.2-2311 of the Code of Virginia and Article 11 of this Ordinance; and
3. in specific cases, making findings of fact and, with concurrence of the Town
attorney, conclusions of law regarding determinations of rights accruing under §
15.2-2307 of the Code of Virginia.
4. granting a variance from any building setback requirement contained in the Zoning
Ordinance in accord with Article 11 of this Ordinance and § 15.2-2286 of the Code
of Virginia.
5. The Zoning Administrator shall respond within ninety (90) days of a request for a
decision or determination on zoning matters within the scope of his authority unless
the requester has agreed to a longer period.
6. In addition to the regulations and requirements herein contained concerning the
administration of this Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator may establish reasonable
additional administrative forms and procedures deemed necessary for the proper
administration of this Ordinance.
7. Such other powers as may be granted in the Code of Virginia.
11-1.2 Certified Copy.
A certified copy of the Zoning Ordinance, as adopted and including any amendments,
shall be filed in the office of the Zoning Administrator of Warrenton and in the office of
the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Fauquier County, Virginia.
11-1.3 Processing Fees.
It is the intent of the Town that at least part of the cost of administering this Ordinance be
borne by those responsible for development; therefore, a fee schedule, as prescribed by
the Town Council and modified from time to time, shall apply to all permits, reviews, and
11 - 3 Updated March 2020
processing as required by this Ordinance.
11-1.4 Payment of Delinquent Taxes Prior to Filing a Land Use Application. Prior to the filing
of an application for a special use permit, special exception, variance, rezoning, site plan,
subdivision plat, land disturbance permit, or other land use permit, the applicant shall
produce evidence that any delinquent Town real estate taxes properly assessed against the
subject property have been paid in full, in accord with § 15.2-2286 (E) of the Code of
Virginia, as amended.
11-2 Board of Zoning Appeals
11-2.1 General Provisions (Purpose, Authority and Membership)
11-2.1.1 The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals from any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative officer in the
administration or enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance.
11-2.1.2 The Board of Zoning Appeals shall adopt such rules and regulations as it may
consider necessary to carry out its authorized business.
11-2.1.3 The Board shall consist of five (5) members and shall be appointed by the
Circuit Court of Fauquier County. Members shall be residents of the Town of
Warrenton. The Board shall receive compensation for traveling expenses and
may receive other such compensation as may be authorized by the Town
Council. Appointments to fill vacancies occurring otherwise than by expiration
of term shall in all cases be for the unexpired term.
11-2.1.4 The term of office shall be for five (5) years. One of the five (5) appointed
members may be an active member of the Planning Commission.
11-2.1.5 Any member of the Board may be removed, for malfeasance, misfeasance or
nonfeasance in office, or for other just cause, by the Circuit Court, after a
hearing held after at least fifteen (15) days written notice.
11-2.1.6 Any member of the Board shall be disqualified to act upon a matter before the
Board with respect to property in which the member has an interest.
11-2.1.7 The Board shall choose annually its own chairman and vice-chairman who
shall act in the absence of the chairman.
11-2.1.8 The Town Manager shall appoint a staff member to serve as secretary to the
Board of Zoning Appeals, without vote and shall prepare minutes of meetings,
keep all records and conduct official correspondence of the Board. In the
11 - 4 Updated March 2020
absence of the secretary at any meeting, the Board shall appoint some other
person, who may or may not be a member of the Board, to prepare the minutes
thereof.
11-2.2 Rules and Regulations
11-2.2.1 The meeting of the Board shall be held at the call of its chairman or, in his
absence, the acting chairman, or at such times as a quorum of the Board may
determine.
11-2.2.2 The chairman, or, in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths
and compel the attendance of witnesses.
11-2.2.3 The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each
member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact.
It shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which
shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public
record.
11-2.2.4 All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. A favorable vote of three
(3) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision, or determination of any administrative official or to decide in favor of
the applicant on any matter upon which the Board is required to pass.
11-2.2.5 For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action or transaction of
official business, a quorum shall be required of not less than three (3) members
of the Board.
11-2.2.6 In exercising its powers the Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or
may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from.
The concurring vote of three (3) members shall be necessary to reverse any
order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative officer or to
decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass
under the Ordinance or to effect any proceedings and other official actions,
which shall be filed in the office of the Board and shall be public records.
11-2.3 Powers and Duties
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the following powers and duties:
11-2.3.1. To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by an administrative officer in the administration or
enforcement of this Ordinance or of any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto, in
11 - 5 Updated March 2020
accord with Section 11-3.13 of this Ordinance, including decisions of the
Zoning Administrator. The decision on such appeals shall be based on the
Board’s judgment of whether the administrative officer was correct. The Board
shall consider the purpose and intent of any applicable ordinances, laws and
regulations in making its decision. In the case of interpreting the zoning map,
the board shall interpret the map in such way as to carry out the intent and
purpose of the ordinance for the particular section or district in question. The
Board shall not have the power to change the locations of district boundaries as
established by Ordinance.
11-2.3.2. To authorize upon appeal or original application in specific cases a variance as
defined in § 15.2-2201of the Code of Virginia, from the terms of this
Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, when, owing to special
conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions will result in unnecessary
hardship; provided that the spirit of this ordinance shall be observed and
substantial justice done and the requirements in Section 11-3.12.
11-2.3.3. No provision of this section shall be construed as granting any Board the power
to rezone property or to base Board decisions on the merits of the purpose and
intent of any ordinances duly adopted by the Town Council.
11-2.3.4. When giving any required notice to owners, their agents or the occupants of
abutting property and property immediately across the street or road from the
property affected, the Board may give such notice by first-class mail rather
than by registered or certified mail.
11-2.3.5. Records
The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each
member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact.
It shall keep full records of its examinations and other official actions, all of
which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Zoning Administrator and
shall be a public record.
11-2.3.6. Periodic Reports
The Board shall submit a report of its activities to the Town Council at least
once each year.
11-2.3.7. Limitation
All provisions of this Ordinance relating to the Board shall be strictly
construed. The Board, as a body of limited jurisdiction, shall act in full
11 - 6 Updated March 2020
conformity with all provisions and definitions in this Ordinance and in strict
compliance with all limitations contained therein.
11-2.3.8. Decisions Subject to Judicial Review
In accord with § 15.2-2314 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, all decisions
and findings of the Board shall be final decisions, and shall be subject to
judicial review in the following manner:
1. Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the
Board of Zoning Appeals, or any taxpayer or any officer, department,
board or bureau of the Town, may present to the Circuit Court of Fauquier
County a petition specifying the grounds on which aggrieved within thirty
(30) days after the filing of the decision in the office of the Board of
Zoning Appeals.
2. Upon the presentation of such petition, the court shall allow a Writ of
Certiorari to review the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals and shall
prescribe therein the time within which a return thereto must be made and
served upon the petitioner’s attorney, which shall not be less than ten (10)
days and may be extended by the court. The allowance of the writ shall not
stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may, on
application, on notice to the Board of Zoning Appeals and on due cause
shown, grant a restraining order.
3. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not be required to return the original
papers acted upon by it but it shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn
copies thereof or of such portions thereof as may be called for by such writ.
The return shall concisely set forth such other facts as may be pertinent and
material to show the grounds of the decision appealed from and shall be
verified.
4. If, upon the hearing, it shall appear to the court that testimony is necessary
for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take evidence or appoint a
commissioner to take such evidence as it may direct and report the same to
the court with the commissioner’s findings of fact and conclusions of law,
which shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon which a
determination of the court shall be made. The court may reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the decision brought up for review.
5. Costs shall not be allowed against the Board of Zoning Appeals, unless it
shall appear to the court that the Board acted in bad faith or with malice in
making the decision appealed from. In the event the decision of the Board
is affirmed and the court finds that the appeal was frivolous, the court may
order the person or persons who requested the issuance of the writ of
certiorari to pay the costs incurred in making a return of the record
pursuant to the Writ of Certiorari.
11 - 7 Updated March 2020
11-3 Procedures for Application Review and Approval
11-3.1 Types of Permit Applications
This Ordinance provides for the following types of permit applications for land use and
development:
1. Land Disturbance Permit - subject to review and approval by the Planning Director.
2. Zoning Permit - subject to review and approval by the Zoning Administrator.
3. Building Permit - subject to review and approval by the Building Official.
4. Occupancy Permit - subject to review and approval by the Zoning Administrator.
5. Site Development Plan - in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of
Warrenton and subject to review and approval by the Planning Director.
6. Subdivision Plat - in accordance with the Subdivision Ordinance of the Town of
Warrenton and subject to review and approval by the Planning Director.
7. Commission Permit (“2232 Review”) - subject to public review and approval by the
Planning Commission.
8. Zoning Amendment (including Conditional Zoning Procedures) - subject to review
and approval by the Town Council.
9. Special Use Permit - subject to review and approval by the Town Council.
10. Variances - subject to review and approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals and, for
certain cases as provided for herein, subject to review and approval by the Zoning
Administrator.
11. Appeals - subject to review and approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
12. Additional Governmental Approval. All departments, officials and public employees
of the Town vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall
conform to the provisions of this chapter. They shall issue permits or licenses for
uses, buildings or purposes only when they are in conformance with the provisions of
this Ordinance. Any such permit or license, if issued in conflict with the provisions of
this Ordinance, shall be null and void.
11-3.2 Public Hearing Procedures
11-3.2.1 Advertisement and Notice is Required.
Prior to each public hearing involving planning and zoning matters before the
Planning Commission, the Town Council or the Board of Zoning Appeals, the
Town shall provide advertisement and written notice as may be required by §§
15.2-2204 and 15.2-2285 of the Code of Virginia, as amended.
11-3.2.2 Notice by Town.
11 - 8 Updated March 2020
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, whenever the notices
required under this Section are sent on behalf of an agency, department or
division of the Town, such notice shall be sent by the Zoning Administrator
and may be sent by first class mail; however, the Zoning Administrator shall
make affidavit that such mailings have been made and file such affidavit with
the papers in the pertinent application or case.
11-3.2.3 Notice and Certification by Applicant.
For any application for amendment or development approval for which a public
hearing is required before the Planning Commission and the Council and which
is initiated by an applicant, the applicant shall be responsible for providing
notice in accord with § 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia. A certification of
notice and a listing of the persons to whom notice has been sent shall be filed
with the Zoning Administrator by the applicant at least five days prior to the
first public hearing of the Commission. A counterpart of such affidavit shall be
presented to the Planning Commission or the Council at the beginning of its
public hearing. The applicant may rely upon records of the local real estate
assessor's office or the applicable website, if available, to ascertain the names
of persons entitled to notice.
11-3.2.4 Condominium Ownership.
In the case of a condominium, written notice may be sent to the unit owner's
association instead of to each individual unit owner.
11-3.2.5 Additional Notice Required for Deferrals
If an item is not heard at a public hearing for which it was noticed, but is deferred
to a specific date, no additional notice at a public hearing is required by this
Section.
11-3.2.6 Additional Notice Required for Recessed Public Hearings.
If a public hearing is begun but the agenda not completed, thereby requiring the
meeting to be recessed, no additional notice is required as long as the dates for
completion of the public hearing agenda is announced at the hearing which has
been recessed.
11-3.2.7 Speakers at Public Hearings.
All witnesses and speakers presenting facts, evidence or opinion at any public
hearing shall provide their name, address and affiliation, if any, for the record.
11 - 9 Updated March 2020
Witnesses or speakers may be required to give oath or affirmation regarding
the truth of their statements. At the discretion of the person presiding over the
hearing, speakers may be limited as to the time they are allowed to speak.
11-3.3 Land Disturbance Permit
11-3.3.1 Permit Required
No person shall engage in any kind of land disturbing activity, as defined in
Article 11, within the Town of Warrenton until they have acquired a Land
Disturbance Permit.
Whenever a land disturbing activity is proposed to be conducted by a
contractor performing construction work pursuant to a construction contract,
the preparation, submission, and approval of the required erosion and sediment
control plan and receipt of a land disturbance permit shall be the responsibility
of the owner of the land.
11-3.3.2 Plan Submission
If filed separately from a site development plan, three (3) copies of the erosion
and sediment control plan shall be submitted to the Administrator. Is submitted
with the site development plan, the erosion and sediment control plan shall
accompany each copy of the site plan submission.
11-3.3.3 Approved Plan.
An approved plan is required before the issuing of any other building or
development permits.
11-3.3.4 Plan, Action.
Any erosion and sedimentation plan submitted under the provisions of this
Article and the Town’s Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance will be acted
on within forty-five (45) days from receipt by either approving or disapproving
in writing and, if disapproved, giving specific reasons for such disapproval. If
no formal action has been taken by the plan approving authority within fortyfive
(45) days after receipt of a plan, the plan shall be deemed approved.
11-3.3.5 Plan Amendments.
An approved plan may be changed by the plan approving authority in the
following cases:
11 - 10 Updated March 2020
1. where inspection has revealed that the plan is inadequate to satisfy
applicable regulations; or
2. where the person responsible for carrying out the approved plan finds that
because of changed circumstances, or for other reasons, the approved plan
cannot be effectively carried out, and proposed amendments to the plan,
consistent with the requirements of this Article, are agreed to by the plan
approving authority and the person responsible for carrying out the plan.
11-3.3.6 Bonding.
Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Administrator shall also require an
applicant to submit a reasonable performance bond with surety, cash escrow,
letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement
acceptable to the Town Attorney for the Town of Warrenton, to ensure that
measures could be taken by the Town, at the applicant's expense, should they
fail, after proper notice, within the time specified to initiate or maintain
appropriate conservation action which may be required of them by the
approved plan as a result of their land disturbing activity. This cash escrow,
letter of credit, or other acceptable legal arrangement will provide for a rightof-
entry by representatives of the Town, for purposes of inspection,
reinstallation, maintenance, or any conservation practices as may be necessary.
1. If the Town takes such conservation action upon such failure by the
permittee, the agency may collect from the permittee for the difference
should the amount of the reasonable cost of such action exceed the amount
of the security held.
2. Within sixty (60) days of the achievement of adequate stabilization of the
land disturbing activity, the bond, cash escrow, letter of credit, or other
legal arrangement, or the unexpended or unobligated portion thereof, shall
be refunded to the applicant or terminated.
3. These requirements are in addition to all other provisions of this Article
relating to the issuance of such permits and are not intended to otherwise
affect the requirements for such permits.
11-3.3.7 Inspections and Enforcement, Generally.
Inspections shall be performed by the Town's Construction Inspector or
Building Official and enforcement shall be performed by the Zoning
Administrator.
11 - 11 Updated March 2020
11-3.3.8 Monitoring, Reports, and Inspections.
The Construction Inspector or Building Official, through the Administrator
shall: (i) provide for periodic inspections of the land disturbing activity, and (ii)
may require monitoring and reports from the person responsible for carrying
out the plan, to ensure compliance with the approved plan and to determine
whether the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion
and sediment. The owner, permittee or person responsible for carrying out the
plan, or operator shall be given notice of the inspection. If the plan approving
authority through the Administrator determines that there is a failure to comply
with the plan, notice shall be served upon the permittee or person responsible
for carrying out the plan by registered or certified mail to the address specified
in the permit application or in the mail to the plan certification, or by delivery
at the site of the land disturbing activity to the agent or employee supervising
such activities. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with
the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be
completed. Upon failure to comply within the time specified, the permit may
be revoked and the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the plan
shall be deemed in violation of this Article and upon conviction shall be
subject to the penalties provided in Section 11-5 herein.
With respect to approved plans for erosion and sediment control in connection
with all regulated land disturbing activities which require a permit, the
Administrator may require of the person responsible for carrying out the plan
such monitoring and reports, and may make such on-site inspections, after
notice to that person, as are deemed necessary to determine whether the soil
erosion and sediment control is performed, and whether such measures are
effective in controlling soil erosion and sediment resulting from the land
disturbing activity. Such person shall have the opportunity to accompany the
inspector on any on-site inspection.
After land clearing operations have begun, no area shall be denuded for more
than thirty (3) days unless authorized by the Administrator. All trenches for
storm, sewer, water, and gas lines are to be backfilled, compacted, seeded, and
mulched within seven (7) days of backfill.
11-3.3.9 Acceptance of Performance.
Upon completion of an approved erosion and sedimentation control plan, the
permittee shall notify the Administrator of such completion. The Town
Construction Inspector or Building Official shall then inspect the work and
plantings, and upon their determination that they are in compliance with the
approved plan, they shall notify the Administrator, who shall issue a letter of
11 - 12 Updated March 2020
preliminary acceptance. A condition of any such preliminary acceptance shall
be that the applicant or permittee guarantee all erosion and sedimentation
control work for a period of one (1) year from the date of its preliminary
acceptance, or for a period of one (1) year from repair or replanting ordered by
the Administrator, until such time that all control structures and a minimum of
ninety (90) percent of all plantings shall have survived for a year without need
of further replanting or repair. The Administrator may order in writing such
replanting or repair work as shall be deemed necessary to enforce compliance
with the approved plan and guarantee at any time during the one (1) year
period. Such an order shall serve to revoke the preliminary acceptance and
shall cause the applicant to renew the guarantee for an additional one (1) year
from the date of replanting or repair. Final acceptance shall occur when
preliminary acceptance has remained unrevoked for a period of one (1) year, or
when all control structures and a minimum of ninety (90) percent of all plants
have survived for a period of one (1) year without need of further replanting or
repair. For the purposes of this Article, normal cleaning of silt basins alone
shall not be construed to be repair work.
11-3.3.10 Appeals.
Final decisions of the Administrator under this Article shall be subject to
review by the Board of Zoning Appeals, provided, that an appeal is filed
within thirty days from the date of any written decision by the Administrator.
Final decisions of the Administrator or Board of Zoning Appeals under the
Article shall be subject to review by the Fauquier County circuit court,
provided, that an appeal is filed within thirty (30) days from the date of the
final written decision of the Board.
11-3.3.11 Violations; Remedies; Civil Penalties; Notice.
1. Stop Work Order.
Upon receipt of a sworn complaint of a violation of this Article from the
representative of the program authority or the Board responsible for
ensuring program compliance, the chief administrative officer of the
program authority or the Board may, in conjunction with or subsequent
to a notice to comply as specified in subsection A above, issue an order
requiring that all or part of a land-disturbing activities permitted on the
site be stopped until the specified corrective measures have been taken
or, if land-disturbing activities have commenced without an approved
plan requiring that all of the land-disturbing activities be stopped until an
approved plan or any required permits are obtained. Where the alleged
11 - 13 Updated March 2020
noncompliance is causing or is in imminent danger of causing harmful
erosion of lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds
of the Commonwealth, or where the land-disturbing activities have
commenced without an approved plan or any required permits, such an
order may be issued whether or not the alleged violator has been issued a
notice to comply a specified in subsection A above. Otherwise, such an
order may be issued only after the alleged violator has failed to comply
with a notice to comply.
The order shall be served in the same manner as a notice to comply, and
shall remain in effect for seven days from the date of service pending
application by the enforcing authority or alleged violator for appropriate
relief to the circuit court of the jurisdiction wherein the violation was
alleged to have occurred. If the alleged violator has not obtained an
approved plan or any required permits within seven days from the date of
service of the order, the chief administrative officer or his designee may
issue an order to the owner requiring that all construction and other work
on the site other than corrective measures be stopped until an approved
plan or any required permit have been obtained.
Such an order shall be served upon the owner by registered or certified
mail to the address specified in the permit application or the land records
of the locality in which the site is located. The owner may appeal the
issuance of an order to the circuit court of the jurisdiction wherein the
violation was alleged to have occurred. Any person violating or failing,
neglecting, or refusing to obey an order issued by the chief
administrative officer or his designee may be compelled in a proceeding
instituted in the circuit court of the jurisdiction wherein the violation was
alleged to have occurred to obey same and to comply therewith by
injunction, mandamus or other appropriate remedy. Upon completion
and approval of corrective action or obtaining an approved plan or any
required permits, the order shall immediately be lifted.
2. Civil Penalties, generally.
Except as set out immediately herein below, any person who violates this
Article may be liable to the Town in a civil action for civil penalties of
One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for any one violation. Each day during
which the violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate
offense. The total civil penalties for a series of specified violations
arising from the same operative set of facts shall not exceed Three
Thousand Dollars ($3,000.00). Notwithstanding the foregoing, the civil
penalty for commencement of land-disturbing activities without an
11 - 14 Updated March 2020
approved permit as provided in Section 4-5 of this ordinance shall be
One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), except that civil penalties for a series
of violations arising from the commencement of land-disturbing
activities without an approved plan for any site shall not exceed a total of
Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00).
3. Injunctions and Other Relief.
Notwithstanding any other relief or remedy available under this Article,
the Administrator may apply to the Circuit Court of Fauquier County for
injunctive or such other equitable relief as might be appropriate in the
case of a violation or threatened violation of any of the provisions of the
Article, without the necessity of showing that there does not exist an
adequate remedy at law.
4. Notice of Violation.
In no case shall the Administrator begin legal action to enforce the
provisions of this Article unless and until they have first given, or made
diligent effort to give, specific notice to the applicant or permittee, as the
case may be, of any violation of this Article for which such legal or
equitable relief is to be sought. Such notice shall give the applicant or
permittee a reasonable opportunity under the particular circumstances to
correct the situation before the enforcement action is brought.
5. Civil Penalties.
Any person violating or failing, neglecting, or refusing to obey any
injunction, mandamus, or other remedy obtained pursuant to this Article
shall be subject, in the discretion of the court, to a civil penalty not to
exceed $2,000 for each violation.
6. Cumulative Remedies.
The remedies provided for in this Article shall be cumulative in the sense
that the imposition of, or attempt to impose, one (1) remedy shall not act
as a restriction of any right to impose or attempt to impose, any other
remedy authorized by this Article.
7. Administrative Fines.
With the consent of any person who has violated or failed, neglected or
refused to obey any regulation or order of the Administrator, or any
11 - 15 Updated March 2020
condition of a permit or any provision of this Article, the Town Council,
or the Administrator may provide, in an order issued by the Town
Council or the Administrator against such person, for payment of civil
charges for violations in specific sums, not to exceed Two Thousand
Dollars ($2,000) for each violation. Such civil charges shall be instead of
any appropriate civil penalties which could be imposed as outlined in
Section 11-5.
11-3.3.12 Criminal Penalties - Misdemeanor.
Violators of this Article shall be guilty of a Class One misdemeanor and
subject to a fine not exceeding $2,500, or twelve months imprisonment in
jail, or both, for each violation.
11-3.4 Zoning Permits
11-3.4.1 Zoning Permit Required
No permitted principal or accessory building, structure or use, or building,
structure or use permissible by special exception, shall be constructed,
reconstructed, moved, added to or structurally altered or otherwise allowed
without a zoning permit issued by the Zoning Administrator. A zoning permit
is required in all cases where a building permit is required.
Failure to obtain a zoning permit shall be a violation of this chapter and
punishable under Section 11-5.
The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all zoning permits and a
copy shall be furnished, upon request, to any person.
11-3.4.2 Application for Zoning Permit
An application for a Zoning Permit shall be made to the Zoning Administrator,
who shall require and be furnished by the applicant with all plans and
documents as may be determined to be necessary to evaluate whether the
proposed structure and facilities will be in compliance with the provisions of
this Ordinance.
In order for an application for a zoning permit to be deemed complete, each
such application shall be accompanied by the following items, unless waived
by the Zoning Administrator as not pertinent. The Zoning Administrator may
also require additional information necessary in order to determine if the
application conforms with the provisions of this Ordinance.
11 - 16 Updated March 2020
1. A statement from the Town Director of Public Works that all applicable
regulations and requirements for water and wastewater facilities have been
complied with.
2. A complete description of the intended use or uses.
3. If a dwelling, the number of housekeeping units within the structure.
4. A plot plan signed by the applicant drawn to scale showing dimensions of
the structure with respect to property lines and public highways; provided,
no part of which is to be located less than the required setback distance
from any property line or right-of-way of any public highway.
5. Number, size, location and lighting of signs, if any.
6. Off-street parking and other facilities.
7. Proposed utilities and their locations.
8. Drainage design and proposal.
9. Topographic map, if determined to be necessary by the zoning
administrator.
10. Fee in accord with the fee schedule adopted by the Town Council.
11-3.4.3 Standards for Issuance
Zoning permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the
zoning administrator authorize only the use, arrangement and construction set
forth in the approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement or
construction. Use, arrangement and construction at variance with that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and punishable as
provided under Section 11-5.
No zoning permit shall be issued where it appears that the structure to be
constructed or the use contemplated would be in violation of the provisions of
this Ordinance or any other applicable law, ordinance or regulation. The
issuance of a zoning permit shall not afford protection to any owner who is
found to be in violation of this Ordinance or any other applicable law,
ordinance or regulation.
If it appears that the proposed structure and use of land or structure is in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter, a zoning permit shall be issued
to the applicant by the zoning administrator. If an intended use is found to be in
compliance with this Ordinance, before proceeding, the applicant is still
required to ensure compliance with the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building
Code, and all other applicable laws, ordinances and regulations.
Approval or denial of a zoning permit shall be made within ten (10) working
days of the time at which the Zoning Administrator has deemed that the zoning
11 - 17 Updated March 2020
permit application is complete.
11-3.4.4 Duration of Valid Zoning Permit
Any zoning permit issued shall be valid for one year. If an applicant has not
completed construction of the building after one year of receiving the permit,
the applicant may re-apply.
11-3.5 Building Permits
11-3.5.1 Building Permit Required
No principal or accessory building, structure or use shall be constructed,
reconstructed, moved, added to or structurally altered or otherwise allowed
without a building permit issued by the Building Official.
Failure to obtain a building permit shall be a violation of this chapter and
punishable under Section 11-5 of this Ordinance.
The Building Official shall maintain a record of all building permits and a copy
shall be furnished, upon request, to any person.
11-3.5.2 Application for Building Permit
An application for a Building Permit shall be made to the Building Official,
who shall require and be furnished with all such plans and documents as may
be required to determine whether the proposed structure and facilities will be in
compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and with the Virginia
Statewide Uniform Building Code.
In order for an application for a Building Permit to be deemed complete, each
such application shall be accompanied by the following items, unless an item is
deemed not pertinent by the Building Official, and such additional information
as the Building Official may require as being necessary in order to determine if
the application conforms with the provisions of this Ordinance and the
Building Code:
1. The size and shape of the parcel of land on which the proposed building is
to be constructed
2. Scale drawings which accurately show the design, construction,
dimensions and materials of all proposed buildings and structures
3. The location of such buildings and structures with respect to the property
lines of said parcel of land, and the right-of-way of any street or highway
11 - 18 Updated March 2020
adjoining said parcel of land.
4. Proposed utilities and their location.
5. Drainage scheme.
6. Fee in accord with the fee schedule adopted by the Town Council.
11-3.5.3 Standards for Issuance
Building permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the
Building Official authorize only the use, arrangement and construction set forth
in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement or
construction. Use, arrangement and construction at variance with that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and punishable as
provided under Section 11-5 of this chapter.
No building permit shall be issued before receipt of a zoning permit for the
proposed use and structure. Building and zoning permits for the same use and
structure may be submitted, reviewed and approved concurrently.
No building permit shall be issued where it appears that the structure to be
constructed or the use contemplated would be in violation of the provisions of
this Ordinance or any other applicable law, ordinance or regulation. The
issuance of a building permit, however, shall not afford protection to any
owner who is found to be in violation of this Ordinance or any other applicable
law, ordinance or regulation.
If the proposed structure is in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance
and the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, a building permit shall be
issued to the applicant by the Building Official.
Approval or denial of a building permit shall be made within ten (10) working
days of the time at which the Building Official has deemed that the application
for permit is complete.
11-3.5.4 Duration of Valid Building Permit
Building permits issued shall be valid for one year.
11-3.6 Occupancy Permit
11-3.6.1 Occupancy Permit Required.
Land may be used, and buildings occupied, structurally altered, erected, or
changed in use for any purpose as permitted in the District in which such land
11 - 19 Updated March 2020
or building is located, only after an occupancy permit has been issued by the
Zoning Administrator. Such a permit shall state that the building or the
proposed use, or the use of the land, complies with the provisions of this
Ordinance. A similar permit shall be issued for the purpose of maintaining,
renewing, or changing a nonconforming use. An occupancy permit either for
the whole or a part of a building or the use of the land shall be applied for
simultaneously with the application for a building permit.
11-3.6.2 Standards for Issuance.
The Occupancy Permit shall be issued within ten (10) days after final approval
by the Building Official of the erection or structural alteration of such building
or part which has conformed with the provisions of this Ordinance and all
previously issued permits and approvals for the site, including building
permits, zoning permits and site plans.
No Occupancy Permit shall be granted until all improvements shown on any
approved site plan have been completed in accordance therewith.
11-3.7 Site Development Plan
11-3.7.1 Site Development Plan Required
No person shall commence any use or erect any structure, including additions
to existing structures, parking areas or other required site plan features, without
first obtaining the approval of a site development plan by the Planning Director
as set forth in this article. No use shall be carried on, no structure erected or
enlarged, and no other improvement or construction undertaken, except as
shown upon an approved site development plan.
A site development plan shall be required for the following uses in the
enumerated districts:
• Multi-family dwellings, town houses and all other dwellings except single
family detached, two-family and accessory dwellings.
• All uses in the RO, PSP, CBD, LI and C Districts
• For all special use permits
11-3.7.2 Exemptions from Site Development Plan Requirement
The following are exempt from having to file a site plan: the lawful
construction, alteration and occupancy of a single or two-family dwelling or
11 - 20 Updated March 2020
accessory unit, with or without a garage. Exemption from the site plan
requirements does not authorize violation of any other provision of this
Ordinance.
11-3.7.3. Site Development Plan Requirements
Every site plan shall be submitted to the Planning Director in accordance with
the applicable standards and regulations for Site Development Plans as
provided in the Town of Warrenton Subdivision and Development Ordinance.
11-3.7.4. Review and Approval
Upon receipt of any Site Development Plan, the Zoning Administrator shall
review it in accordance with the applicable procedures, standards and
regulations for Site Development Plans as provided in this Ordinance.
11-3.7.5. Revisions To, Or Deviation From, Approved Plan.
After a Site Development Plan has been approved by the Zoning
Administrator, minor adjustments of the plan, which are in substantial
compliance with this article and the other provisions of this Ordinance and
which serve the overall purposes of this section, may be approved by the
Zoning Administrator. Deviation from an approved site plan without the
written approval of the zoning administrator shall void the plan and the Zoning
Administrator shall require the applicant to resubmit a new plan for
consideration. Any major revision of an approved Site Development Plan shall
be made in the same manner as the originally approved plan.
11-3.8 Commission Permit (“2232 Review”)
11-3.8.1 Permit Required
In accord with the Code of Virginia, §15.2-2232, no street, park or other public
area or public structure, public utility, public building or public service
corporation facility other than railroads, whether publicly or privately owned,
shall be constructed, established or authorized unless and until the general
location or approximate location, character and extent thereof has been
submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission as being substantially
in accord with the adopted comprehensive plan or part thereof.
Widening, narrowing, extension, enlargement, vacation or change of use of
streets or public areas shall likewise be submitted for approval, but paving,
repair, reconstruction, improvement, drainage or similar work and normal
11 - 21 Updated March 2020
service extensions of public utilities or public service corporations shall not
require approval, unless involving a change in location or extent of a street or
public area.
11-3.8.2 Application
An application for a commission permit shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator and shall meet the minimum submission requirements as
prescribed for a zoning permit in Section 11-3.4.2. and in addition shall include
a written statement of justification from the applicant as to why the proposed
improvement should be deemed to be in accord with the Comprehensive Plan.
An application is not necessary for features already specifically shown on the
Comprehensive Plan, as determined by the Planning Director.
11-3.8.3 Planning Commission Action
In connection with any such determination, the Planning Commission may, and
at the direction of the Town Council shall, hold a public hearing, after notice as
required by §15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia.
The Planning Commission shall communicate its findings pursuant to this
section to the Town Council, indicating its approval or disapproval, along with
written reasons therefore. Failure of the commission to act within sixty (60)
days of submission of an application, unless such time is extended by the
Council, shall be deemed approval.
11-3.8.4 Issuance of Permit; Town Council Review
The Zoning Administrator, on behalf of the Planning Commission, shall issue a
Commission Permit following approval by the Planning Commission pursuant
to this section. The Council may overrule the action of the Commission by a
vote of a majority of its membership.
11-3.8.5 Appeal of Denial of Permit
The owners or their agents may appeal the decision of the Planning
Commission to the Council within ten (10) days after the decision of the
Commission. The appeal shall be by written petition to the Council setting
forth the complete reasons for the appeal. The appeal shall be heard by the
Council within sixty (60) days of its submission. A majority vote of the
Council shall overrule the Commission.
11 - 22 Updated March 2020
11-3.9 Zoning Amendments
11-3.9.1 Authority for Change.
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good zoning
practice require, the Town Council may, by ordinance, amend, supplement, or
change the regulations, district boundaries, or classifications of property. Any
such amendment may be initiated by resolution of the Town Council, or by
motion of the Planning Commission, or by petition of any property owner,
addressed to the Town Council, in accord with the procedures and
requirements of this Ordinance.
The regulations, restrictions and boundaries established in this Ordinance may,
from time to time, be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed,
by ordinance, by a majority vote of the Town Council after recommendation by
the Planning Commission, provided that a public hearing shall be held in
relation thereto at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an
opportunity to be heard; and that notice shall be given of the time and place of
such hearing as provided for in §§ 15.2-2204 and 15.2-2285 of the Code of
Virginia, as amended.
11-3.9.2 Initiation of Amendment
Either a zoning map or text amendment may be proposed by resolution of the
Town Council, by motion of the Planning Commission, or by application by
the owner, contract purchaser with the owner's written consent, or the owner's
agent therefore, of the property which is the subject of the proposed
amendment.
11-3.9.3 Submission of Application for Amendment.
Every application for amendment of the Zoning Ordinance shall contain the
following items, as applicable. Applicability shall be determined by the
Planning Director who may waive or modify any of the designated submission
items if appropriate given the nature of the application and so as to facilitate
review by the Town and the public. Five (5) copies of the complete application
shall be submitted.
1. The applicant's name, address, phone number and email address, and
signature.
2. The applicant's authorized representative’s name, address, phone number
and email address.
11 - 23 Updated March 2020
3. The property owner’s name, address, phone number and email address and
signature.
4. A summary of existing data and conditions of the property, including:
• Existing zoning classification
• Tax Map and parcel numbers
• Address of the property
• Total acreage
5. A plan of the property, at a scale of 1”=200’, showing the extent of the area
to be rezoned, streets bounding and intersecting the area, the land use and
zone classification of abutting districts, and photographs of the area to be
rezoned and abutting areas.
6. A plan to a scale of 1” = 200’, unless an alternative scale is requested and
approved by the Planning Director, indicating the locations of existing and
proposed topography, vegetation, floodplain, wetlands, structures, uses,
streets, and areas for off-street parking and loading.
7. A boundary survey of the property to be rezoned
8. Information at the time of submission, on all parcels contiguous to the
subject property and any property within 100 feet of the boundary,
including:
• Existing zoning
• Existing land use
• Proposed land use
• Historic buildings or structures
9. A statement of justification that explains the circumstances in the proposed
district and the abutting districts and any other factors on which the
applicant relied as reasons for supporting the proposed zoning amendment,
including the degree of compliance of the proposed request and subsequent
development plans with the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan.
10 The approximate time schedule for the beginning and completion of
development in the area and any proposed phasing of the development.
11. A Concept Development Plan for the property, showing the proposed uses
and their general relationships within the site and external to the site,
including proposed structures, uses, streets, parking areas, open space
areas, vegetation, sidewalks and trails and means of access to the existing
road system
12. A Traffic Study that shows the projections for trip generation, traffic
volume and levels of service on site and on the adjacent road system,
11 - 24 Updated March 2020
including provisions for safely accommodating both vehicular and
pedestrian traffic.
13. Information about the market area to be served by the proposed
development if a commercial use, including population, effective demand
for proposed business facilities, and any other information describing the
relationship of the proposed development to the needs of the market area.
14. A statement of Impact Mitigation describing and analyzing the various
impacts of the proposed rezoning, including fiscal, environmental
conditions, and public facilities and utilities impacts, and the proposed
methods for mitigating any anticipated impacts.
15. Any development conditions or proffers
16. Disclosure of Real Parties in Interest
17. Certificate of Payment of Taxes, verifying that real estate taxes have been
paid for all property included in the application.
18. Record of Pre-Application Conference
19. Fees, in accord with the fee schedule adopted by the Town Council
20. A statement describing in detail the existing character of the area.
11-3.9.4 Staff Review of Application
1. Pre-Application Conference.
Prior to filing an application, an applicant shall meet with the Planning
Director and discuss the proposed application and land uses and questions
regarding the procedures or substantive requirements of this Ordinance. In
connection with all such conferences, the Zoning Administrator shall be
consulted as appropriate. A request for a pre-application conference shall
be made to the Planning Director and shall be accompanied by a sketch
map of the site, a description of the proposed project or use, and a list of
the issues to be discussed at the conference. The Planning Director shall
respond to each written request for a pre-application conference within
fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt.
2. Review of Application for Completeness.
No application shall be accepted and reviewed unless determined by the
Planning Director to be complete. A complete application is one which
meets the minimum submission requirements established herein. Each
application shall be reviewed to determine if it includes the minimum
submission requirements. The Planning Director shall maintain a current
log of all pending complete applications.
3. Acceptance of Complete Application.
11 - 25 Updated March 2020
Within fifteen (15) calendar days of submission of the application, the
Planning Director shall either officially accept the application as complete
and forward to the applicant a notice of acceptance, or reject the
application if it is incomplete and forward to the applicant a notice of
incompleteness specifying those areas of additional information necessary
for acceptance and review.
If a notice of incompleteness is issued, the applicant may resubmit the
application with the additional data required. Upon resubmission, the
Planning Director will review the resubmitted application in the manner
provided in this section for the original application.
If the application is not resubmitted within sixty (60) days of being
determined incomplete, the Planning Director shall notify the applicant that
the original application has been rejected as incomplete.
4. Referrals. Upon official acceptance of the application for zoning
amendment, the Planning Director shall forward a copy of the application
to all town departments and county or state agencies whose comments
are necessary or desirable for full and appropriate review of the merits of
the application.
5. Referral responsibilities. Each reviewing agency shall prepare a staff report
of referral comments which sets out in writing its comments and
recommendations regarding the application and shall forward such staff
report to the Director of Planning.
6. Review of Referrals. All referral comments shall be provided to and
reviewed by the Director of Planning within thirty (30) calendar days
after an application has been officially accepted. The Planning Director
shall forward to the applicant a written review of the issues raised by the
application.
7. Applicant Response. Upon receipt of the written report from the
Planning Director, an applicant may submit a written request for a
meeting with the Planning Director to discuss the matters contained in
the report and the application. Such request shall include a response to
the matters raised in the Director’s written report.
8. Required Action by Other Entities. In the event that this Ordinance
requires that an application not be granted until acted upon by some
government board or agency other than the Town Planning Commission
11 - 26 Updated March 2020
and Council, the Planning Director shall forward the application for
amendment to such board or agency for appropriate action prior to
notification to an applicant that an application is ready to be presented to
the Planning Commission or Town Council. The Planning Commission
may make its recommendations on an application contingent on required
action by the other boards or agencies.
9. Report and Notice to Applicant. The Planning Director shall compile the
referrals and other information pertinent to the application, prepare a
written staff report with proposed findings and recommendations as to
the application, and notify the applicant that the report is complete and
the application is ready to be presented to the Planning Commission and
Town Council for public hearing.
10. Submission to Planning Commission. Within sixty (60) days of formal
acceptance of the application, the Planning Director shall forward the
application and staff report to the Planning Commission for its review.
11-3.9.5 Amendment to Application
An application may be amended by the submission of additional information or
proposed changes to the application after it has been officially accepted. If the
additional information or proposed changes submitted are to conform with
recommendations made by Town staff, commissions or boards, then it shall not
be deemed an amendment and the application shall continue to be processed on
its original time line.
However, if the additional information or proposed changes submitted by the
applicant are at the applicant's request, then the Planning Director shall review
the information within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt and render a finding
as to whether the submitted information necessitates repeating any portion of
the review process including public hearings. If any portion must be repeated,
the Director shall notify the applicant in writing within the fifteen (15) calendar
day period that the additional information or proposed changes must be
withdrawn, submitted as a new application, or will require the applicant to
approve an extension of the time limits prescribed in this Section and such
notice shall specify the required extension. The applicant will then have fifteen
(15) calendar days to provide the Director with a written response either
granting the necessary extension or withdrawing the additional information or
proposed changes. If the applicant chooses to withdraw the information, then
the application will proceed based on its original timeline.
11 - 27 Updated March 2020
11-3.9.6 Withdrawal of Application
An application for rezoning may be withdrawn at any time upon written
request by the applicant and with the consent of either the Planning
Commission or the Town Council, whichever body has advertised the hearing;
There shall be no refund of rezoning fees in the case of withdrawal either
before or after advertising. In the event of and upon such withdrawal,
processing of the motion, resolution or petition shall cease without further
action.
11-3.9.7 Planning Commission Review.
Within sixty (60) calendar days after a zoning amendment application has been
submitted to the Planning Commission from the Planning Director, and
generally within one hundred twenty (120) days after official acceptance of the
application by the Town, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing
on the application after notice as required by § 15.2-2204 of the Code of
Virginia.
11-3.9.8 Report by Planning Commission
The Planning Commission shall report to the Town Council its
recommendation with respect to the proposed amendment. Failure of the
Planning Commission to report to the Town Council within one hundred (100)
days after the first meeting of the commission after the proposed amendment or
reenactment has been referred to the commission, shall be deemed a
recommendation for approval, unless the proposed amendment or reenactment
has been withdrawn by the applicant prior to the expiration of the time period
If the proposed amendment consists of a change in the text of this Ordinance,
the Commission may recommend revisions to the proposal. If the proposed
amendment consists of a change in zoning district boundaries, it may
recommend that the land be rezoned to a different zoning district
classification than that requested if the Commission is of the opinion that
such revision is in accord with sound zoning practice and the adopted
Comprehensive Plan, is in furtherance of the purposes of this Ordinance and
is not more intensive than the advertised/noticed proposed use. Before
recommending a larger extent of land or a rezoning to a more intensive
classification than was set forth in the application, the Commission shall hold
an additional duly noticed public hearing on the matter.
In recommending the approval or denial of any proposed amendment to this
Ordinance, the Planning Commission should state its reasons for such
11 - 28 Updated March 2020
recommendation.
Tabling or deferring an application for rezoning on the grounds of inadequate
data may be requested by the applicant for a period of no longer than ninety
(90) days, after which the application shall be considered to be automatically
withdrawn. All costs involved in re-applying and re-advertising shall be paid
by the applicant.
11-3.9.9 Town Council Review and Action.
After receiving the report of the Planning Commission, or after the lapse of
one hundred (100) days past the initial meeting of the Planning Commission
on the application without Commission recommendation, the Town Council
shall hold its own public hearing after notice and advertising required by §
15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia. The Council may approve the zoning
amendment as requested by the applicant, it may deny the amendment, or it
may approve a zoning classification of less intensity than that requested, if
available in the Ordinance, without holding a new hearing. No land may be
zoned to a more intensive use classification than was contained in the public
notice without an additional public hearing. The Town Council must act on
the proposed zoning amendment within one year of official acceptance of the
application.
11-3.9.10 Evidentiary Matters Before the Town Council
All information, testimony or other evidence presented by an applicant for a
zoning amendment shall be presented to the Planning Commission in
conjunction with its review and hearing on the application. If the Town
Council determines that an applicant is presenting evidence which is
substantially or materially different from that presented to the Commission,
the Council may refer the application back to the Commission for such
additional consideration and action as the Council may deem appropriate. All
costs in re-advertising shall be paid by the applicant.
11-3. 9.11 Contesting a Decision of the Town Council
Every action contesting a decision of the Town Council for granting or
failing to adopt a proposed zoning ordinance or amendment thereto or
granting or failing to grant a special exception or special use permit, shall be
filed within thirty (30) days of such decision with the Fauquier County
Circuit Court.
11 - 29 Updated March 2020
11-3.9.12 Criteria for Consideration of Zoning Map Amendments.
In considering requests for zoning map amendments, the Planning
Commission and Town Council should consider, among other issues, the
following factors:
1. whether the rezoning request, if granted, would further the public
interest, and whether it conforms with the goals, objectives, and policies
of the Comprehensive Plan;
2. whether the rezoning is consistent with the town's Future Land Use Plan,
as identified in the Comprehensive Plan, and established character of the
area and land use patterns;
3. whether the rezoning is justified by changed or changing conditions;
4. whether the rezoning, if granted, would create an isolated district
unrelated to adjacent districts;
5. whether utility, sewer and water, transportation, school, recreation,
stormwater management and other facilities exist or can be provided to
serve the uses that would be permitted on the property if it were rezoned;
6. whether the rezoning will be compatible with properties and uses in the
vicinity and not have an adverse impact on these properties or their
values;
7. whether there are adequate sites available elsewhere in the Town for the
proposed use, or uses, in districts where such uses are already allowed;
8. whether the impact that the uses that would be permitted if the property
were rezoned will have upon the volume of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic and traffic safety in the vicinity and whether the proposed
rezoning provides sufficient measures to mitigate such impacts;
9. whether a reasonable and viable economic use of the subject property
exists under the current zoning;
10. whether the effect of the proposed rezoning on environmentally sensitive
land or natural features, wildlife habitat, vegetation, water quality and air
quality is compatible with the Town’s Comprehensive Plan;
11. whether the proposed rezoning encourages economic development
activities in areas designated by the Comprehensive Plan and provides
desirable employment and enlarges the tax base;
12. whether the proposed rezoning considers the current and future
requirements of the community as to land for various purposes, including
housing and business, as determined by population and economic
studies;
13. the effect of the proposed rezoning to provide moderate housing by
enhancing opportunities for all qualified residents of the Town; and
14. the effect of the rezoning on natural, scenic, archaeological, or historic
features of significant importance.
11 - 30 Updated March 2020
11-3.9.13 Criteria for Consideration of Text Amendments.
If the request is for an amendment of the text of this Ordinance, the Planning
Commission and Town Council shall consider the following matters, in
addition to any relevant matters included in Section 11-3.9.12:
1. Whether the proposed text amendment is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan.
2. Whether the proposed text amendment is consistent with the intent and
purpose of this Ordinance.
11-3. 9.14 Joint Public Hearing.
The Town Council and the Planning Commission may hold a joint public
hearing following proper public notice under § 15.2-2204 of the Code of
Virginia, as amended.
11-3.9.15 Majority Requirement for Change in Ordinance.
An affirmative vote of at least a majority of the members of the Town
Council shall be required to adopt, amend, or reenact a zoning ordinance.
11-3.9.16 Timing of Application Consideration and Reconsideration
Proposed amendments shall be considered as soon as feasible, based on the
regular schedule of the Planning Commission and the Town Council
meetings and the schedule of newspaper publication relative to public notice.
Upon the denial of any application filed to change a zoning district
designation, no further application concerning any or all of the same property
shall be filed for rezoning to the same use in less than twelve (12) months
from the time of denial by the Town Council, unless this requirement is
specifically waived by the Town Council.
11-3.9.17 Conditional Zoning
1. Purpose and Authority
As part of a petition to rezone property and amend the official zoning
map, the property owner may voluntarily proffer in writing certain
conditions and restrictions on the use and development of his property,
such conditions being in addition to, or modification of, the regulations
provided for a particular zone or zoning district by this Ordinance. The
11 - 31 Updated March 2020
Zoning Administrator shall be vested with all necessary authority to
administer, interpret and enforce such conditions and restrictions, all in
accordance with the terms of §15.2-2296 et seq. of the Code of Virginia,
as amended..
While the conditions may vary from property to property by reason of
the nature of the use and different circumstances at a particular location,
it is not the intention of this section to authorize conditions limited to a
particular individual or group, owner, or operator, and the provisions of
this section shall not be used for the purpose of discrimination in
housing.
2. Proffered Conditions.
As a part of an application for rezoning or amendment to the zoning
district map, the owner or owners of the property involved may, prior to
a public hearing before the Town Council, voluntarily proffer in writing
such reasonable conditions, in addition to the regulations provided for
the zoning district or districts as herein set forth, as he deems appropriate
for the particular case to address impacts of the proposed use.
For the purpose of this Ordinance, proffered conditions may include
written statements, development plans, profiles, elevations, and/or other
demonstrative materials. Materials of whatever nature and intended as
proffers shall be annotated with the following statement signed by the
owner or owners of the subject property: "I (we) hereby voluntarily
proffer that the development of the subject property of this application
shall be in strict accordance with the conditions set forth in this
submission unless an amendment thereto is mutually agreed upon by the
Town Council, and the undersigned."
3. When Proffers Are Made.
Proffered conditions should be submitted for Staff review as part of the
initial application for rezoning..
Proffered conditions made at the Planning Commission meeting shall be
forwarded to the Town Council prior to the Council’s public hearing.
To be considered by the Planning Commission, proffers must be
submitted with the application prior to advertising for public hearing.
11 - 32 Updated March 2020
4. Contents of Proffer.
Proffered conditions shall be signed by all persons having an ownership
interest in the property and shall be notarized. Proffered conditions shall
contain a statement that the owners voluntarily enter into the proffers
contained therein.
5. Review and Revision of Proffered Conditions.
Additional conditions may be proffered by the applicant during or
subsequent to the public hearing before the Planning Commission,
provided however that after proffered conditions are signed and made
available for public review and the public hearing before the Town
Council has been advertised (whether or not jointly held with the
Planning Commission) no change or modification to any proffered
condition shall be approved without a second advertised public hearing
thereon.
6. Modifications to Proffers.
After the Town Council’s public hearing has been advertised, should
additional or modified conditions be proffered by the applicant, which
conditions were specifically discussed at the public hearing before the
Planning Commission, then a second public hearing need be held only
before the Town Council before the application and the modified
conditions can be reviewed and acted on by the Council.
7. Additional Conditions.
Should additional conditions be proffered by the applicant at the time of
the public hearing before the Town Council, which conditions were not
addressed at the public hearing before the Planning Commission, or if the
proffered conditions are modified beyond the scope of any conditions
considered at the public hearing before the Planning Commission, the
application shall be the subject of a second public hearing before both the
Planning Commission and the Town Council, which hearing may be held
either separately or jointly.
8. Annotation of Zoning District Map.
The zoning district map shall show by an appropriate symbol on the map
the existence of conditions attaching to the zoning on the map. The
Zoning Administrator shall keep in his office and make available for
11 - 33 Updated March 2020
public inspection a Conditional Zoning Index. The Index shall provide
ready access to the ordinance creating conditions in addition to the
regulations provided for in a particular zoning district. Such conditions
shall become a part of the zoning regulations applicable to the property
in question, regardless of changes in ownership or operation, unless
subsequently changed by an amendment to the zoning district map, and
such conditions shall be in addition to the specific regulations set forth in
this Ordinance for the zoning district in question.
9. Enforcement of Conditions.
The Zoning Administrator shall be vested with all necessary authority on
behalf of the Town Council to administer, interpret and enforce
conditions attached to a rezoning or amendment to the zoning district
map, including: (a) the ordering in writing of the remedy of any
noncompliance with such conditions; (b) the bringing of legal action to
insure compliance with such conditions, including injunction, abatement,
or other appropriate action or proceeding; and (c) requiring a guarantee,
satisfactory to the Town Council, in an amount sufficient for and
conditioned upon the construction of any physical improvements
required by the conditions, or a contract for the construction of such
improvements and the contractor's guarantee, in like amount and so
conditioned, which guarantee shall be reduced or released by the Town
Council, or agent thereof, upon the submission of satisfactory evidence
that construction of such improvements has been completed in whole or
in part. Provided, further, that failure to meet all conditions shall
constitute cause to deny the issuance of any of the required use,
occupancy, or building permits, as may be appropriate.
Upon approval by the Town Council, proffered conditions shall become
a part of the zoning regulations applicable to the property, and are
enforceable under the same provisions for enforcement as all other
provisions in the Ordinance.
10. Substantial Conformance Required.
Upon approval, any site plan, subdivision plat or development plan
thereafter submitted for the development of the property in question shall
be in substantial conformity with the approved zoning and all proffered
statements, plans, profiles, elevations, or other demonstrative materials,
and no development shall be approved by any Town official in the
absence of said substantial conformity.
11 - 34 Updated March 2020
11. Substantial Conformance Defined.
For the purpose of this Section, substantial conformity mean that
conformity which leaves a reasonable margin for adjustment due to final
engineering data but conforms with the general nature of the
development, the specific uses, and the general layout depicted by the
plans, profiles, elevations, and other demonstrative materials presented
or proffered by the applicant. Determinations of substantial conformance
shall be made by the Zoning Administrator.
12. Guarantee for Construction of Improvements.
A guarantee, satisfactory to the Town Council, may be required in an
amount sufficient for and conditioned upon the construction of any
public improvements required by a rezoning request and the proffered
conditions. This guarantee may be reduced or released by the Council or
agent thereof, upon the submission of satisfactory evidence that the
construction of such improvements has been completed in whole or in
part. The guarantee shall be required no later than final site plan or
subdivision approval, whichever may occur earlier in time.
13. No Permits Shall Be Issued That Do Not Comply With Proffers.
Failure to meet or comply with any proffered conditions shall be
sufficient cause to deny the issuance of any site plan or subdivision
approvals, grading permits, zoning permits, building permits, or
certificates of occupancy as may be determined appropriate by the
Zoning Administrator. In addition to the other penalties appropriate for
violations of this Ordinance, failure to meet or comply with any
proffered condition shall be sufficient cause to deny the issuance of any
development approvals or permits relating to the land area which was the
subject of the conditional zoning. To this end, each application for a
development approval or permit shall include an affidavit by the
applicant that all applicable proffers have or will be complied with as
agreed upon at the time of rezoning. The burden shall be on the applicant
to verify that proposed development complies with all proffered
conditions.
14. Appeal of Proffer Decision.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Administrator
regarding any proffered condition may appeal such decision to the Town
Council. Such appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) calendar days from
11 - 35 Updated March 2020
the date of the decision being appealed by filing a notice of appeal with
the Zoning Administrator. Such notice shall be a written statement
specifying the grounds on which aggrieved and the complete basis for
the appeal. Upon receipt of the appeal notice, the Council shall take such
testimony as it deems appropriate and should render its decision within
sixty (60) calendar days after receipt of the appeal notice. The Town
Council may reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify the
decision of the Zoning Administrator.
15. Change of Approved Conditions.
Once proffered conditions have been approved, and there is cause for an
amendment which would not be in substantial conformity with them,
then an application shall be filed for an amendment of the proffered
conditions. Applications can be filed by any landowner subject to
conditions proffered pursuant to § 15.2-2297, 15.2-2298, 15.2-2303 or
15.2-2303.1 and Section 1 of this Article. Written notice of such
application shall be provided as prescribed in Section H of § 15.2-2204
to any landowner subject to such existing proffered conditions. The
approval of such amendment or variation by the Town Council shall not
in itself cause the use of any other property to be determined a nonconforming
use per Section 11-4.3 of this Ordinance.
If the amendment concerns an approved site development plan, such
application shall include the submission requirements for a site
development plan set forth in Section 11-3.7 of this Ordinance, except
that the Planning Director may waive any submission requirement if such
requirement is not necessary for an adequate review of the amendment
application. Such amendment shall be the subject of public hearing in
accordance with the requirements for a new application. No such
amendment or variation of any conditions proffered pursuant to § 15.2-
2297, 15.2-2298, 15.2-2303 or 15.2-2303.1 and Section 1 of this Article
until after public hearings before the Planning Commission and Town
Council are advertised pursuant to Article 11-3.2 of this Ordinance.
Where a landowner subject to the conditions noted above requests an
amendment to such proffered conditions and where such amendment
does not affect conditions of use or density, the Town may waive
requirements for public hearings.
11 - 36 Updated March 2020
11-3.10 Special Use Permits and Waivers
11-3.10.1 Authorization.
Uses listed in the district regulations as “permissible uses upon approval by
the Town Council” shall be reviewed and acted upon by the Planning
Commission and Town Council as provided in Section 11-3.2 of this
Ordinance.
Uses listed in the district regulations as “permissible uses upon approval by
the Town Council” shall be reviewed and acted upon by the Town Council
as provided in Section 11-3.10.10 of this Ordinance.
Special use permits may be granted to establish or construct uses or
structures which have the potential for a harmful impact upon the health,
safety, and welfare of the public upon finding that the use, with conditions,
will not have a deleterious impact, and will reflect the spirit and intent of
the Comprehensive Plan as well as this Ordinance.
In acting on a request for a special use permit, the Town Council shall
consider the impact of the requested special use.
Only those special use permits that are expressly authorized in a particular
zoning district, or elsewhere in this Ordinance may be approved, including
waivers where authorized. The Council may approve special use permits or
waivers subject to conditions on such permits that shall apply to the
property or use, regardless of any change in ownership.
11-3.10.2 Application.
Application for a special use permit shall be filed on the appropriate form
therefore as provided by the Zoning Administrator and in accordance with
the instructions which accompany the form. Special use permit applications
shall contain the same information as required for zoning amendment
applications set forth in Section 11-3.9. In addition, unless waived in part
by the Zoning Administrator, the applicant shall provide all of the
information, data, and studies needed to allow the Planning Commission
and Town Council, to reach conclusive evaluations, which shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
1 A Statement of Justification explaining the compatibility of the
proposed use with the existing and proposed land uses adjacent to and
in the vicinity of the site and any potential impacts on the environment
11 - 37 Updated March 2020
and on the neighborhood due to the proposed use intensity, number of
participants, acreage, hours of operation, traffic, lighting, and access,
as well as the matters set forth in section 11.3-11.3.
2 A vicinity map depicting the adjacent and nearby (within 1,000 feet)
land uses, streets and other data customarily incidental to a vicinity
map.
3 A proposed site development plan indicating the location of the
anticipated structures, setback lines, street pattern, parking provisions,
a screening plan, and common open space if applicable. Such plans
shall be contained on sheets measuring a minimum of 18" X 24" and a
maximum of 36" X 24".
4 An analysis of the impact on the Town's transportation network and the
ability of adjacent streets and intersections to efficiently and safely
move the volume of traffic generated by the development, along with
estimates of cost and means of providing improvements required to
service the proposed special use.
5 An analysis of the impact on the Town's community facilities including
estimates of costs and means of providing the additional community
facilities which will be needed to serve the proposed special use.
Community facilities include, but shall not be limited to, sewage
disposal facilities and systems, solid waste disposal facilities and
systems, water supply facilities and systems, storm drainage facilities
and systems, and electrical utility facilities and systems.
6 An analysis of the ability of the Town to provide police and fire
protection to the proposed special use.
7 The proposed configuration and intensity of lighting facilities to be
arranged in such a manner to protect the streets and neighboring
properties from direct glare or hazardous interference.
8 Noise impact and abatement studies to determine potential impact on
adjoining properties and neighborhoods.
9 The delineation of any necessary screening for any uses or structural
features deemed to be incompatible with the objectives of this Article,
the remainder of this Zoning Ordinance, or the Comprehensive Plan
including walls, fences, plantings, and/or other enclosures. Other
landscaping to enhance the effectiveness of the screening and to insure
the compatibility of use may also be required.
10 The delineation of screening and buffering of all parking areas will be
required in accordance with a landscaping plan. Parking areas forward
of the established building setback line will be prohibited.
11 The delineation of major trees on the site. Except to protect the public
safety, avoid property loss, or provide for required parking, all major
trees forward of the building setback line may be required for
11 - 38 Updated March 2020
preservation if their removal would diminish the character of the
neighborhood.
11-3.10.3. Evaluation Criteria; Issues for Consideration
In considering a Special Use Permit application, the following factors
should be considered. The applicant also shall address these factors in its
statement of justification:
1. Whether the proposed Special Use Permit is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan.
2. Whether the proposed Special Use Permit will adequately provide for
safety from fire hazards and have effective measures of fire control.
3. The level and impact of any noise emanating from the site, including
that generated by the proposed use, in relation to the uses in the
immediate area.
4. The glare or light that may be generated by the proposed use in relation
to uses in the immediate area.
5. The proposed location, lighting and type of signs in relation to the
proposed use, uses in the area, and the sign requirements of this
Ordinance.
6. The compatibility of the proposed use with other existing or proposed
uses in the neighborhood, and adjacent parcels.
7. The location and area footprint with dimensions (all drawn to scale),
nature and height of existing or proposed buildings, structures, walls,
and fences on the site and in the neighborhood.
8. The nature and extent of existing or proposed landscaping, screening
and buffering on the site and in the neighborhood.
9. The timing and phasing of the proposed development and the duration
of the proposed use.
10. Whether the proposed Special Use Permit will result in the
preservation or destruction, loss or damage of any significant
topographic or physical, natural, scenic, archaeological or historic
feature.
11. Whether the proposed Special Use Permit at the specified location will
contribute to or promote the welfare or convenience of the public.
12. The traffic expected to be generated by the proposed use, the adequacy
of access roads and the vehicular and pedestrian circulation elements
(on and off-site) of the proposed use, all in relation to the public's
interest in pedestrian and vehicular safety, efficient traffic movement
and access in case of fire or catastrophe.
13. Whether the proposed use will facilitate orderly and safe road
development and transportation.
11 - 39 Updated March 2020
14. Whether, in the case of existing structures proposed to be converted to
uses requiring a Special Use Permit, the structures meet all code
requirements of the Town of Warrenton.
15. Whether the proposed Special Use Permit will be served adequately by
essential public facilities, services and utilities.
16. The effect of the proposed Special Use Permit on environmentally
sensitive land or natural features, wildlife habitat and vegetation, water
quality and air quality.
17. Whether the proposed Special Use Permit use will provide desirable
employment and enlarge the tax base by encouraging economic
development activities consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
18. The effect of the proposed Special Use Permit use in enhancing
affordable shelter opportunities for residents of the Town, if applicable.
19. The location, character, and size of any outdoor storage.
20. The proposed use of open space.
21. The location of any major floodplain and steep slopes.
22. The location and use of any existing non-conforming uses and
structures.
23. The location and type of any fuel and fuel storage.
24. The location and use of any anticipated accessory uses and structures.
25. The area of each proposed use.
26. The proposed days/hours of operation.
27. The location and screening of parking and loading spaces and/or areas.
28. The location and nature of any proposed security features and
provisions.
29. The number of employees.
30. The location of any existing and/or proposed adequate on and off-site
infrastructure.
31. Any anticipated odors which may be generated by the uses on site.
32. Refuse and service areas.
11-3.10.4. Conditions and Restrictions
In approving a Special Use Permit, the Town Council may impose such
conditions, safeguards and restrictions as may be necessary to avoid,
minimize or mitigate any potentially adverse or injurious effect of such
special uses upon other properties in the neighborhood, and to carry out the
general purpose and intent of this Ordinance. Conditions and restrictions
may include, but are not limited to, those related to fencing, planting or
other landscaping, additional set backs from property lines, location and
arrangement of lighting, setting of reasonable time limitations and other
reasonable requirements deemed necessary to mitigate the impacts of the
use and safeguard the interests of the public. The Council may require a
11 - 40 Updated March 2020
guarantee or bond to ensure that conditions imposed will be complied with.
All required conditions shall be set out in the documentation approving the
Special Use Permit.
11-3.10.5. Period of Validity
As a condition of approval, a special use permit may be granted for a
specific period of time with expiration of the approval to occur at the
termination of a stated period. In such case, an extension may be granted
prior to expiration by the original approving body, upon written
application, without notice or hearing. After expiration, no extension may
be granted without complying with the requirements for an initial
application for a special use permit unless a qualified application for
renewal is actively under consideration by the approving body.
11-3.10.6. Staff Review
Wherever a use or structure is listed either as a permissible use subject to
approval of a special use permit, application shall be made to the Planning
Director who shall prepare a report and refer such application to the
Planning Commission for those uses that are listed as permissible upon
approval by the Town Council, and to the Board of Zoning Appeals for
those uses listed as permissible upon approval by the Board. Application
for a special use permit shall be filed, containing such material and be
processed in the same manner as for zoning amendments as provided for in
Section 11-3.10. A Special Use Permit may be submitted in conjunction
with a zoning map amendment application.
11-3.10.7. For Uses to be Acted Upon by the Town Council, as listed in Article 3
Upon review of the application and supporting data, the Planning
Commission shall make its recommendation to the Town Council as to
whether the application complies with the special use provisions in the
particular district and the Comprehensive Plan, including verification that
the use is specifically authorized within the district, and whether it should
be approved or denied.
Before submitting its recommendation to Town Council, the Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing which may be a joint public
hearing with the Town Council, after notice as required by § 15.2-2204 of
the Code of Virginia, as amended. Following the public hearing, the
Commission shall forward its recommendation to the Town Council.
11 - 41 Updated March 2020
11-3.10.8 Town Council Review and Hearing.
For those uses that are listed as permissible upon approval by the Town
Council, the Town Council shall consider the recommendations of the
Town Planning Commission before granting or denying approval of a
special use permit. Before rendering a decision on a particular special use
permit, the Town Council shall hold a public hearing, which may be a joint
public hearing with the Planning Commission, after notice as required by §
15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia, as amended.
11-3.10.9 Modifications to the Application or Conditions.
For those uses that are listed as permissible upon approval by the Town
Council, after the Planning Commission has made its recommendation to
the Town Council, should the application be modified, or additional
conditions be agreed to or offered by the applicant that results in a more
intense use or higher density or alters conditions that were intended to
mitigate the impact of the development as determined by the Zoning
Administrator, then a second public hearing shall be held by the Planning
Commission before the modified application can be heard by the Town
Council. The applicant shall be responsible for paying any additional
advertising fees required for a subsequent public hearings before the
Planning Commission and the Town Council. The Town Council may still
impose reasonable conditions on the applicant, in accord with § 15.2-2286
of the Code of Virginia, as amended.
However, should additional information or modified conditions be
submitted by the applicant after the Planning Commission has made its
recommendation to the Town Council, which modifications or conditions
were discussed at the public hearing before the Planning Commission, then
a second public hearing before the Planning Commission shall not be
required.
11-3.10.10 For Uses to be Acted Upon by the Town Council
Upon review of the application and supporting data, and before rendering a
decision on a particular special use permit, the town Council shall hold a
public hearing after notice as required by § 15.2-2204 of the Code of
Virginia, as amended, and subsequently shall determine whether the
application complies with the special use provisions in the particular
district and the Comprehensive Plan, including verification that the use is
specifically authorized within the district, and whether it should be
approved or denied.
11 - 42 Updated March 2020
11-3.10.11 Construction Already Commenced.
Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the plans or
construction of any building or structure subject to a vested right prior to
the effective date of this Ordinance.
11-3.11 Variances
11-3.11.1. Variances Determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals
1. Variances Authorized
a) The Board of Zoning Appeals shall grant a variance if the
applicant proves, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the
strict application of the terms of the Ordinance would
unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property or that the
granting of the variance would alleviate a hardship due to the
physical condition relating to the property or improvements
thereon at the time of the effective date of the Ordinance. For
properties located within the Floodplain District, the additional
factors and limitations contained in Section 3-5.1.8 of this
Ordinance shall also apply.
b) No variance shall be considered except after notice and
hearing as required by §15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia as
amended.
c) The concurring vote of the majority of the BZA shall be
required to authorize a variance.
2. Standards for Variances
In granting a variance, the BZA may impose such conditions regarding
the location, character, and other features of the proposed structure or
use as it may deem necessary in the public interest and may require a
guarantee or bond to ensure that the conditions imposed are being, and
will continue to be, complied with. Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, general or special, the property upon which a
property owner has been granted a variance shall be treated as
conforming for all purposes under state law and local Ordinance;
however, the structure permitted by the variance may not be expanded
unless the expansion is within an area of the site or part of the structure
for which no variance is required under the Ordinance. Where the
expansion is proposed within an area of the site or part of the structure
11 - 43 Updated March 2020
for which a variance is required, the approval of an additional variance
shall be required. No variance in the strict application of any provision
of this Ordinance shall be authorized by the BZA except upon the
following findings:
a) The property interest for which the variance is being requested
was acquired in good faith and any hardship was not created
by the applicant for the variance;
b) The granting of the variance will not be of substantial
detriment to the adjacent property and nearby properties in the
proximity of that geographical area;
c) The condition or situation of the property concerned is not of
so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably
practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be
adopted as an amendment to the Ordinance;
d) The granting of the variance does not result in a use that is not
otherwise permitted on such property or a change in the zoning
classification of the property; and
e) The relief or remedy sought by the variance application is not
available through a special use permit process that is
authorized in the Ordinance or the process for modification to
the Zoning Ordinance at the time of the filing of the variance
application.
11-3.11.2. Unauthorized Variances
1. No variance shall be authorized that would permit the establishment of
any use not otherwise permitted in the zoning district under the specific
provisions of this Ordinance.
2. No variance shall be authorized that would result in an increase in
density from that permitted by the applicable zoning district
regulations.
3. No variance shall be authorized that would relate to nonconforming
uses.
4. No variance shall be authorized that would reduce the amount of
off-street parking space required by Article 7.
5. No variance shall be authorized that would relate to signs.
6. No variance shall be authorized in cases where the applicant,
subsequent to the effective date of this Ordinance, has purchased a
portion of a larger parcel, which portion has an area or width less than
required by the provisions of this Ordinance at the time of such
purchase or which portion has unusual physical characteristics, that are
11 - 44 Updated March 2020
set forth as the basis for the application for a variance, which would
not exist if such portion had not been detached by such purchase from
the larger parcel of which it was a part.
7. No variance shall be authorized that would permit the establishment of
any use not otherwise permitted in a floodplain.
8. No variance shall be authorized merely for the purpose of convenience
or economic hardship.
11-3.11.3. Procedures for Variances
1. Application for Variance
Pursuant to provisions of this article and §15.2-2309 of the Code of
Virginia, as amended, any person seeking a variance from the
application of regulations of this chapter, shall first submit his proposal
to the Zoning Administrator on a form to be provided by the Zoning
Administrator, including therewith satisfactory evidence that any
delinquent real estate taxes owed to the county which have been
properly assessed against the subject property have been paid, and all
plans and information relating to the application required by the board
of zoning appeals pursuant to §15.2-2310 of the Code of Virginia. The
application shall be transmitted promptly to the secretary of the Board
of Zoning Appeals, who shall place the matter on the docket to be
acted upon by the board.
The Zoning Administrator shall also transmit a copy of the application
to the local Planning Commission which may send a recommendation
to the Board or appear as a party at the hearing.
2. Decision on Variance Application
Upon receipt of an application or appeal, the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing of such application or appeal
in conformance with §15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia.
The proposal shall then be advertised pursuant to provisions of §15.2-
2204 of the Code of Virginia prior to public hearing by the Board of
Zoning Appeals. The Zoning Administrator shall also transmit a copy
of the application to the Planning Commission, which may send a
recommendation to the Board or appear as a party at the hearing.
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall render a decision on any
application submitted to it within sixty (60) days after the date of the
11 - 45 Updated March 2020
hearing thereon.
3. Burden of Applicant
The applicant for a variance shall bear the burden of producing evidence
to support the required findings and to establish that the requested
variance satisfies all standards for a Variance.
4. Withdrawal of Application
An application or appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be
withdrawn by the applicant or appellant at any time prior to the
deadline for cancellation of the newspaper advertisement for the first
public hearing. After such deadline, an application or appeal may be
withdrawn only with the permission of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
An application or appeal which is not withdrawn pursuant to this
subsection shall be either granted or denied on its merits.
5. Re-Application
If any application is denied by the Board of Zoning Appeals on its
merits, no application requesting the same relief with respect to all or
part of the same property shall be considered by the Board within
twelve (12) months after the date of such denial.
11-3.12 Appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals
11-3.12.1 When Appeals May be Taken
1. An appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the
municipality affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator or
from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by any
other administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of this
article or any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto.
2. Such appeal shall be made within thirty (30) days after the decision
appealed from by filing with the Zoning Administrator, and with the
Board, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning
Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken. An
appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from unless the Zoning Administrator certified to the Board that by
reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would in his opinion
11 - 46 Updated March 2020
cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings
shall not be stayed otherwise, than by a restraining order granted by the
Board or by a court of record, on application and on notice to the
Zoning Administrator and for good cause shown.
11-3.12.2 Appeal Procedure
1. Appeals shall be filed with the Board of Zoning Appeals in care of the
Zoning Administrator, who shall provide a copy of the appeal to the
secretary of the Board, and a third copy provided to the individual,
official, department, or agency concerned, if any.
2. Appeals requiring an advertised public hearing shall be accompanied
by cash payments to the Town in accordance with the Fee Schedule as
set by Town Council by resolution.
3. Upon receipt of an application or appeal, the Board shall fix a
reasonable time for the hearing, give public notice thereof in accord
with § 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia, as well as due notice to the
parties in interest.
4. The Board shall make its decision within ninety days of the filing of
the application or appeal.
5. In exercising its powers the Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify, an order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from. The concurring vote of a majority of the membership of
the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision or determination of an administrative officer or to decide in
favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass
under the Ordinance or to effect any variance from the Ordinance.
6. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and other official
actions which shall be filed in the office of the board and shall be
public records. The chairman of the board, or in his absence the acting
chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses.
11-3.12.3 Withdraw of Appeal
An application or appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be
withdrawn by the applicant/appellant at any time prior to the deadline for
cancellation of the newspaper advertisement provided for in this article.
After such deadline, an application or appeal may be withdrawn only with
the permission of the Board. An application or appeal which is not
withdrawn pursuant to this subsection shall be either granted or denied on
the merits by the Board, either in whole or in part.
11 - 47 Updated March 2020
11-3.12.4 Court Petition
1. Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of
the Board of Zoning Appeals, or any taxpayer or any officer,
department, board, or bureau of the Town may present to the circuit
court of the county a petition specifying the grounds on which
aggrieved within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision in the
office of the Board.
2. Upon the presentation of such petition, the court shall allow a writ of
certiorari to review the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals and
shall prescribe therein the time within which a return thereto must be
made and served upon the realtor’s attorney, which shall not be less
than ten (10) days and may be extended by the court. The allowances
of the writ shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from,
but the court may, on application, on notice to the Board, and on due
cause shown, grant a restraining order.
3. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not be required to return the
original papers acted upon by it, but it shall be sufficient to return
certified or sworn copies thereof or of such portions thereof as may be
called for by such writ. The return shall concisely set forth such other
facts as may be pertinent and material to show the grounds of the
decision appealed from and shall be verified.
4. If, upon the hearing, it shall appear to the court that testimony is
necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take evidence
or appoint a commissioner to take such evidence as it may direct and
report the same to the court with his findings of fact and conclusions of
law, which shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the
determination of the court shall be made. The court may reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision brought up for
review.
5. Costs shall not be allowed against the Board, unless it shall appear to
the court that it acted in bad faith or with malice in making the decision
appealed from.
11-3.13 Sign Review
Signs shall be reviewed in accordance with Article 6. The timing and application type used for
the review of signs shall be as specified in Article 6-4.
11 - 48 Updated March 2020
11-4 Non-Conforming Uses and Structures
11-4.1 Purpose
The purpose of this section is to regulate and limit the development and continued
existence of uses, structures, and lots legally established prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance which do not conform to the requirements of this Ordinance. Many
nonconformities may continue, but the provisions of this subsection are designed to
curtail substantial investment in nonconformities and to bring about their eventual
improvement to a conforming status or elimination in order to preserve the integrity of
this Ordinance and the desired character of the Town and to protect the public health and
safety.
Any nonconforming use, structure, or lot which lawfully existed as of the effective date
of this Ordinance and which remains nonconforming, and any use, structure, or lot which
has become nonconforming as a result of the adoption of this Ordinance or any
subsequent reclassification of zoning districts or other amendment to this Ordinance, may
be continued or maintained only in accordance with the terms of this section. The
limitations of this section shall not apply to structures or lots whose nonconforming
features are the subject of a variance that has been granted by the Board of Zoning
Appeals or by the Zoning Administrator, or a modification or condition that was
approved by the Town Council.
It is the intent of this chapter to abide by the letter and spirit of the provisions of § 15.2-
2307 of the Code of Virginia. It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconformities
shall not be enlarged, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other
structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
Nonconforming uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses
in the districts involved.
11-4.2 Continuation
11-4.2.1 If at any time after the enactment of this Ordinance a lawful use of land and/or
structures exists which would not be permitted by this chapter, the use may be
continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful. A use of land or use of
structure established in violation of contemporary zoning regulations is illegal,
not nonconforming.
11-4.2.2 If any change in title of possession or renewal of a lease of any such lot or
structure occurs, the use existing may be continued.
11-4.2.3 If any nonconforming use (structure or activity) is discontinued for a period
exceeding two (2) years, after the enactment of this Ordinance, it shall be
11 - 49 Updated March 2020
deemed abandoned and any subsequent use shall conform to the requirements
of this Ordinance.
11-4.2.4 Whenever a nonconforming structure, lot, or activity has been changed to a
more restricted nonconforming use, such existing use may only be changed to a
use of the same or less restricted category or to a less non-conforming activity
as identified in the zoning district within which it is located.
11-4.3 Non-Conforming Uses
11-4.3.1 Expansion
No nonconforming use shall be enlarged, increased or extended to occupy a
greater area of land than was occupied on the effective date of this provision to
the Ordinance, unless such enlargement does not result in an increase in
nonconformity or results in a change to a use permitted in the district.
11-4.3.2 Discontinuance
If any nonconforming use of land and/or structure ceases for any reason for a
period of more than two (2) years, any subsequent use of such land and/or
structure shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the
district in which such land is located.
11-4.3.3 Superseded
When any nonconforming use, or nonconforming structure and use in
combination, is superseded by a permitted use and/or structure, the use shall
thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and no nonconforming use
and/or structure shall thereafter be resumed.
11-4.3.4 Moving
No such nonconforming use and/or structure shall be moved in whole or in part
to any portion of the land or parcel other than that occupied by such use and/or
structure at the effective date or amendment of this ordinance, unless such
move results in decreasing the degree of nonconformity or results in
conformity with the requirements for the district.
11-4.3.5 Additional Uses
No additional uses which would be prohibited in the district involved shall be
allowed.
11 - 50 Updated March 2020
11-4.3.6 Special Use Permits
Any lawful existing use which is permissible as a special permit use in a
district under the terms of this Ordinance shall not be deemed a nonconforming
use in such district, but shall, with written notification and proof to the Zoning
Administrator, be considered a lawful conforming use in that district.
11-4.4 Non-Conforming Structures and Buildings
Non-conforming signs are regulated in Article 6-16 unless otherwise noted.
11-4.4.1 Repairs and Maintenance
On any building or structure devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming
use, work may be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months on
ordinary repairs or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures,
wiring, or plumbing, to an extent-not exceeding twenty (20) percent of the
current replacement value of the structure provided that the cubic content of the
structure as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this Ordinance
shall not be increased. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to prevent
the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any structure or part thereof
declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety,
upon order of such official.
11-4.4.2 Expansion or Enlargement
A nonconforming structure to be extended or enlarged shall conform with the
provisions of this Ordinance, except as provided for herein. No nonconforming
use and/or structure shall be enlarged, increased or extended to occupy a
greater area of land than twenty-five percent (25%) more than was occupied on
the date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance unless such enlargement
does not result in an increase in nonconformity or results in a change to a use
permitted in the district.
11-4.4.2 Restoration or Replacement
1. If a nonconforming use or structure is destroyed or damaged in any manner
to the extent that the cost of restoration to its condition before the
occurrence shall exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the cost of
reconstructing the entire structure, it shall be restored only if it complies
with the requirements of this Ordinance.
2. Where a conforming structure devoted to a nonconforming activity, or
where a nonconforming structure is damaged less than seventy-five (75)
11 - 51 Updated March 2020
percent of the cost of reconstructing the entire structure, either may be
repaired or restored, provided any such repair or restoration is started
within twelve (12) months and completed within eighteen (18) months
from the date of partial destruction.
3. Historic structures designated as contributing structures to an Historic
District adopted by the Town Council shall be exempt from the limitations
of Sections 11-4.4.2.1 and 11-4.4.2.2.
4. The cost of land or any factors other than the cost of the structure are
excluded in the determination of cost of restoration for any structure or
activity devoted to a nonconforming use.
5. If a nonconforming structure or portion thereof containing a
nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of
repairs and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized official to
be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not
thereafter be restored, repaired, rebuilt or used, except in conformity with
the regulations of the district in which it is located.
11-4.4.3 Pre-existing Setback
Any structure which existed on the date of adoption of this Ordinance which is
nonconforming solely due to a setback or yard requirement imposed by this
Ordinance may be enlarged, increased, extended, repaired or replaced so long
as any such improvements do not result in an increase in the degree of
nonconformity.
11-4.4.4 Illegal Structures
No structure that fails to conform with the requirements of this chapter shall be
erected.
11-4.5 Non-Conforming Lots
11-4.5.1 Use
Any lot of record at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance which is less in
area or width than the minimum required by this Ordinance may be used when
the requirements regarding setbacks, side, and rear yards are met.
11-4.5.2 Changes in District Boundaries
Whenever the boundaries of a district are changed by amendment of this
Ordinance, any uses of land, legal structures or buildings which become
nonconforming as a result of such change shall become subject to the most
11 - 52 Updated March 2020
current provisions of this Ordinance. Such affected use, lot or structure shall be
accorded nonconforming use, lot and/or structure status as may be appropriate
under the terms of this Ordinance.
11-4.5.3 Division, Boundary Line Adjustment
No lot or parcel or portion thereof shall be used or sold in a manner reducing
compliance with lot width or other requirements established by this chapter,
nor shall any division be made which creates a lot with width or area below the
requirements stated in this chapter.
Notwithstanding the provisions of the paragraph above, boundary line
adjustments may be permitted between nonconforming lots, or between a
conforming and a nonconforming lot, provided that the Zoning Administrator
determines that the degree of nonconformity for any lot resulting from such
boundary line adjustment is not increased due to such adjustment.
11-4.5.4 Condemnation
Any lawfully created lot which, by reason of condemnation for alignment,
realignment of a federal or state road, has been reduced in size to any area less
than that required by this Ordinance shall be considered a lawful nonconforming
lot of record subject to the provisions set forth in this section.
11-4.5.5 Violations Are Not Nonconformities
Uses or structures established in violation of zoning regulations are lawful nonconformities.
The burden of proof shall be upon the owner of the property to
establish the lawful nonconforming status of a claimed non-conforming use.
11-4.5.6 Accessory Uses/Buildings, Signs
A lawful nonconforming use of a structure, a lawful nonconforming use of land
or a lawful nonconforming use of a structure and land in combination shall not
be continued, extended or enlarged by use or establishment of either an
accessory use or building or by attachment on a building or premises of
additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises.
11-5 Enforcement and Penalties
11-5.1 Conformance to Provision. All departments, officials, and public employees of the Town
of Warrenton which are vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall
conform to the provisions of this Ordinance. They shall issue permits for uses, buildings,
11 - 53 Updated March 2020
or purposes only when they are in harmony with the provisions of this Ordinance. Any
such permit, if issued in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance, shall be null and
void.
11-5.2. Zoning Administrator
Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person
may file a written violation complaint. The Zoning Administrator shall properly record
such complaint, investigate it and take appropriate action thereon if warranted.
Upon his becoming aware of any violation of any provision of this chapter, the Zoning
Administrator shall serve notice of such violation on the person committing or permitting
such violation. If such violation has not ceased within thirty (30) days or such other
reasonable time set by the Zoning Administrator and specified in the notice, he shall
institute such legal action as may be necessary to remedy and terminate the violation.
The Zoning Administrator shall order the discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings
or structures, removal of illegal building or structures or of illegal additions, alterations or
structural changes and discontinuance of any illegal work being done, or shall take any
other action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with, or to prevent violation
of, its provisions.
Notice of a zoning violation or a written order of the Zoning Administrator shall include
a statement informing the recipient that he may have a right to appeal the notice of a
zoning violation or a written order within thirty (30) days, and that the decision shall be
final and unappealable if not appealed within thirty (30) days.
11-5.3 Violation of Provisions.
Any person, firm, or corporation, whether as principal, owner, lessee, agent, employee or
otherwise, who violates, causes, or permits the violation of any of the provisions of this
Ordinance shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. Such person, firm, or corporation
shall be deemed to be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which
any portion of any violation of this Ordinance is committed, continued, or permitted by
such person, firm, or corporation, and shall be punishable as herein provided.
11-5.4 Recourse for Unlawful Use.
The Zoning Administrator of the Town of Warrenton may institute any appropriate action
of proceedings to prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
repair, or conversion of any building or structure, or the unlawful use of land; to restrain,
correct, or abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure, or
land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about such premises.
11 - 54 Updated March 2020
The remedies provided for in this section are cumulative and not exclusive and shall be in
addition to any other remedies provided by law.
12 - 1 Updated March 2020
Article 12 Definitions
Amended by Town Council: February 12, 2013
June 14, 2016
August 9, 2016
December 11, 2018
April 9, 2019
September 10, 2019
December 10, 2019
March 10, 2020
For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain words and terms are used in a limited or special sense as defined
herein. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes plural and the plural
singular; the word "structure" includes "building"; the word "used" includes arranges, designed,
constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased, or intended to be used; and the word "shall" is mandatory
and directory.
Any word, term or phrase used in this ordinance not defined below shall have the meaning ascribed to the
word in the most recent edition of Webster’s Unabridged Dictionary, unless in the opinion of the Zoning
Administrator, established customs or practices of the Town of Warrenton justify a different or additional
meaning.
A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P | R | S | T | U | V | W | Y | Z
Abutting: Having a common border with, or being separated from such a common border by a
right-of-way, alley, or easement.
Abandoned Motor Vehicle: A motor vehicle, trailer, or semi-trailer or part of a motor vehicle, trailer, or
semi-trailer that is inoperable and is left unattended on public property, other than an interstate highway or
primary highway, for more than forty-eight hours.
Accent: Giving prominence to one or more elements of site design.
Accessory building: (see Accessory Structure)
Accessory Dwelling Unit: A subordinate dwelling unit in a main building or accessory building for use as
a complete, independent living facility with provision within the accessory dwelling for cooking, eating,
sanitation, and sleeping. Such a dwelling is an accessory use to the main dwelling.
Accessory Structure: A subordinate structure customarily incidental to and located upon the same lot
occupied by the main use or building, including, but not limited to, private garage, carport, parking space
other than for residential, swimming pool, tennis court, storage or utility building, decks, balconies,
porticos, porches, temporary healthcare structures, and living quarters for household employees or
caretakers. Accessory structures can be attached or detached, depending upon their use and construction.
Accessory Use: A use clearly incidental and subordinate to, and on the same lot as, a principal use. (also
see Accessory Dwelling Units; Home Occupation).
Acre: A unit of land measure containing 43,560 square feet.
Acreage: A parcel of land, regardless of area, described by metes and bounds which is not a numbered lot
on any recorded subdivision plat.
12 - 2 Updated March 2020
Active Recreation: (see Recreation, Active)
Active Recreation Area or Facilities: (see Recreation Area or Facilities, Active)
Administrator: The Zoning Administrator for the Town of Warrenton. However, see also Administrator,
VSMP under Stormwater Management, and Certified Program Administrator under Erosion and Sediment
Control. The Zoning Administrator is an Agent of the governing body and its associated boards and
commissions and is appointed by the Town Manager or Community Development Director.
Agriculture: The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, non-intensive livestock, horticulture, and forestry,
but not including any agricultural industry or business, such as packing plants, dairies, mills, kennels,
commercial stables, intensive agriculture as defined herein, or similar uses.
Agriculture, intensive: The raising, breeding and keeping of animals in concentrated, confined conditions,
which may include such operations as swine, veal, sheep; houses and pens for poultry or other fowl; feed
lots for beef, dairy cattle, swine, sheep and other animals; livestock markets and pet farms.
Agricultural pen: (see Animal Kennel)
Alley: A permanent service way, with a minimum width of twenty (20) feet, providing a secondary means
of vehicular access to an abutting property, and not intended for general traffic circulation.
Alteration: Any change, addition, or modification in the total floor area, use, adaptability, or external
appearance of an existing structure.
Amusement Arcade: A building or part of a building in which five or more pinball machines, videogames,
or other similar player-operated amusement devices are maintained.
Animal Hospital or Clinic: Establishment where treatment is received and no activity is conducted outside
the main building. Kennels are not by definition included.
Animal Kennel: An establishment licensed to operate a facility housing dogs, cats, or other household pets
and where grooming, breeding, boarding, training, or selling of animals is conducted as a business.
Animal Kennel, Private: Any building, buildings, or land designed or arranged for the care of more than
three dogs or more than three cats belonging to the owner of the principal use, kept for the purposes of
show, hunting, or as pets.
Apartment House: A residential building located on a single lot used or intended to be used as the
residence of three (3) or more families living independently of each other, typically sharing a common
entrance and hallway for access to individual units, not including row or townhouses (also see Dwelling:
Multifamily).
Apartment: A single dwelling unit typically sharing a common entrance and hallway for access within an
Apartment House or within a larger, mostly non-residential structure.
Applicant: Any person submitting an application for a permit or requesting issuance of a permit, of any
type, under this Ordinance.
12 - 3 Updated March 2020
Applicant-Owner: An individual, corporation, proprietor, trust, trustee, joint venture, partnership, or other
entity having legal title to any tract of land or parcel of land to be developed, whether or not they have given
their power of attorney to one of their group, or another individual or entity to act on their behalf in planning,
negotiation, or in representing or executing the requirements of the ordinances of the Town of Warrenton.
Appraiser: A person who earns his livelihood from the appraisal of real property, as contrasted with the
selling of property, and who meets the standards for membership in the American Institute of Real Estate
Appraisers.
ARB: Architectural Review Board.
Arborist or "urban forester": a person trained in arboriculture, forestry, landscape architecture,
horticulture, or related fields and experienced in the conservation and preservation of native and ornamental
trees.
Arborist, Certified: An arborist who is certified by the International Society of Arboriculture.
Architect: A person who is recognized by the Commonwealth of Virginia and who is registered with the
State Department of Professional and Occupational Registration, or registered with a like body in another
state, as a licensed architect.
Architectural Unit: A visually distinct mass that is part of a larger structure or a collection of structures
and is either near the other structures or may be attached by a smaller enclosed structural element such as
a gallery, an arcade or other such element.
Area, Gross Leasable: Inside square footage of a building including retail, wholesale, and storage space,
exclusive of halls, closets, elevator shafts, toilets, etc., and any outside display.
Assembly Hall: A building or part of a building intended and designed for the conduct of meetings,
presentations, and the like.
Assisted Living Facility: A place, establishment, or institution, operated for the maintenance or care of
four or more adults who are aged, infirm, or disabled and who are cared for in a primarily residential setting,
in accord with § 63.2-100 of the Code of Virginia. The level of service provided for these adults shall
include at least moderate assistance with the activities of daily living.
Atrium House: A one-story, single-family, attached dwelling shaped to surround or partly surround a
private open space called an atrium, it being a type of townhouse unit (also see Townhouse).
Attached Accessory Structure: An attached subordinate structure customarily incidental to and located
upon the same lot occupied by the main use or building, including but not limited to a private garage,
carport, balcony and deck.
Automobile body shop: A business limited to the repair and reconstruction of the exterior shells of
automobiles and light trucks, including sanding, painting, and refinishing; but may also include frame,
engine and other mechanical work in the repair of a vehicle.
Automobile Graveyard: Any lot or place which is exposed to the weather upon which more than five
inoperable motor vehicles of any kind, are placed.
12 - 4 Updated March 2020
Automobile Sales: On-site sales, conducted on a regular or ongoing basis as a commercial enterprise, either
retail or wholesale, of automobiles and/or light trucks and vans, but not heavy trucks or equipment.
Awning: A structure made of cloth, metal, or other material affixed to a building in such a manner that the
structure may be raised or retracted to a flat position against the building, but not including a canopy or
marquee.
Banks and Savings and Loan Offices: The retail offices of financial services institutions providing walkin
service to customers. Drive-through facilities are a separately designated and regulated component.
Basement: A story having part but not more than one-half of its height below grade. A basement shall be
counted as a story for the purpose of height regulations, if it is used for business purposes, or for dwelling
purposes by other than a janitor employed on the premises.
Bed and Breakfast Facility: A private residence, or portion thereof, where short-term lodging is provided
for compensation (no longer than 14 consecutive days) and meals may be provided, to guests only. The
operator of the facility shall live on the premises or in an adjacent premises on the same lot. Up to four (4)
guest rooms without cooking facilities may be provided. [also see Tourist Home; also see Inn]
Bedroom: A room in a dwelling unit planned and intended for sleeping, separable from other rooms by a
door.
Berm: A continuous bank of earth designed and placed to block or partially obscure elements of a site (such
as a parking area) or of a building (such as a loading dock). Berms typically range in height from two (2)
to six (6) feet, with width-to-height ratios of from 2:1 to 5:1. Berms are often used in combination with
shrubbery and trees.
Best Management Practices (BMP): A schedule of activities, prohibitions, or practices, including both
structural and nonstructural practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices; devices,
methods, or structures, including erosion and sediment control and stormwater designs, to prevent or reduce
the pollution of surface waters and groundwater systems from the impacts of land-disturbing activities that
are put into place during site development to protect Town infrastructure, adjacent properties, water bodies,
streams, and the natural landscape during construction. After construction, SWM/BMP(s) are the practices
that are integrated into a development that control and mitigate the quality and quantity of stormwater runoff
from the site after development is completed. These practices need to be maintained over the life of the
development or until it is returned to its natural, undeveloped state.
Block: That land abutting on one side of a street extending to the rear lot lines (or, for parcels of land
extending through to another street, to a line midway between the two streets) and lying between the nearest
intersecting and intercepting streets and boundary of any railroad right-of-way, park, school ground, or
unsubdivided acreage or center line of any drainage channel twenty (20) or more feet in width.
Boardinghouse: A building that is the primary residence of the owner where meals and lodging are
provided, for compensation, on a permanent basis for up to ten (10) individuals not related by blood,
marriage, or adoption to the owner.
Broadcasting Station: The studios and/or facilities for radio or television broadcasting.
12 - 5 Updated March 2020
Buffer, Buffer Yard: A landscaped area intended to separate and partially obstruct the view of two (2)
adjacent land uses or properties from one another or from the roadway or to block noise or other nuisances;
land areas reserved for the purpose of providing screening and separation from adjacent, different land uses.
Building: A structure having one (1) or more stories and a roof, designed primarily for support and shelter
of persons, animals, or property of any kind. When a structure is divided into separate parts by fire walls,
each having separate plumbing, electrical, heating, drainage, and ventilation, each part so divided shall be
deemed a separate structure.
Building Area: The area of the horizontal section of the buildings taken at their greatest outside dimensions
on the ground floor including all attached structures and covered porches.
Building, Governmental: Any building owned by, operated by and/or leased to a government agency,
except utilities, which are defined separately.
Building, Height of: The vertical distance measured from the level of the curb or the established curb grade
opposite the middle of the front of the structure to the highest point of the roof if a flat roof; to the deck line
of a mansard roof; or to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof.
For buildings set back more than ten (10) feet from the street line, the height shall be measured from the
average elevation of the ground surface along the front of the building.
Building Line: The line which establishes the distance of a structure from any lot boundary line.
Building, Main: The principal structure or one of the principal buildings on a lot, or the building or one of
the principal buildings housing the principal use on the lot.
Building Official: The official appointed by the Town Manager to administer and enforce the Building
Code.
Building, Public: (see Building, Governmental)
Business and Professional Office: A building or portion of a building wherein services are performed
involving predominantly administrative, professional, or clerical operations.
Business and office supply establishments: Retail or wholesale distribution of office materials, goods and
small equipment.
C – District (Commercial District): Any zoning district beginning with "C", and predominantly providing
for commercial uses.
Cabinet, upholstery, and furniture shops: A business limited to the production, repair or refinishing of
cabinets, furniture and related household items.
Cable television facilities: Offices, studios and other facilities of a cable television business.
Cafeteria: A commercial eating facility in which patrons choose food items along a self-service line rather
than through table service.
Cafeteria Truck: a vehicle or cart primarily offering delivery and/or self-service of pre-packaged or
prepared foods, not cooked to order or prepared on-site. This type of vendor must obtain an itinerant
merchant license from the Town Manager.
12 - 6 Updated March 2020
Caliper: A measurement of the diameter of a tree trunk taken at four and one-half feet above the soil line.
Also known as diameter at breast height (DBH).
Canopy: A structure, other than an awning, made of cloth, metal, or other material which may be a
standalone structure or totally or partially attached to a building for the purpose of providing shelter to
patrons or automobiles, or as a decorative feature on a building wall. A canopy is not a completely enclosed
structure and cannot be raised or retracted.
Capital Improvement Plan: A plan outlining the nature, location, costs, funding, and timing of future
capital expenditures for community facilities such as streets, sidewalks, drainage facilities, water and
wastewater lines and treatment facilities, parks, public buildings, and required property.
Car Port: A structure attached to a dwelling unit, open on at least one (1) side, designed for the parking
and storage of vehicles by the residents of the dwelling and their guests.
Car Wash: A building or area of land that provides facilities for washing and cleaning motor vehicles,
which may use production line methods with a conveyor, blower, or other mechanical devices, and which
may employ some hand labor.
Car wash, Self-service: A building or area of land that provides facilities for patrons to wash and cleaning
their motor vehicles by hand and/or with light equipment such as hoses and vacuums.
Caregiver: An adult who provides care for a mentally or physically impaired person within the
Commonwealth. A caregiver shall be either related by blood, marriage, or adoption to or the legally
appointed guardian of the mentally or physically impaired person for whom he is caring.
Carnival: An amusement show, usually traveling from place to place, containing rides, side shows, and
other forms of entertainment.
Cellar: A story having more than one-half of the height below grade.
Cemetery: A place where lots are sold for the burial of the dead.
Centerline: The midpoint of the width of a highway or right-of-way.
Channel Letters: A sign that consists of custom-made metal or plastic that are covered in a translucent
plastic material, often internally illuminated. The space between the letters is not part of the sign structure
but rather the building façade though the space may count toward the sign area depending on how the letters
are grouped and calculated in accordance with Section Error! Reference source not found..
Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act land-disturbing activity: A land-disturbing activity including
clearing, grading, or excavation that results in a land disturbance equal or greater than 2,500 square feet
and less than one acre in all areas of jurisdictions designated as subject to the regulations adopted pursuant
to the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act, Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:67, et seq. Required for localities
within Tidewater Virginia.
Child: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
12 - 7 Updated March 2020
Child Care Center: A facility operated for the purpose of providing care, protection, and guidance to a
group of four (4) or more children separated from their parents or guardians during part of the day only,
and meeting the licensing requirements for child care centers of Section 63.1-196 of the Code of Virginia,
1950, as amended.
Church (or place of religious worship): A building or structure, or group of buildings or structures, which
by design and construction are primarily intended for activities that people regularly attend to participate in
or hold religious services, meetings, and other activities. The term "church" shall not carry a secular
connotation and shall include buildings in which religious services of any denomination are held.
Civic Group: A non-profit group or organization which meets regularly in the Town or which has
"Warrenton" or a Town location in its name, and which has demonstrated service to the Town, in the
determination of the Zoning Administrator. (also see “non-profit organization”)
Cleaning and Pressing Shop: (see Laundry)
Clean Water Act (CWA): The federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C §1251 et seq.), formerly referred to as
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972,
Public Law 92-500, as amended by Public Law 95-217, Public Law 95-576, Public Law 96-483, and Public
Law 97-117, or any subsequent revisions thereto.
Clear-cutting or Clearing: The indiscriminate removal of trees, shrubs, or undergrowth with the intention
of preparing real property for nonagricultural development purposes, or any activity that removes the
vegetative ground cover, including but not limited to the removal of vegetation, root mat removal, and/or
topsoil removal. This definition does not include the selective removal of non-native tree and shrub species
when the soil is left relatively undisturbed; removal of dead trees and shrubs; or normal mowing operations.
Clerk: The Clerk of the Circuit Court of Fauquier County having jurisdiction in the Town of Warrenton.
Clinic: A building designed and used for the diagnosis and treatment of human patients that does not
include overnight care facilities. This definition includes a group practice in which several licensed medical,
dental or health care professionals work cooperatively.
Club: Buildings and/or facilities owned and operated by a corporation, association, or persons, which
serves as a gathering place for a group of individuals organized for a common purpose to pursue common
goals, interests, or activities and characterized by certain membership qualifications, payment of fees and
dues, regular meetings, and a constitution and by-laws.
Club, Swim or Tennis: A private club with swimming and/or tennis facilities, indoor or outdoor.
Cluster Development: A residential development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific
areas on a site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, and preservation
of environmentally sensitive areas or historic and cultural resources.
COA: Certificate of Appropriateness.
Coherence: Logically consistent arrangement of interdependent elements of a site plan or architectural
design.
Commercial Nurseries and Greenhouses: An area or establishment for the propagation, growing, or
selling of nursery stock for gardens, grounds, and yards. Such stock may include trees, plants, shrubs, and
vines. Landscape contracting of nursery stock shall be permitted as a use.
12 - 8 Updated March 2020
Commercial Recreation, Indoor: Any enclosed or semi-enclosed establishment operated as a commercial
enterprise (open to the public for a fee) for the following activities: games and athletics, bowling, billiards
or pool, darts, bingo, slot cars, hard and soft courts, miniature golf, golf driving nets, cultural activities,
martial arts, archery, roller or ice skating, skateboarding, swimming, and activities incidental to the
foregoing.
Commercial Recreation, Outdoor: Any outdoor establishment operated as a commercial enterprise (open
to the public for a fee) for the following activities: games and athletics, batting and pitching cages, darts,
hard and soft courts, miniature golf, radio-controlled vehicles and airplanes, pony rides, waterslides,
cultural activities, martial arts, archery, camping, roller or ice skating rinks, skateboarding, picnicking,
boating, fishing, swimming, golf driving ranges, and activities incidental to the foregoing, but not including
amusement rides, amusement parks, theme parks or motor vehicle race tracks.
Commercial Use: An occupation, employment, or enterprise that is carried on for profit by the owner,
lessee, or licensee.
Commission, the: The Planning Commission of Warrenton, Virginia.
Common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where separate and distinct construction
activities may be taking place at the same or different times or on difference schedules, or are connected
through common ownership or interests, rights-of-way, or development pattern.
Communications Towers: (see Transmission and Receiving Towers)
Community Building: A building and associated facilities and area, usually owned by a public nonprofit
group or agency, used for and providing fraternal, social, and/or recreational programs generally open to
the public and designed to accommodate and serve significant segments of the community.
Comprehensive Plan: Maps, charts, and descriptive matter officially adopted by the Warrenton Town
Council showing, among other things, recommendations for the most appropriate use of land; for the most
desirable density of population; for a system of thoroughfares, parkways and recreation areas; for the
general location and extent of facilities for water and sewer; and for the general location, character and
extent of community facilities.
Complex: A grouping of buildings or architectural elements on a single site or tract.
Condominium: A building or group of buildings in which units are owned individually and the structure,
common areas, and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis.
Conference Center: A facility designed for conducting large or small group meetings. Such facilities may
include overnight accommodations or short term lodging (not longer than fourteen (14) consecutive days),
food preparation and service, entertainment, social or charitable events, and recreational facilities.
Conservation Easement: An easement granting a right or interest in real property that is appropriate to
retaining land or water areas and their structures in their built, natural, scenic, open, or wooded condition,
or for the purpose of maintaining existing land uses; for stormwater management or protection of wetlands,
floodplain, soils, slopes, or critical areas; protection and enhancement of scenic views or visual corridors,
for preservation of historic, architectural, or cultural resources, or for other local, environmental, cultural,
or historic reasons that further the objectives of the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Ordinance, or the
Town Code.
12 - 9 Updated March 2020
Construction Standards: Specifications and standards as adopted by or applicable in the Town of
Warrenton relating to the construction of all physical improvements, including but not limited to
development, structures, or the installation of utilities.
Convalescent Home: (see Nursing Home).
Convenience Retail: Any retail establishment offering for sale prepackaged food products, household
items, and other goods commonly associated with the same and having a gross floor area of less than five
thousand (5,000) square feet.
Convenience store: (see Convenience Retail)
Council: The Town Council of Warrenton, Virginia.
Covenant: A formal agreement of legal validity between two (2) or more parties outlining restrictions,
rights, or responsibilities concerning the use of property or structures.
Crematory: A building containing a furnace for reducing dead bodies, either animal or human, to ashes by
burning.
Critical Root Zone (CRZ): An area which must be preserved in order to ensure protection and survival of
a tree; a minimum of one foot per inch of caliper (defined herein as the diameter at breast height).
Cul-de-sac: A street with only one (1) outlet having an appropriate turn-around area for a safe and
convenient reverse of traffic movement.
Dairy: A commercial establishment for the manufacture and sale of dairy products.
Day Care Center: (see Child Care Center and Family Day Care Home).
Deciduous: Any tree or shrub that loses its leaves during the winter season.
Deck: An exterior, roofless, floor system supported on at least two opposing sides by an adjoining
dwelling/structure and/or posts, piers or other independent supports.
Density: The number of dwelling units per acre of land.
Density Bonus: An additional increment of density allowable on a site in return for a specified public good,
as provided in this ordinance.
Density, Gross: The number of dwelling units per gross acre of land on the site or lot.
Density, Net: The number of dwelling units per net acre of land (gross site or lot area less floodplain, steep
slopes and other unbuildable areas).
Detention Facility: A facility which serves the purpose of collecting and retaining rainfall falling on a site
for controlled release to primary storm water management facilities as a result of land alteration activities.
Developer or Subdivider: An individual, corporation, proprietor, trust, trustee, joint venture, partnership,
or other entity having legal title to any tract of land or parcel of land to be developed, whether or not they
have given their power of attorney to one of their group, or another individual or entity to act on their behalf
12 - 10 Updated March 2020
in planning, negotiation, or in representing or executing the requirements of the ordinances of the Town of
Warrenton.
Development (noun): Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not
limited to buildings or other structures, the placement of mobile homes, streets, and other paving, utilities,
filling, grading, excavation, mining, dredging, or drilling operations.
Development (verb): Land disturbance and the resulting landform associated with the construction of
residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreation, transportation or utility facilities or structures.
Development potentially changes the runoff characteristics of the land.
District: A section of the Town of Warrenton within which the zoning regulations are uniform; Zoning
District.
District, Base: A type of Zoning District established in this ordinance that specifies allowable land uses
and development intensities and requires a generally uniform group of land uses and lot requirements and
does not require a concept development plan in advance of zoning approval.
District, Regular: (see Base District)
District, Overlay: A type of Zoning District established in this ordinance that may be mapped for a
particular land area and functions as an additional set of zoning requirements in addition to the zoning
requirements of the underlying base district that applies to the tract.
District, Special: (see District, Overlay)
Drive-In Facility (same as “Drive-Through”): Any portion of a building or structure from which
customers can receive a service or obtain a product while in their motor vehicle.
Driveway or Accessway: That space specifically designated and reserved on the site for movement of
vehicles from one location to another on site or from the site to a public street.
Drug Store: A retail establishment offering a variety of consumer goods with a licensed pharmacist on
staff for the purpose of dispensing prescription drugs.
Dustless Surface: A surface adequately covered in accordance with good construction practice, with a
minimum of either two (2) applications of bituminous surface treatment concrete, or bituminous concrete
approved by the Town, and to be maintained in good condition at all times.
Dwelling: Any structure, or portion thereof, which is designed for generally permanent residential
purposes, not including hotels, boardinghouses, lodging houses, tourist cabins, or automobile trailers (also
see “dwelling unit”).
Dwelling, Accessory: (see Accessory Dwelling Unit).
Dwelling, Duplex (two-family): Two (2) single-family attached dwellings.
Dwelling, Elderly and Handicapped: A building or portion thereof containing at least ten (10) dwelling
units and within which at least ninety (90) percent of all dwelling units are occupied by or designed for
occupancy by:
12 - 11 Updated March 2020
(a) Families of two or more persons the head of which (or his or her spouse) is 55 years of age or over
or is handicapped; or
(b) The surviving member or members of any family described in paragraph (a) living in a unit within
the building with the deceased member of the family at the time of his or her death; or
(c) A single person who is 55 years of age or over, or a non-elderly handicapped person between the
ages of 18 and 55; or
(d) Two (2) or more elderly or handicapped persons living together, or one or more such persons
living with another person who is determined by a licensed physician's certification to be essential
to their care or well-being.
For the purpose of this definition Handicapped Person means any adult having an impairment which is
expected to be of an indefinite duration, is a substantial impediment to his or her ability to live
independently, and is of a nature that such ability could be improved by more suitable housing conditions.
A person also shall be considered handicapped if he or she is developmentally disabled, i.e., if he or she
has a disability attributable to mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, or another neurological condition
closely related to mental retardation or to require treatment similar to that required for mentally retarded
individuals, which disability originates before such individual attains age eighteen, which constitutes a
substantial handicap to such individual.
Dwelling, Four-Family: A residential structure, occupying one lot, arranged or designed to be occupied
by four (4) families living independently of each other, generally with separate entrances for each dwelling
unit and common open space surrounding the structure.
Dwelling, Live-Work Unit: A residential structure, occupying one lot, with home business quarters on the
ground floor and occupant residential quarters on the upper floor or floors.
Dwelling, Mixed Commercial Use: A dwelling unit in a structure that is also designed and used for
commercial purposes. Access to the dwelling unit is separate from access to areas used for commercial
purposes and the unit is typically located in basements or upper stories with commercial uses occurring at
the street level of the structure.
Dwelling, Mobile Home:
Manufactured homes are also commonly referred to as “mobile homes” and differ from Modular Homes as
defined herein, in that they do not necessarily comply with BOCA or Virginia Uniform Statewide Building
Code standards. Three types are defined herein as follows:
Mobile (Manufactured) Home, Type A: A multi-sectional manufactured home (“doublewide”)
constructed after July 1, 1976, that meets or exceeds the Manufactured Home Construction and Safety
Standards, promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Mobile (Manufactured) Home, Type B: A traditional single manufactured home (“singlewide”)
constructed after July 1, 1976, that meets or exceeds the Manufactured Home Construction and Safety
Standards, promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Mobile (Manufactured) Home, Type C: Any manufactured home (“mobile home”) constructed before
July 1, 1976 and which consequently does not meet the criteria of a Type A or Type B manufactured
home as defined herein.
12 - 12 Updated March 2020
Dwelling, Modular: A dwelling unit constructed through use of large, prefabricated, mass-produced,
partially pre-assembled sections or modules which are subsequently put together on-site on a permanent
foundation, and which meets the BOCA and Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code standards.
Dwelling, Multifamily: A residential structure arranged or designed to be occupied by more than one (1)
family living independently of each other, the structure having more than two (2) dwelling units and
generally 5+having a common entrance or hallway providing access to dwelling units.
Dwelling, Single-Family, Attached: One (1) of two (2) or more residential buildings having a common
party wall separating dwelling units, each dwelling unit occupying a separate lot.
Dwelling, Single-Family, Detached: A structure arranged or designed to be occupied by one (1) family,
the structure having only one (1) dwelling unit.
Dwelling, Three-Family: A residential structure, occupying one (1) lot, arranged or designed to be
occupied by three (3) families living independently of each other, generally with separate entrances for each
dwelling unit and common open space surrounding the structure.
Dwelling, Triplex: A group of three (3) townhouse units.
Dwelling, Townhouse: A dwelling unit, occupying one(1) lot, attached by means of a common vertical
wall or walls, extending from the floor of the basement to the roof, to a series of similar dwelling units,
each of which has individual access from the outdoors and each of which normally consists of two (2) or
three (3) stories, situated on one (1) lot. The term "townhouse" is inclusive of the terms "atrium house" and
"patio house."
Dwelling, Two-Family: A single structure arranged or designed to be occupied by two (2) families living
independently of each other, with separate entrances for each dwelling unit and common open space
surrounding the structure.
Dwelling, Quadriplex: A group of four (4) townhouse units.
Dwelling Unit: One (1) or more rooms connected together in a structure designed for occupancy as a
separate living quarters, for owner occupancy, or rental or lease on a weekly, monthly or longer basis, and
physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure, and
containing independent cooking, sleeping, and sanitary facilities within the unit.
Easement: A grant of one (1) or more of the property rights by the owner to, or for the use by, the public,
a corporation, or another person or entity.
Emergency Housing: The housing is designated to provide emergency housing for a maximum of sixty
(60) days. Emergency housing and related counseling services shall be provided by a Fauquier
County/Town of Warrenton recognized human service organization. A house coordinator must reside on
the premises, and a substitute house coordinator shall be on the premises if the house coordinator is away
from the residence for more than one day.
Employment service or agency: A public, non-profit or for-profit agency or business that provides
assistance in matching prospective employees with employers.
12 - 13 Updated March 2020
Engineer: A person who is recognized by the Commonwealth of Virginia and who is registered with the
State Department of Professional and Occupational Registration, or registered with a like body in another
state, as a "professional engineer."
Erosion: The disintegration, detachment, carrying away, or wearing away of land surface by running water,
wind, and/or other natural agents.
Erosion and Sediment Control. Under the Articles, Manuals, Forms, and Regulations set forth for the
purposes of Erosion and Sediment Control, in addition to the definitions set forth in in 9VAC25-720-10 of
the Virginia Water Quality Management Planning Regulations and 9VAC25-80 of the Virginia Erosion and
Sediment Control Regulations, as amended, which are expressly adopted and incorporated herein by
reference, the words and terms used in this Ordinance have the following meanings unless otherwise
specified in this Ordinance.
Agreement in Lieu: An application for a Land Disturbance Permit (LDP) wherein the applicant
agrees to certain specific and general best management practices and methods as appropriate for
the location, scope and type of development proposed, which may be substituted for an erosion and
sediment control plan. This may be acceptable where the land disturbing activity results from the
construction of a single-family residence, or wholly comprises an area of less than 2,000 square
feet, if executed by the Erosion and Sediment Control Administrator in accordance with the
requirements of this Ordinance. An Agreement in Lieu may constitute the Site Conservation Plan
(SCP) for the project. This differs from an Agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan
(see Stormwater Management).
Approved Plan: That plan approved by the Erosion and Sediment Control Administrator, by the
issuance of a Land Disturbance Permit (LDP), which carries the permittee's proposed methodology
for controlling erosion, sedimentation, and storm water runoff resulting from proposed land
disturbing activity. Changes approved in the field by an Inspector must be shown on the Approved
Plan and signed off by the ESC Administrator.
Certified Program Administrator: The Town of Warrenton’s designated Erosion and Sediment
Control Administrator.
Certified Inspector: Employee of the Town of Warrenton charged with on-site inspection of erosion
and sediment control devices employed via this Article and who (i) holds a certificate of
competence from the Board in the area of project inspection or (ii) is enrolled in the Board's training
program for project inspection and successfully completes such program within one year after
enrollment.
Erosion and Sediment Control Administrator: Town of Warrenton designated personnel certified
by the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality that are responsible for administering the
adopted Erosion and Sediment Control requirements.
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan: The document containing material for the conservation of soil
and water resources of a unit or group of units of land. It may include appropriate maps, an
appropriate soil and water plan inventory and management information with needed interpretations,
and a record of all decisions contributing to conservation treatment. The plan shall contain all major
conservation decisions and all units of land will be so treated to achieve the conservation objective.
12 - 14 Updated March 2020
Erosion Impact Area: An area of land not associated with current land disturbing activity, but
subject to persistent soil erosion resulting in the delivery of detriment onto neighboring properties
or into natural waterways.
Land Disturbance Activity Level: Development projects disturbing more than 2,000 square feet of
land area in the Town of Warrenton must comply with the regulations of the Site Conservation
Manual (Article 4 of the Zoning Ordinance).
Local Erosion and Sediment Control Program (Local Control Program): An outline of the various
methods employed by a district or locality to regulate land disturbing activities and thereby
minimize erosion and sedimentation in compliance with the state program and may include such
items as local ordinances, policies and guidelines, technical materials, inspection, enforcement, and
evaluation.
Natural Channel Design Concepts: The utilization of engineering analysis and fluvial geomorphic
processes to create, rehabilitate, restore, or stabilize an open conveyance system for the purpose of
creating or recreating a stream that conveys its bankfull storm event within its banks and allows
larger flows to access its bankfull bench and its floodplain.
Natural Landscape: The Town’s natural landscape shall include, but is not limited to, natural
resources such as trees and woodlands, fresh water bodies, wetlands, riparian areas, steep slopes,
other natural areas and natural soils.
Plan Approving Authority: The State Water Control Board, the Department of Environmental
Quality, the Town of Warrenton, or the Zoning Administrator of the Town of Warrenton
responsible for determining the adequacy of a conservation plan or erosion and sediment control
plan submitted for land-disturbing activities on a unit(s) of land and for approving plans.
Responsible Land Disturber: The property owner or his designated representative.
Riparian Area: A transitional zone, adjacent to a water body, between water and terrestrial
ecosystems. Such area is at least periodically influenced by flooding and includes perennial and
intermittent streams and lakes.
Riparian Buffer: A riparian area composed of natural vegetation whose purpose is to provide
stabilization of stream banks, limit erosion, reduce flood size flows, and filter and settle out runoff
pollutants.
Riparian Setback: The area set back along the stream to protect the riparian area and water body
from impacts of development and abutting properties from the impact of flooding and land loss
through erosion.
Runoff Volume: The volume of water that runs off the land development project from a prescribed
storm event.
Site Conservation Plan (SCP): That Plan, which may be a portion of the required Site Development
Plan (SDP), Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, and/or Stormwater Plan that includes the design
to preserve the natural landscape of the Town of Warrenton per the preservation of trees and
woodlands, natural waterways and sediment through the best management of each construction
operation. The plans must make use of the practices that preserve the existing natural condition to
the maximum extent practicable.
12 - 15 Updated March 2020
Virginia Soil and Water Conservation Board: Board established by the General Assembly to help
guide the delivery of soil and water conservation services to citizens of the Commonwealth.
Transporting: Any moving of earth materials from one place to another, other than such movement
incidental to grading, when such movement results in destroying the vegetative ground cover, either
by tracking or by the buildup of earth materials to the extent that erosion and sedimentation will
result from the soil or earth materials over which such transporting occurs.
Water Quality Volume: The volume equal to the first one-half inch of runoff multiplied by the
impervious surface of the land development project.
Excavating: Any digging, scooping, or other method of removing earth materials.
External Relationships: Those associations pertaining to off-site considerations. (also see Internal
Relationships)
Evergreen: A coniferous or other plant that retains it leaves or needles in all seasons.
Facilities: Something designed, built, installed, etc., to serve a specific function affording a convenience,
use or service to the users.
Fair: a temporary, mainly outdoor, public celebratory event, including festivals, which may include musical
or theatrical entertainment, display and/or sale of crafts, food and the like.
Fairgrounds, showgrounds, or exhibition center: A site which is used for temporary, regular exhibitions,
displays, contests and the like.
Family: One (1) or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living and cooking together as a single,
nonprofit, housekeeping unit, provided that not more than four (4) persons not related by blood, marriage,
adoption, or guardianship shall constitute a family unless such group is composed of handicapped persons
as defined in Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act
of 1988 and all subsequent amendments. Such unrelated handicapped individuals shall have the right to
occupy a dwelling unit in the same manner and extent as any family unit established through kinship as
defined above.
Family Care Home: A private single-family home in which more than three (3) children, but no more than
six (6) children, are received for care, protection, and guidance during only part of the day, except children
who are related by blood or marriage to the person who maintains the home, and meeting applicable
licensing requirements for family care homes of § 63.1-196 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended.
Farmer's Market: A place where locally grown produce and goods are sold on a temporary or seasonal
basis to the general public, not including wholesale or bulk sales to commercial enterprises or the sale of
crafts, household items, or other nonagricultural items.
Farm equipment, motorcycle, boat, and sport trailer sales and service: On-site sales and service, either
retail or wholesale, of farm equipment, motorcycle, boat, and sport trailers.
Fence: Any artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose,
partition, or screen areas of land.
Filling: Any depositing or stockpiling or earth materials.
12 - 16 Updated March 2020
Flag: Any fabric or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or design that displays words, letters,
figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, logos, colors, that may be mounted to a flag pole or other structure.
Flex Industrial uses: Light industrial activities that occur in buildings of no more than two stories in height,
with one or more loading docks, and not more than half of the gross floor area used for offices.
Flood: A general and temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
Flooding: A flood event. In stormwater management, a volume of water that is too great to be confined
within the banks or walls of the stream, water body or conveyance system and that overflows onto adjacent
lands, thereby causing or threatening damage.
Floodplain: A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream or watercourse which is subject to
partial or complete inundation, or an area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source. In stormwater management, the floodplain means the area adjacent to a channel,
river, stream, or other water body that is susceptible to being inundated by water normally associated with
the 100-year flood or storm event. This includes, but is not limited to, the floodplain designated by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency and shown on the adopted Federal Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
Floodplain Management Definitions (reference Floodplain District):
Base Flood/One Hundred-Year Flood: A flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every one
hundred (100) years (i.e., that has a one (1) percent chance of occurring each year, although the flood
may occur in any year).
Existing Manufactured Home Park/Subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which
the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the initial effective date of these
regulations.
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: The preparation of additional
sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood Fringe: All that land in a floodplain not lying within a delineated floodway and subject to
inundation by relatively low velocity flows and shallow water depths.
Flood Hazard District: The area subject to inundation by waters on the 100-year flood, which is the
flood that has a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as defined by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Flood-Prone Area: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.
Floodproofing: The protection of structures and public utility systems from damage caused by
inundation or seepage of flood waters.
12 - 17 Updated March 2020
Historic Structure: Any structure that is a) listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register; b) certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district
preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; c) individually
listed on the Virginia Landmarks Register; or d) individually listed on the local inventory of historic
places, provided that the Warrenton preservation program has been certified by the Department of
Historic Resources and/or the Secretary of the Interior.
Manufactured Home Park/Subdivision: A parcel, or contiguous parcels, of land divided into two (2)
or more lots, for rent or sale, intended for the placement of a manufactured home.
New Construction: For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of
construction” commenced on or after the effective date of an initial Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements
to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, “new construction” means structures for
which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of this Article and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures.
New Manufactured Home Park/Subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the initial effective date of these
regulations.
Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle which is a) built on a single chassis; b) four hundred (400) square
feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; c) designed to be self-propelled or
permanently towable by a light duty truck; and d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Start of Construction: The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or
the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, or foundations or the erections of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration on any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not the
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the
structure to it before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value
of the structure before damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure
before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
12 - 18 Updated March 2020
incurred “substantial damage” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either 1) any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local
code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
2) any alteration of a “historic structure”, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structures
continued designation as a “historic structure.”
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas, usually associated with
flowing water, that must be reserved and kept free of encroachment, in order to discharge the 100-year
flood or storm event without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot at any
point along the watercourse. This includes, but is not limited to, the floodway designated by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and shown on the adopted Federal Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
Floor Area, gross: The sum of the total horizontal areas of all floors of a structure on a lot, measured from
the interior faces of exterior walls, including basements, elevator shafts, stairwells at each story, enclosed
porches or atriums, interior balconies or mezzanines, and attics with headroom of six (6) feet, six (6) inches
or greater. This definition does not include floor space not used for human habitation or suitable for
temporary storage of merchandise or equipment such as areas designed for heating and ventilating
equipment, cellars or outside balconies which do not project more than six (6) feet from the exterior wall,
off-street parking structure, rooftop mechanical structures or penthouses, or areas with less than six (6) feet,
six (6) inches or more of structural headroom.
The term “floor area” shall include basements, elevator shafts and stairwells at each story, floor space for
mechanical equipment with headroom of seven feet or more, attic space, interior balconies and mezzanines.
The term gross floor area shall not include cellars or outside balconies which do not exceed a projection of
six feet beyond the exterior walls of the building.
Parking structures and rooftop mechanical structures are excluded from gross floor area.
The gross floor area of structures devoted to bulk storage of materials including, but not limited to, grain
elevators and petroleum storage tanks, shall be computed by counting each ten feet of height or fraction
thereof as being equal to one floor.
Floor Area, gross leasable: The total area designated for tenant occupancy and exclusive use in a shopping
center or commercial building, including storage, retail area, offices, shipping, basements, mezzanines and
upper floors, if any, expressed in square feet and measured from the center line of joint partitions and from
outside wall faces.
Floor Area, net: The sum of the total horizontal areas of the several floors of all buildings on a lot,
measured from the interior faces of exterior walls and from the centerline of walls separating two or more
buildings. The term “net floor area” shall include outdoor display areas for sale, rental and display of
vehicles, equipment and other products, but shall exclude areas designed for permanent uses such as toilets,
utility closets, enclosed parking areas, mechanical equipment rooms, public and fire corridors, stairwells,
elevators, escalators, and areas under a sloping ceiling where headroom in at least half of such area is less
than seven feet.
Footprint, building: (see Floorplate)
Floorplate: The horizontal land area occupied by a building at finished grade including projections and
overhangs (“footprint”).
12 - 19 Updated March 2020
Foster Home: A residence of any person in which one (1) or more children, other than a child by birth or
adoption of such person, resides as a member of the household.
Front: The edge of a lot or structure that abuts a street or way and ordinarily is regarded as the front of the
lot.
Front, to: When a building or structure faces or orients toward the front of a lot.
Frontage: That side of a lot abutting on a street or way and ordinarily regarded as the front of the lot; the
distance between the side lines of any lot as measured along a line, at the required setback distance from
the front lot line, generally paralleling the street upon which the lot fronts. The minimum width of a lot
measured from one side lot line to the other along a straight line on which no point shall be farther away
from the street upon which the lot fronts than the building setback line, as defined and required herein. On
irregularly shaped lots that make such a measurable line impossible, the frontage shall be measured along
the line that can be drawn so as to best meet the intent of the above definition.
Frozen food lockers: Commercial facilities in which frozen foods are stored for wholesale distribution or
purposes.
Funeral Home: A building or part thereof used for human funeral services. Such building may contain
space and facilities for the following: embalming and the performance of other services used in the
preparation of the dead for burial; the performance of autopsies and other surgical procedures; the storage
of caskets, funeral urns, and other related funeral supplies; and, the storage of funeral vehicles, but not
including facilities for cremation.
Garage, Private: Accessory building designed or used for the private storage of not more than three (3)
automobiles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory, with no facilities for
mechanical service or repair of a commercial or public nature. On a lot occupied by a multiple-unit
dwelling, the private garage may be designed and used for the storage of twice as many automobiles as
there are dwelling units. A garage which is attached to the main dwelling structure shall be considered part
of that structure for purposes of setback, yard and height regulations.
Garage, Public: A building or portion thereof, other than a private garage, designed or used as a business
enterprise with a fee or service charge being paid to the owner for renting, selling, or storing motor-driven
vehicles.
Garage, Repair: Any building, premises, or land in which or upon which a business, service, or industry
involving the maintenance, servicing, repair, or painting of motor vehicles is conducted or rendered, such
services taking place within an enclosed building or screened from public view.
Garden Apartment: A dwelling unit situated within a structure consisting of no more than three (3) stories
with access to the dwelling units provided by means of an interior hallway or foyer, each dwelling unit
normally consisting of a portion of one (1) floor of the structure.
Gasoline Service Station: (see Service Station)
Geometric Design: Typical cross-sections used in street design.
Gift Shop: A building, or area within a building, comprising no more than 3,000 square feet that display
and sells merchandise at retail that is related to a historic person, place or event.
12 - 20 Updated March 2020
Golf Course: Any area of land, publicly or privately owned, on which the game of golf is played, including
accessory uses and buildings customary thereto, but excluding lighted golf driving ranges as defined herein.
Golf Driving Range: A limited area on which golf players do not walk, but onto which they drive golf
balls from a central driving tee.
Gooseneck Lighting: A type of light fixture in which a lamp or lightbulb is attached to a flexible,
adjustable shaft to allow the user to position the light source without moving the fixture or item to be
illuminated. When applied for the purposes of illumination of signage, the lighting is directed on a sign
element.
Governing Body: The Town Council of Warrenton, Virginia.
Governmental Buildings: (see Building, Governmental)
Green: Land open to the general public for passive recreational use that contains lawns, shade trees and/or
landscaped areas. Paved pedestrian walkways and sitting areas may cover up to twenty-five percent (25%)
of the green. Greens may be publicly owned or owned in common by a property owners association. Greens
may but are not required to be square or rectangular in shape.
Grade: The average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of a building. In the case where
walls are parallel to and within five (5) feet of a sidewalk, the ground level shall be measured at the
sidewalk.
Grading: Any excavating or filling of earth materials or any combination thereof, including the land in its
excavated or filled condition.
Grain and feed supply stores: A business which sells grain, seed, feed and related agricultural products
on a wholesale basis, and may sell at retail as well.
Gross Floor Area: (see Floor Area, Gross)
Gross Leasable Space: (see Floor Area, Gross Leasable).
Group Home: A building which provides living accommodations for the physically or mentally
handicapped, children sixteen (16) years of age or younger, abused adults, or persons sixty-five (65) years
of age or older. The residents of such group homes shall be supervised by a resident or nonresident staff
persons in charge of their area.
Health Official; Health Officer: The health director or sanitarian of the County of Fauquier, Virginia, or
his designated agent.
Health or Fitness Facilities: An indoor establishment, which may include saunas and steambaths, offering
or providing facilities for and instruction in general health, physical fitness, and controlled exercises such
as weight lifting, calisthenics, and aerobic dancing.
Heliport: Any landing area used for the landing and taking off of helicopters for the purpose of picking up
or discharging of passengers or cargo, including fueling and emergency service facilities.
12 - 21 Updated March 2020
Heritage tree: any tree that has been individually designated by the local governing body to have notable
historic or cultural interest.
Highway Engineer: The engineer appointed by the Town Manager or designated state official serving the
local VDOT residency.
Historic District: An area containing buildings or places in which historic events occurred or having
special public value because of notable architectural or other features relating to the cultural or artistic
heritage of the community, of such significance as to warrant conservation and preservation, and designated
and/or mapped and adopted by the Town Council as an overlay district of the Zoning Ordinance.
Historic District Definitions (reference HD District):
1. Alteration: Any change, modification, or addition to a part of or all of the exterior of any building
or structure.
2. Building: Any enclosed or open structure which is a combination of materials to form a construction
for occupancy or use.
3. Building Official: The person appointed by the Town Manager as the individual who issues the
permit for the construction, alteration, reconstruction, repair, restoration, demolition, or razing of
all or part of any building.
4. Building Permit: An approval statement signed by the Building Permit Office authorizing the
construction, alteration, reconstruction, repair, restoration, demolition, or razing of all or a part of
any building.
5. Contributing Properties: Properties so designated on the inventory map of landmarks and
contributing properties which is adopted as a part of this Ordinance, being generally those
properties which by reason of form, materials, architectural details, and relation to surrounding
properties contribute favorably to the general character of the part of the Historic District in which
they are located but which by reason of recent age, lack of historic significance, or other factors are
not designated as historic landmarks under the criteria of this Ordinance.
6. Certificate of Appropriateness: The approval statement signed by the Chairman of the Architectural
Review Board which certifies the appropriateness of a particular request for the construction,
alteration, reconstruction, repair, restoration, demolition, or razing of all or a part of any building
within a historic district, subject to the issuance of all other regional permits needed for the matter
sought to be accomplished.
7. Demolition: The dismantling or tearing down of all or part of any building and all operations
incidental thereto.
8. Historic District: An area containing buildings or places in which historic events occurred or
having special public value because of notable architectural or other features relating to the cultural
or artistic heritage of the community, of such significance as to warrant conservation and
preservation.
9. Historic Landmark: Defined as any building or place listed in the National Register of Historic
Places, or in the Virginia Landmarks Register, or any building or place officially designated as a
landmark structure or place by the Town of Warrenton on the inventory map which is adopted as a
part of this Ordinance.
10. Reconstruction: Any or all work needed to remake or rebuild all or a part of any building to a sound
condition, but not necessarily of original materials.
11. Repairs: Any or all work involving the replacement of existing work with equivalent material for
the purpose of maintenance, but not including any addition, change, or modification in construction.
12. Restoration: Any or all work connected with the returning to or restoring of a building, or a part of
any building, to its original condition through the use of original or nearly original materials.
12 - 22 Updated March 2020
Historic Shrine: (see Museum)
Home Garden: A garden in a residential district for the production of vegetables, fruits, and flowers
generally for use and/or consumption by the occupants of the premises.
Home Business: Same as Home Occupation, except that a home business is permitted to have up to three
full-time equivalent employees who do not reside in the dwelling in addition to any family employees who
reside on the premises.
Home Occupation: Any occupation or activity conducted solely by a member of the family residing on
the premises which is incidental and secondary to the use of the premises for dwelling, and in general an
occupation where services are performed in such a way that visits to the premises by members of the public
are infrequent and that the character and intensity of the use is compatible with the quiet nature of residential
neighborhoods, provided that (a) not more than the equivalent area of one quarter (1/4) of the total interior
finished floor space of the dwelling shall be used for such purpose; (b) that such occupation shall not require
external or internal alterations, or the use of machinery or equipment not customary for purely domestic
household purposes; (c) that no commodity is stored or sold, except as are made on the premises; (d) there
shall be no group instruction, assembly or activity, or no display that will indicate from the exterior that the
building is being utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling.
When within the above requirement, a home occupation includes, but is not limited to the following: art
studio; dressmaking; home offices, teaching, with musical instruction limited two (2) pupils at a time.
However, a home occupation shall not be interpreted to include the conduct of barber shops and beauty
parlors, retail stores, nursing homes, medical offices, clinics, convalescent homes, rest homes, child care
centers, day care centers or nursery schools, restaurants, tea rooms, tourist homes, massage parlors or
similar establishments offering services to the general public.
Homeowners Association: A private nonprofit corporation of homeowners for the purpose of owning,
operating, improving and maintaining various common property and facilities.
Hospital: An institution primarily for human in-patient care for the sick or injured and including related
facilities such as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central services facilities, and staff
offices that are an integral part of the facilities, rendering medical, surgical, obstetrical, or convalescent
care, including nursing homes, homes for the aged, and sanatoriums.
Hospital, Special Care: A special care hospital shall mean an institution rendering care primarily for
mental or feeble-minded patients, alcoholics, or drug addicts.
Hotel: A facility offering transient lodging accommodations for ten or more individuals on a daily rate and
providing additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreational facilities (also see
Motel).
Housing, Emergency: (see Emergency Housing)
Household Pet Grooming: A commercial business limited to the routine grooming of household pets, as
defined herein, including bathing, hair cutting and similar functions. (also see Pet Grooming)
Housekeeping Unit: (see Dwelling Unit)
Human Scale: The design and appearance of a building façade or group of facades such that a human being
perceives that the facades relate to the size of a human being and are not perceived to be overwhelming,
disorienting or intimating due to the apparent size.
12 - 23 Updated March 2020
I - District: A zoning district for industrial uses.
Ice cream truck: A vehicle primarily offering delivery and/or self-service of pre-packaged frozen novelties
or treats including ice cream, frozen yogurt, popsicles and similar fare. This type of vendor must obtain an
itinerant merchant license from the Town Manager.
Illustrative Material: Accompanying pictorial and written data.
Impervious: Condition of a material that prevents significant percolation of water or discharge.
Impervious Surface: A surface on previously undeveloped land that has been compacted or covered with
a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water, including gravel driveways and
parking areas.
Improvements: All utilities, facilities, buildings, and structures including but not limited to streets,
cul-de-sacs, storm and sanitary sewers, water lines, curb and gutter, and landscaping required pursuant to
the terms of the Ordinances of Warrenton, Virginia.
Industry, Heavy: A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products
predominantly from extracted or raw materials, or a use engaged in storage or manufacturing processes
using flammable or explosive materials, or storage or manufacturing processes that potentially involve
hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
Industry, Light: A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of
finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental
storage, sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial processing or storage or
manufacturing processes that involve hazardous or offensive conditions.
Inn: A single-family dwelling, portion thereof, or accessory building to, where short-term lodging is
provided for compensation to transient guests only. Additional services, such as restaurants, meeting and
event space, and recreational facilities may also be provided. The operator may or may not live on the
premises. Up to twelve (12) guest rooms may be provided.
Inoperable Vehicle: A vehicle parked outside of a structure in any zoning district within the Town that
cannot be operated mechanically and/or does not display a current, valid Town and State registration decal.
Institutional uses or buildings: Educational and philanthropic operations, including museums, art
galleries, and libraries
Internal Relationships: Those associations pertaining to on-site considerations.
Janitorial service establishment: A commercial facility used to store equipment and materials used in
providing janitorial services, which may include limited administrative office space for the enterprise.
Junk Vehicle: An inoperable or abandoned motor vehicle without current Town and State registration.
Junk Yard: The use of any area of land lying within one hundred (100) feet of a state highway or the use
of more than two hundred (200) square feet of land area in any location for the storage, keeping, or
abandonment of junk including scrap metals or other scrap materials. The term "junk yard" shall include
the term "automobile graveyard" as defined herein.
Jurisdiction: The limits of territory within which authority may be exercised by the governing body.
12 - 24 Updated March 2020
Kennel: (see Animal Kennel).
Landscape Architect: A person who is certified by the State of Virginia in the practice of landscape design.
Laboratories, research: A workplace devoted to scientific research and experimentation.
Laboratories, medical: A workplace devoted to routine testing of medical samples and related items
associated with the diagnosis and treatment of diseases.
Land-Disturbing Activity: Any land change which may result in the alteration or removal of the Town’s
Natural Landscape including trees and woodlands, that potentially changes its runoff characteristics and
that might impact the natural waterways within the Town through the erosion or movement of sediment
into town and state waterways or onto neighboring lands. This includes, but is not limited to, clearing and
grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, except that the term shall not include the exceptions
under Article 4-5 or Article 5-3 (c) of the Zoning Ordinance.
Land Disturbance Permit (LDP): A permit issued by the Town for clearing, filling, excavating, or
transporting of soil, or any combination thereof.
Landscaping: The modification of existing site conditions by earthwork, planting, and/or structural
installation to complete a desired landscape scheme.
Landscape Design: The planned treatment of land, structures, plants, topography, and other natural
features.
Laundromat: A business that provides home-type washing, drying, and/or ironing machines for hire to be
used by customers on the premises.
Laundry: A commercial facility where washing, drying, ironing, and/or dry cleaning are performed, but
do not include self service machines.
Laundry, Pick Up-Drop Off: A business that provides laundry services to customers but washing, drying,
or dry cleaning facilities are not located on the immediate premises.
Lawn and Garden Equipment: Motorized and non-motorized equipment used to cultivate or maintain
lawns and garden plots of yards associated with non-agricultural land uses.
Library: A place devoted to the collection and display of books, manuscripts and related intellectual
property for use and circulation by the public but not for sale.
Lighting (reference Lighting Regulations):
Footcandle: Unit of luminance. One lumen per square foot. It is the luminous flux per unit area in
the Imperial system. One footcandle equals approximately 0.1 (0.093) lux.
Flood Lam: A specific form of lamp designed to direct its output in a specific direction (a beam) but
with a diffusing glass envelope: Such lamps are so designated by the manufacturers and are typically
used in residential outdoor area lighting.
12 - 25 Updated March 2020
Full Cutoff Light Fixture or Luminaire; Fully Shielded Light Fixture: A lighting fixture from which
no light output, either directly from the lamp or a diffusing element, is emitted at or above a horizontal
plane drawn through the bottom of the fixture and no more than 10% of the lamp's light intensity is
emitted at an angle 10 degrees below that horizontal plane, at all lateral angles around the fixture.
Implicit in the definition is a fixture that is aimed straight down and has a flat lens. Any structural
part of the light fixture providing this shielding must be permanently affixed.
Glare: The sensation produced by a bright source within the visual field that is sufficiently brighter
than the level to which the eyes are adapted to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual
performance and visibility. The magnitude of glare depends on such factors as the size, position,
brightness of the source, and on the brightness level to which the eyes are adapted.
High Intensity Discharge Lamp: A mercury vapor, metal halide, or high or low pressure sodium lamp.
IESNA: Illuminating Engineering Society of North America
Illuminance, Luminance: The intensity of incident light at a point, measured with a light meter in
footcandles or lux.
Initial lumens: The lumens emitted from a lamp, as specified by the manufacturer of the lamp.
Lamp: The component of a luminaire that produces light. A lamp is also commonly referred to as a
bulb.
Light pollution: Any adverse effect of manmade light.
Light Trespass: Light falling where it is not wanted or needed, typically across property boundaries.
Lumen: Unit of luminous flux; used to measure the amount of light emitted by lamps.
Luminaire: The term "luminaire" means a complete lighting unit, less the support assembly,
consisting of a lamp or lamps together with the components designed to distribute the light, to position
and protect the lamps, and to connect the lamps to the power supply. A luminaire is also commonly
referred to as a fixture.
Lux. Unit of Luminance: One lumen per square meter. It is the luminous flux per unit area in the
metric system. One lux equals approximately 10 (10.8) footcandles.
Installed: The attachment, or assembly fixed in place, whether or not connected to a power source,
of any outdoor light fixture.
Opaque: Opaque means that a material does not transmit light from an internal illumination source.
Applied to sign backgrounds, means that the area surrounding any letters or symbols on the sign
either is not lighted from within, or allows no light from an internal source to shine though it.
Outdoor Light Fixture or Lumenaire: An outdoor illuminating device, outdoor lighting or reflective
surface, lamp or similar device, permanently installed or portable, used for illumination or
advertisement.
Temporary Lighting: Lighting which does not conform to the provisions of this Code and which will
not be used for more than one thirty (30) day period within a calendar year, with one thirty (30) day
12 - 26 Updated March 2020
extension. Temporary lighting is intended for uses which by their nature are of limited duration; for
example holiday decorations, civic events, or construction projects.
Live-Work Unit: (see Dwelling, Live-Work Unit)
Loading Space: A space within the main building or on the same lot providing for the standing, loading,
or unloading of trucks and other carriers.
Lodge: (see Club).
Lot: A numbered and recorded portion of a subdivision intended for transfer of ownership or for building
development for a single building or accessory building or, in the case of land not transferred for sale, a
measured parcel of land having fixed boundaries and designated on a plat or survey showing the metes and
bounds or simply described by metes and bounds.
Lot Area: The total horizontal area of the lot lying within the lot lines, provided that no area of land lying
within any street or right-of-way shall be deemed a portion of any lot area. The area of any lot abutting a
street shall be measured to the street right-of-way.
Lot, Corner: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection. All sides along the streets
shall be considered front yards.
Lot, Coverage: The area of a site covered by buildings or roofed areas.
Lot, Depth of: The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
Lot, Double Frontage: An interior lot having frontage on two (2) streets.
Lot, Interior: A lot other than a corner lot with only one street frontage.
Lot Line: A property boundary line of any lot held in single and separate ownership from adjacent property,
except that, in the case of any lot abutting a street, the lot line or such portion of the lot as abuts the street
shall be deemed to be the same as the street line, and shall not be the center line of the street, or any other
line within the street line even though such may be the property boundary line.
Lot, Pipestem: A lot with access provided to the bulk of the lot by means of a narrow corridor that does
not meet the street frontage requirement of the district regulations.
Lot, through: A lot in which both the front and rear lot lines abut a street.
Lot of Record: A lot which has been recorded among the land records in the Office of the Circuit Court of
Fauquier County, Virginia.
Lot, Substandard: (see Nonconforming Lot).
Lot, Width of: The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at the required front setback line.
Lumber and building supply: A commercial use devoted to the storage and sale of wood, lumber and
related building materials.
Manufacture and/or Manufacturing: The processing, fabrication, assembly, and distribution of products
such as, but not limited to: scientific or precision instruments, photographic equipment, communication
12 - 27 Updated March 2020
equipment, computation equipment, household appliances, toys, sporting and athletic goods, glass products
made of purchased glass, electric lighting and wiring equipment, industrial controls, lithographic and
printing processes, radio and TV receiving sets, watches and clocks, optical goods, and electrical
machinery.
Marquee: A permanent structure projecting beyond a building wall at an entrance to a building or extending
along and projecting beyond the building's wall and generally designed and constructed to provide
protection against the weather.
Massage Therapist: A practitioner who is licensed or certified by the state and/or a recognized professional
organization, to practice massage therapy for purposes of medical care or physical therapy rather than for
entertainment or recreation.
Materials: The physical elements of which something is made or fabricated.
Medical or Dental Clinic: Any building or group of buildings occupied by medical practitioners and
related services for the purpose of providing health services to people on an out-patient basis.
Medical Center: Any building or group of buildings that provides a range of professional medical services
that would normally be found in hospitals, medical clinics and medical offices.
Medical Laboratory: (see Laboratory, Medical)
Meeting Hall: (see Assembly Hall)
Mentally or physically impaired person: A person who is a resident of Virginia and who requires
assistance with two or more activities of daily living, as defined in § 63.2-2200, as certified in a writing
provided by a physician licensed by the Commonwealth.
Message, Commercial: Any sign, wording, logo or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names,
advertises or calls attention to a business, product, service or other commercial activity.
Message, Noncommercial: Any sign, wording or logo that does not represent a commercial message or
commercial speech. See also “Message, Commercial.”
Mini-Warehouse: A structure containing separate storage spaces of varying sizes leased or owned on an
individual basis for self-storage of business, household, or contractors supplies.
Mixed-Use: A use or structure which contains residential uses as well as commercial or office uses.
Mobile Food Cart: Any non-motorized mobile food unit with limited infrastructure that serves food and/or
beverages intended for immediate consumption. Mobile food carts may not exceed six (6) feet in length,
three (3) in width (excluding wheels), or four (4) feet in height (excluding wheels and umbrellas). Mobile
Food Carts include pushcarts and similar devices.
Mobile Food Vehicle: A motorized mobile food unit which is self-sufficient in terms of potable water,
sanitary sewer and electric utilities, and generally consists of an enclosed truck, trailer or similar vehicle,
where food may be stored, prepared, cooked, and/or served. An open bed truck, van or converted
automobile is not considered a mobile food vehicle and is NOT eligible for a mobile food vending permit.
12 - 28 Updated March 2020
Mobile Food Vendor: Any person or business selling foods from a mobile food cart or mobile food vehicle,
which is stationary for a period of time longer than that necessary to complete a sale or greater than a fifteen
(15) minute period. This definition does not apply to traveling ice cream trucks, cafeteria trucks serving
active construction sites, or non-commercial vehicles.
Mobile Home (also “Manufactured Home”): (see “Dwelling, Mobile Home”)
Mobile Home Park: A residential neighborhood conforming to the requirements of the former MHP
Residential District.
Mobile Home Subdivision: An arrangement of lots designed and intended for the placement of mobile
homes for residential purposes, meeting the requirement of the former MHP Residential District.
Modular home; Modular dwelling: (see Dwelling, Modular)
Monument sales: Sales of headstones, plaques and similar elements for memorials.
Motel: A building or a group of two (2) or more detached or semi-detached buildings containing rooms or
apartments having separate entrances provided directly or closely in connection with automobile parking
or storage space serving such rooms or apartments, which building or group of buildings is designed,
intended, or used principally for the providing of sleeping accommodations for automobile travelers and is
suitable for occupancy at all seasons of the year.
Motion picture studio: A building or group of buildings in which videos, motion pictures or other visual
recordings are filmed.
Mural: A painting or other artistic depiction on the wall of a building which does not serve the purpose of
commercial or business advertisement or promotion.
Museum: A building which provides educational or aesthetic opportunities for the visiting public on a
regular schedule. Artifacts, artwork, historical documents, photographs, costumes, and other objects are
exhibited and cared for by a professional staff.
Neighborhood Professional Business: Any establishment containing between 1,500 and 5,000 square feet
of gross floor area, on the ground floor of a building/structure wherein the primary occupation is the
provision of services on a fee or contract basis. Retail sales to the general public are not permitted, except
as a secondary and subordinate activity, and not exceeding ten (10) percent of the gross floor area. The
retail sales area component should be clearly delineated within the building/structure. Business service
establishments shall not have more than two (2) employees, including the owner.
New Urbanism: A pattern of urban design which incorporates various traditional town planning principles,
including narrow streets, on-street parking, interconnected streets, alleys, small front setbacks, mixed-uses
and similar features.
Noise: Sound of a harsh, loud, or confused kind causing disturbance to occupants of an abutting, adjacent,
or adjoining property, as provided for in the performance standards of these regulations and any other
provisions of the Town Code.
Nonconforming Activity: (see Nonconforming Use)
12 - 29 Updated March 2020
Nonconforming Lot: An otherwise legally platted lot that does not conform to the minimum area or width
requirements of this Ordinance for the district in which it is located either at the effective date of this
Ordinance or as a result of subsequent amendments to the Ordinance.
Nonconforming Sign: An otherwise legal sign that does not conform with the regulations of this Ordinance
for the district in which it is located, either at the effective date of this Ordinance or as a result of subsequent
amendments to the Ordinance.
Nonconforming Structure: An otherwise legal building or structure that does not conform with the lot
area, yard, height, lot coverage, or other area regulations of this Ordinance, or is designed or intended for a
use that does not conform to the use regulations of this Ordinance, for the district in which it is located,
either at the effective date of this Ordinance or as a result of subsequent amendments to the Ordinance.
Nonconforming Use: The otherwise legal use of a building or structure or a tract of land, other than a sign,
that does not conform with the regulations of this Ordinance for the district in which it is located, either at
the effective date of this Ordinance or as a result of subsequent amendments to the Ordinance.
Non-profit organization: A non-profit organization incorporated under the provisions of section 501 [c] 3
of the federal code.
Nursery School: (see Day Care Center).
Nursing or Convalescent Home: An extended or intermediate care facility licensed or approved to provide
full-time convalescent or chronic care to individuals who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness, or
infirmity are unable to care for themselves.
Office: A building or portion of a building wherein services are performed involving predominantly
administrative, professional, or clerical operations.
Office, business and professional: (see Business and Professional Office)
Office, medical: (see Medical or Dental Clinic)
Off-Street Parking Space or Parking Bays: A reasonably level space, available for the parking of one (1)
motor vehicle, not less than nine (9) feet wide and having an area of not less than one hundred sixty-two
(162) square feet exclusive of passageways or other means of circulation or access.
One Hundred-Year Flood: A flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that
has a one (1) percent chance of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
On-Site: That area within the boundary of any land to be developed or planned for development.
Open Space: An area that is intended to provide light and air, and is designed for either environmental,
scenic, or recreational purposes and may include, but is not limited to, lawns, decorative planting,
walkways, active and passive recreation areas, playgrounds, fountains, swimming pools, wooded areas, and
water bodies, but not including driveways, parking lots, and storage yards.
Open Space, Common: Open space within or related to a development, not in individually owned lots or
dedicated for public use, but which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the
residents of a development.
Operator: The owner or operator of any facility or activity subject to regulation under this Ordinance.
12 - 30 Updated March 2020
Outdoor Lighting: (see Lighting)
Outdoor Storage: The keeping in an unroofed area of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles
in the same place for more than one (1) week.
Owner: The owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein; a mortgagee, or vendee
in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, or other person, firm, or corporation in
control of a property.
Owner-Applicant: (see Applicant-Owner).
Parcel: A continuous quantity of land, as shown on the official parcel maps of the County Commissioner
of the Revenue and/or an approved record plat, in the possession of, owned by, or recorded as the property
of the same person or persons.
Park: An area open to the general public and reserved for recreational, educational, or scenic purposes.
Parking, off-street: Parking in spaces designated outside of the street right-of-way.
Parking, on-street: Parking in spaces designated within the street right-of-way.
Parking Lot: An area not within a building where motor vehicles may be stored for the purposes of
temporary, daily, or overnight off-street parking. For the purposes of this Article, parking lots are defined
as any area used for the display or parking of any and all types of vehicles, boats, farm machinery, lawn
and garden equipment, or heavy construction equipment, whether or not these items are for sale or lease.
This definition includes, but is not limited to, parking lots and display areas for automobile dealerships and
service stations. The area of the parking lot shall be calculated to include all paved areas used for ingress,
egress, internal circulation, loading, and parking stalls.
Parking Space, All Weather: A parking space surfaced to whatever extent necessary to permit reasonable
use under all conditions of weather.
Passive Recreation: (see Recreation, Passive)
Passive Recreation Area: (see Recreation Area or Facilities, Passive)
Patio Home or Patio House: For purposes herein, same as atrium house (also see Atrium House,
Townhouse).
Peak Flow Rate: The maximum instantaneous flow from a given storm condition at a particular location.
Performance Bond: Surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or other such legal
arrangement acceptable to the Town to ensure that measures could be taken by the Town, at the applicant’s
expense, should they fail to initiate or maintain appropriate action per the approved site plan or permit.
Permittee: The person to whom the permit authorizing construction, building, or land-disturbing activities
is issued, and who is ultimately responsible for those activities.
12 - 31 Updated March 2020
Person: Any individual, partnership, form, association, joint venture, public private corporation, trust,
estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, county, city, town, or other
political subdivision of the Commonwealth, any interstate body, or other legal entity.
Personal Service Establishment or Store: Establishments primarily engaged in the repair, care,
maintenance or customizing of personal property that is worn or carried about the person, or is a physical
component of the person, such as the following which will serve as illustration: beauty parlors, barber
shops, shoe repair, tailor shops, opticians, and similar places of business. Personal Service Establishments
do not include dry cleaning plants, or linen or diaper service establishments.
Pet, Household: Small, domestic animals that are customarily kept in the house or residential yard for the
company or enjoyment of the owner, such as but not limited to dogs, cats, rabbits, birds, rodents, fish and
other such animals that pose no threat, harm or disturbance to neighboring residents or properties.
Pet Grooming: A commercial business limited to the routine grooming of household pets, as defined
herein, including bathing, hair cutting and similar functions.
Pipeline, Major: A main trunk pipeline that carries water, gas or other material, or that collects stormwater
or wastewater, and connects to one or more smaller lines that provide the service to specific customers.
Pipestem Lot: (see Lot, Pipestem).
Planned Unit Development: A development of land that is under unified control and is planned and
developed as a whole in a single development operation or programmed series of development stages,
including principal and accessory structures and uses substantially related to the character and purposes of
the development, and including streets, circulation ways, utilities, buildings, open spaces, and other site
features and improvements. It also includes a program for the provision, operation, and maintenance of
such areas, facilities, and improvements as will be for common use by some or all of the occupants of the
planned development but will not be provided, operated, or maintained at public expense. PUD includes
mixed-use developments, single use residential developments and/or commercial developments, in accord
with the provisions of this Ordinance.
Planner: Person qualified to prepare site development plans, either licensed as such or meeting the
educational training and work experience standards for membership of the American Institute of Certified
Planners.
Planning Director: The person designated by the Town Manager to serve in this capacity. All references
to the Planning Director in this Ordinance shall also include the Community Development Director.
Plat: A map or plan of a tract or parcel of land which is to be or has been subdivided (when used as a verb,
plat is synonymous with subdivide).
Playground: A recreational area which is graded and either planted in grass or paved, or a combination of
both, which may have play equipment, and which may be lighted or unlighted for nighttime sports activities
in accord with the provisions of this ordinance.
Plumbing and electrical supply: A business which sells plumbing and/or electric products on a wholesale
basis, and may sell at retail as well.
Porch: A structure attached to a building to shelter an entrance or to serve as a semi-enclosed space, usually
roofed and generally open-sided, but it may be screened or glass enclosed.
12 - 32 Updated March 2020
Premise: A contiguous parcel of land with its appurtenances and buildings that functions as a unit. For the
purpose of this ordinance, an outparcel along the perimeter of a shopping center or similar multi-tenant use
that contains a freestanding building and a parking area separate from the shopping center as indicated on
an approved site plan shall be considered a premises separate from the premises of the shopping center.
Printing establishments: Printing, publishing, and engraving establishment; photographic processing;
blueprinting; photocopying; and similar uses
Profile: A drawing of a side or sectional elevation of an object.
Property: Any tract, lot, or parcel, or several of the same collected together for the purpose of subdividing,
preparing a site development plan, and/or developing.
Public Buildings: (see Building, Public)
Public Facilities Manual: The Town of Warrenton Public Facilities Manual. This manual provides
standards and specifications for public facilities construction within the Town.
Public Water and Sewer Systems: A water or sewer system owned and operated by a municipality or
county, or owned and operated by a private individual or a corporation approved by the Governing Body
and properly licensed by the State Corporation Commission, and subject to special regulations as herein set
forth.
Pumping station: A component of a public water or wastewater system that pumps material from one line
to another for either distribution or collection.
R – District (Residential District): Any zoning district beginning with "R" and/or any zoning district
designed primarily for residential uses.
Raceway or Wireway: A raceway or wireway is a form of mounting structure for signs that are a narrow
structure attached to a wall where electrical conduit can run within and where the sign structure itself is
mounted to the raceway or wireway.
Recreation, Active: Intensive play or athletic activity involving individual or group participation in games,
sports or other activity. Includes such activities as baseball, basketball, tennis, soccer, golf, swimming,
riding and other activities involving physical exertion. May be private, public or commercial in nature.
Recreation Area or Facilities, Active: Area or facilities designed for intensive play or athletic activity by
either juveniles or adults.
Recreation, Commercial: (see Commercial Recreation)
Recreation, Passive: Activity involving minimal physical exertion such as sitting, walking, picnicking,
bird watching and reading.
Recreation Area or Facilities, Passive: Natural areas with or without facilities, primarily scenic, for
passive activities, e.g., sitting, walking, riding, or picnicking.
Recycling Center: A facility that is not a junkyard and in which recoverable resources, such as newspapers,
glassware, and metal cans, are collected, stored, flattened, crushed, or bundled, either by machine or by
12 - 33 Updated March 2020
hand, within a completely enclosed building, in preparation for further processing or manufacturing at
another facility.
Recycling Collection Point: An incidental use that serves as a neighborhood drop-off point for recoverable
resources, for temporary storage in containers, or small structures, not including processing of such items.
Generally, these facilities are located in shopping center parking lots, or other public or semi-public areas
such as churches or schools.
Recycling Plant: A facility that is not a junkyard and in which recoverable resources, such as magazines,
books, and other paper products; glass; metal cans; and other products, are recycled, reprocessed, and
treated, within a completely enclosed building, to return such products to a condition in which they may
again be used for production.
Rental service establishment: A business that rents household equipment and/or vehicles.
Rescue Squad: An emergency medical and rescue company, typically operated as a non-profit
organization, using emergency medical vehicles to serve customers.
Rest Home: (see Nursing Home).
Restaurant: An establishment whose principal business is the selling of unpackaged food to the customer
in a ready-to-consume state, in individual servings, or in nondisposable containers, and where the customer
consumes these foods while seated at tables or counters located within the building. This definition also
includes cafes, cafeterias, sit-down restaurants, tea rooms, confectionery shops, refreshment stands, and
outdoor cafes.
Restaurant, Carry-Out: An establishment that provides prepared food for pick-up by the customer or
delivery by the restaurant employees, but not eat-in facilities.
Restaurant, Drive-Through: An establishment that delivers prepared food, beverages, and/or desserts to
customers in motor vehicles, regardless of whether or not it also serves customers who are not in motor
vehicles, for consumption on or off the premises.
Restaurant, Fast Food: An establishment whose principal business is the sale of pre-prepared or rapidly
prepared food, beverages, and/or desserts directly to the customer in a ready-to-consume state for
consumption either within the restaurant building or off premises. Orders are not generally taken at the
customer's table and food is generally served in disposable wrapping or containers.
Retail Stores and Shops: Buildings for the display and sale of merchandise at retail (but specifically
exclusive of coal, wood, and lumber yards), such as the following which serve as illustrations:
drugstore, newsstand, food or grocery store, candy shop, dry goods and notions store, antique store, gift
shop, hardware store, household appliance store, furniture store, florist, music and radio store. This group
also includes the consolidation of retail stores into one or more buildings as a shopping center.
Retail uses, General: (see Retail Stores and Shops)
Retail uses, Personal services: Retail uses that provide services to individuals, such as barber, beauty
salon, nail care, and the like.
Retail uses, Business services: Retail uses that provide services to businesses, such as office supplies,
office equipment, data processing, and the like.
12 - 34 Updated March 2020
Retail Use, Automated: A retail establishment that is fully automated, without a full time attendant or
proprietor.
Retention Facility: The same as a Detention Facility except that the lower water elevation of the pond may
be at a level lower than the normal hydraulic grade line of the drainage system into which it drains. Water
detained in this lower elevation must therefore be dissipated by evaporation, seepage into the soil, or
retained as a permanent water pool.
Reverse Frontage: A lot with double frontage which is not accessible from one of the streets upon which
it fronts, usually the street designed for or experiencing the highest vehicular traffic volumes.
Right-of-Way: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road,
electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or for
another special use. May include a fee simple or easement ownership.
Road, Public: All public property reserved or dedicated for street traffic, maintained by the Town of
Warrenton or the Virginia Department of Highways.
Road, Private: A way open to vehicular ingress and egress established as a separate tract for the benefit of
certain adjacent properties, not including driveways, and not maintained by the Town of Warrenton or the
Virginia Department of Highways.
Rooming House: (see Boarding House).
Rug and carpet cleaning and storage with incidental sales of rugs and carpets: A business which cleans
and/or stores rugs and carpets and which may sell or trade such items as an incidental use.
Satellite Dish Antenna: A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar
configured, usually in a round, parabolic shape, intended to receive and/or transmit radio, electromagnetic,
or microwaves from terrestrially based and/or orbitally based sources.
School: Any public, parochial, or private place of instruction that provides a curriculum of elementary or
secondary academic instruction, including kindergartens, elementary schools, middle schools, junior high
schools, vocational schools, and high schools, meeting all the licensing requirements of the Commonwealth
of Virginia.
Screening: (see Buffer).
Seating Capacity: The actual seating capacity of an area based upon the number of fixed seats or one (1)
seat per eighteen (18) inches of bench or pew length. For other areas where seats are not fixed, the seating
capacity shall be one (1) seat for every seven (7) square feet of net floor area, excluding floor area devoted
to permanent displays and/or storage.
Security service office or station: A kiosk, office or other structure out of which the security personnel of
a building or complex operate.
Sediment: Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been
moved from its site or origin by air, water, gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface, either
above or below sea level.
12 - 35 Updated March 2020
Self-Service Storage Units: (see Mini-Warehouse).
Senior Citizens Center: A licensed facility which provides care, supervision, and recreation activities for
persons 55 years of age and older, during a portion of the day and which is not used for lodging or overnight
care.
Service Station: Buildings and premises where the primary use is the supply and dispensing of retail motor
fuels, lubricants, batteries, tires, motor vehicle accessories, and/or light maintenance activities, performed
within an enclosed building, such as engine tune-ups, lubrication, and minor or emergency repairs. This
definition does not include heavy automobile maintenance activities such as engine overhauls, automobile
painting, and body or fender work.
Setback: The minimum distance by which any building or structure must be separated from the front, side,
or rear lot line.
Setback Line: The line which establishes the required setback. The same as building line.
Shopping Center: A grouping of retail business and service uses on a single site with common, shared
parking facilities and combined access points to the public road system.
Shrub: A low-growing, usually multi-stemmed, woody plant.
Sign: Any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, visible from a public place, a public rightof-
way, any parking area or right-of-way open to use by the general public, or any navigable body of water
which is designed and used to attract attention to an institution, organization, business, product, service,
event, or location by any means involving words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, logos, colors,
illumination, or projected images. The term “sign” also does not include the display of merchandise for sale
on the site of the display.
Sign Area: The entire display area of a sign including the advertising surface located on one or more sign
faces and any framing, trim and molding, but not including the supporting structure as measured pursuant
to Section 6-5.
Sign Copy: Those letters, numerals, and figures, symbols, logos, and graphic elements comprising the
content or message of a sign.
Sign Face: The surface of the sign upon, against or through which the message of the sign is exhibited.
Sign Height: The vertical distance to top of sign structure as measured pursuant to Section 6-5.
Sign, Awning: A sign painted on, printed on or attached flat against the surface of an awning.
Sign, Banner: A temporary sign constructed of a flexible substrate such as, canvas, plastic, fabric or similar
lightweight, non-rigid material that can be mounted to a structure with cord, rope, cable, or a similar method.
Where a banner sign is supported by stakes or another type of supporting structure for posting in the ground,
such sign shall be classified as a “Sign, Yard.”
Sign, Building: Signs that are attached to the building including wall signs, projecting signs, awning signs,
marquee signs, suspended signs, and canopy signs.
Sign, Canopy: A sign attached to the soffit or fascia of a canopy.
12 - 36 Updated March 2020
Sign, Changeable Copy: A sign designed so that the characters, letter or illustrations can be changed or
rearranged manually or electronically without altering the sign display surface. May also be known as
readerboards. See also the definition of “Sign, Electronic Message Center.”
Sign, Drive-Through: Any signage allocated along a drive-through lane that is oriented toward the
customer or user in the drive-through lane.
Sign, Electronic Message Center: Any sign that uses changing lights to form a sign message or messages
wherein the sequence of messages and the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified
by electronic processes. Such signs may be included in the definition of other types of signs if they
otherwise meet those definitions and do not have features of prohibited signs, such as flashing signs.
Sign, Feather: A temporary sign that is constructed of lightweight cloth, canvas, plastic fabric or similar
lightweight, non-rigid material and that is supported by a single vertical pole mounted into the ground or
on a portable structure that may resemble a sail, bow, or teardrop.
Sign, Free Standing: Any sign supported upon the ground by a monument, pedestal, bracing, or other
permanent measure and not attached to any building. See also the definition of “Sign, Monument.
Sign, Marquee: A sign attached to and made a part of a marquee or any similar projections from a building,
with changeable, fixed or both types of lettering in use.
Sign, Monument: A permanent freestanding sign other than a pole sign, not attached to a building, which
is placed upon or supported by the ground independently of any other structure, typically on a monument
or pedestal structure.
Sign, Neon: Any illuminated sign that is comprised of glass tubing that contains neon or other gases that
light up in various colors when an electric discharge is applied to the gas.
Sign, Nonconforming: Any sign which was erected legally prior to the adoption of this code, but which
does not comply with subsequently enacted sign restrictions and regulations or a sign which does not
conform to the sign code requirements.
Sign, On-Premise: A sign with a message that relates to an activity located on the same premise.
Sign, Permanent: A sign permitted by this code to be located on the premises for an unlimited period of
time, constructed of rigid material, and designed to be permanently attached to a structure or the ground.
Sign, Portable: Any sign not attached to the ground or a sign designed to be transported, including signs
designed to be transported by means of wheels. Such signs shall not include sidewalk signs as allowed in
Section 6-15.
Sign, Projecting: A sign that is affixed perpendicular to a building or wall and extends more than eighteen
inches beyond the face of such building or wall.
Sign, Sidewalk (A-Frame): A freestanding sign which is ordinarily in the shape of an “A” or some
variation thereof, which is readily moveable, and is not permanently attached to the ground or any structure.
See also the definition of T-frame signs. Such signs are placed on a public sidewalk, private sidewalk, or
similar walkway, in a manner established in Section 6-15.6.1.
12 - 37 Updated March 2020
Sign, Sidewalk (T-Frame): A freestanding sign which is ordinarily in the shape of an upside down “T” or
some variation thereof, which is readily moveable, and is not permanently attached to the ground or any
structure. See also the definition for A-frame signs. Such signs are placed on a public sidewalk, private
sidewalk, or similar walkway, in a manner established in Section 6-15.6.1.
Sign, Temporary: A sign that is neither permanently anchored to the ground, nor permanently affixed to
a structure, nor mounted on a chassis, constructed of materials not intended for extended/permanent use,
and/or is intended for a limited period of display.
Sign, Vehicle: A vehicle sign shall be considered to be used for the primary purpose of advertising if the
vehicle fails to display current license plates, inspection sticker, or municipal decal, if the vehicle is
inoperable, if evidence of paid-to-date local taxes cannot be made available, or if the sign alters the standard
design of such vehicle. Vehicle signs include those attached to or placed on a vehicle or trailer.
Sign, Wall: A sign attached directly to an exterior wall of a building with the exposed face of the sign in a
plane parallel to the building wall. A wall signs shall include cornice and transom signs as allowed in the
Historic District.
Sign, Window: A sign attached to, in contact with, placed upon or painted on the window or door of a
building which is intended for viewing from the outside of such building. This does not include merchandise
located in a window. A structure that would be considered a sign if mounted on the exterior of the building,
but which is mounted inside the building and oriented to be visible through the window by a person outside
of the window, shall be considered a window sign for the purposes of this Article.
Sign, Yard: Any temporary sign placed on the ground or attached to a supporting structure, posts, or poles,
that is not attached to any building.
Sign fabricating and painting: The fabrication, painting or assembly of any type of sign as defined herein.
Simplicity: Directness of expression in design.
Site Development Plan: Detailed drawings indicating all building construction and land improvements,
including landscape treatments and related information as required by this Ordinance. Also defined as the
Site Development Plan Ordinance, Town of Warrenton, Virginia, December, 1970.
Small equipment sales and/or service operations: A commercial enterprise devoted to the repair and
sales of small scale motorized equipment for residential or commercial activities, such as lawn mowers and
power tools.
Special Exception: (see Special Use Permit)
Special Use Permit: A permit for a use that, owing to some special characteristics attendant to its operation,
installation, or relation to the neighborhood, is permitted in a district, subject to Town Council or BZA
approval, in accordance with the provisions of Article 11 of this Ordinance. Special Use Permits are subject
to special requirements and/or conditions that may be imposed by the Council or BZA, respectively,
different from those usual requirements for the district in which the special use in located.
Specifications: A detailed, precise presentation of the materials and procedures to be employed in the
construction of all physical improvements required by the ordinance applicable in the Town of Warrenton,
Virginia.
12 - 38 Updated March 2020
Specimen tree: any tree that has been individually designated by the local governing body to be notable
by virtue of its outstanding size and quality for its particular species.
Square: Land open to the general public for passive recreational use that contains paved pedestrian plazas,
lawns, shade trees and/or landscaped areas. Paved pedestrian plazas may cover up to 90% of the square.
Squares may be publicly owned or owned in common by a property owners association. Squares are not
required to be square or rectangular in shape.
State: The Commonwealth of Virginia.
State Water Control Law: Chapter 3.1 (§62.1-44.2 et seq.) of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia.
State waters: All water, on the surface and under the ground, wholly or partially within or bordering the
Commonwealth or within its jurisdiction, including wetlands.
Steep Slope: A slope exceeding twenty-five (25) percent grade.
Storage yards: A yard area in which materials, equipment and/or vehicles used for construction, excavating
or similar activities are stored, kept and/or maintained. Storage yards may be partially covered, enclosed or
screened.
Stormwater: Precipitation that is discharged across the land surface or through conveyances to one or more
waterways and that may include stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage.
Stormwater Management: Under the Articles, Manuals, Forms, and Regulations set forth for the purposes
of Stormwater Management, in addition to the definitions set forth in 9VAC25-870-10 of the Virginia
Stormwater Management Regulations, as amended, which are expressly adopted and incorporated herein
by reference, the words and terms used in this Ordinance have the following meanings unless otherwise
specified herein.
Adequate channel: A natural or manmade channel that will convey the designated frequency storm
event without overtopping the channel bank nor causing erosive damage to the channel bed or banks.
For manmade channels, the ten-year frequency storm is used to verify that stormwater will not
overtop the channel banks, and the two-year storm is used to demonstrate that stormwater will not
cause erosion to the channel bed or banks. For natural channels, that channel capable of conveying
the runoff from a two-year storm without overtopping its banks or eroding the channel lining, or
without causing flooding of structures from the 100-year storm event.
Administrator, VSMP: The Administrator of the Town of Warrenton Virginia Stormwater
Management Program.
Agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan: A contract between the VSMP authority and
the owner or permittee that specifies methods that shall be implemented to comply with the
requirements of a VSMP for the construction of a single-family residence; such contract may be
executed by the VSMP authority in lieu of a stormwater management plan. This differs from an
Agreement in lieu of an erosion and sediment control plan.
Applicant/Developer: Any person, his Agent, or his assigns submitting a stormwater management
plan for approval.
Channel: An elongated depression having a definite bed and bank which serves to confine the flow
of water.
12 - 39 Updated March 2020
Concentrated Flow: Converging area between sheet flow and channel flow. The area where a stream
could be said to begin.
Conduit or conveyance: A general term for any open or enclosed facility, natural or man-made, which
is intended for the conveyance of water.
Control measure: Any best management practice or stormwater facility (BMP) or other method used
to minimize the discharge of pollutants to state waters.
Control Section: A section or a reach of a conduit where conditions exist that make the water level
stable. A control section may be partial or complete. A complete control section is independent of
downstream conditions and is effective at all stages. An overflow dam or rock ledge crossing a
channel are examples. Control sections may be either natural or artificial.
Culvert: A closed conduit carrying water under a highway, railroad, or other embankment. A culvert
is distinguished from a bridge by generally having the same material all around its perimeter, and
having a regular, symmetrical shape.
Debris: Any material, including floating trash or suspended sediment moved by a flowing stream.
Deter: The practice of containing standing water for a brief time after a surface water runoff event
for the purpose of reducing peak runoff rates and/or for removing pollutants. Detention may be
achieved in facilities that are normally dry (detention ponds).
Discharge:
(a) The quantity of water, silt, or other mobile substances passing along a conduit per unit of
time: rate of flow expressed as cubic feet per second, liters per second, million of gallons per
day, etc.
(b) The act involved in water or other liquid passing through an opening or along a conduit or
channel.
(c) The water or other liquid which emerges from an opening or passes along a conduit or channel.
Ditch: An artificial channel.
Flood Routing: Determining the changes in the rise and fall of floodwater as it proceeds downstream
along a drainageway, including the effects of structures.
Frequency of Storm: The anticipated period in years that will elapse, based on average probability of
storms in the design region, before a storm of a given intensity and/or total volume will recur. A 10-
year storm can be expected to occur on the average of once every 10 years, but has a 10% chance of
occurring in any given year.
General permit: The state permit titled GENERAL PERMIT FOR DISCHARGES OF
STORMWATER FROM CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES found in Part XIV (9VAC25-880-1 et
seq.) of the Regulations authorizing a category of discharges under the CWA and the Act within a
geographical area of the Commonwealth of Virginia.
Infiltration Facility: A stormwater management facility which temporarily impounds runoff and
discharges it via infiltration through the surrounding soil. While an infiltration facility may also be
equipped with an outlet structure to discharge impounded runoff, such discharge is normally reserved
12 - 40 Updated March 2020
for overflow and other emergency conditions. Since an infiltration facility impounds runoff only
temporarily, it is normally dry during non-rainfall periods.
Layout: A conceptual drawing sufficient to provide for the specified stormwater management
facilities required at the time of approval.
Minor modification: An amendment to an existing general permit before its expiration not requiring
extensive review and evaluation including, but not limited to, changes in EPA promulgated test
protocols, increasing monitoring frequency requirements, changes in sampling locations, and changes
to compliance dates within the overall compliance schedules. A minor general permit modification
or amendment does not substantially alter general permit conditions, substantially increase or
decrease the amount of surface water impacts, increase the size of the operation, or reduce the
capacity of the facility to protect human health or the environment.
On site Stormwater Management Facilities: Facilities which are designed to control stormwater
runoff emanating from a specific site.
Peak Discharge: The maximum instantaneous flow from a given storm condition at a specific
location.
Post-development Runoff: Conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist after
completion of the land development activity on a specific site or tract of land.
Predevelopment Runoff: Conditions that exist at the time that plans for a land development activity
are approved by the plan approval authority. For staged development, the first item approved or
permitted shall establish the time at which predevelopment conditions are fixed. In the case of land
development by governmental agencies, the initiation of land acquisition shall establish the time at
which predevelopment conditions are fixed.
Regional Watershed-Wide Stormwater Management Facility or Regional Facility: A facility or series
of facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from a large contributing area, although only
portions of the watershed may experience land development.
Regulations: Virginia Stormwater Management Program (VSMP) Permit Regulations, 9VAC25-870,
as amended.
State Board: The Virginia State Water Control Board.
State permit: An approval to conduct a land-disturbing activity issued by the State Board in the form
of a state stormwater individual permit or coverage issued under a state general permit or an approval
issued by the State Board for stormwater discharges from an MS4. Under these state permits, the
Commonwealth imposes and enforces requirements pursuant to the federal Clean Water Act and
regulations, the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and the Regulations.
Storm Sewer: A sewer that carries only stormwater, drainage and other surface water, but not
domestic sewage or industrial wastes. A storm sewer system consists of underground conduits, inlets,
manholes, open channels, swales and special appurtenances.
Stormwater Detention Basin or Detention Basin: A stormwater management facility which
temporarily impounds runoff and discharges it through a hydraulic outlet structure to a downstream
conveyance system. While a certain amount of outflow may also occur via infiltration through the
12 - 41 Updated March 2020
surrounding soil, such amounts are negligible when compared to the outlet structure discharge rates
and are, therefore, not considered in the facility's design. Since a detention facility impounds runoff
only temporarily, it is normally dry during non-rainfall periods.
Stormwater Drainage System: A system of conduits and associated structures used to collect and
convey runoff.
Stormwater Management Facility: A device that controls stormwater and changes the characteristics
of runoff including, but not limited to the quantity and quality, the period of release, or the velocity
of flow.
Stormwater management plan: Document(s) containing material describing methods for complying
with the requirements of Article 5 of this Ordinance.
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP): A document that is prepared in accordance with
good engineering practices and that identifies potential sources of pollutants that may reasonably be
expected to affect the quality of stormwater discharges from the construction site, and otherwise
meets the requirements of this Ordinance. The document shall identify and require the
implementation of control measures, and shall include an approved erosion and sediment control
plan, an approved stormwater management plan, and a pollution prevention plan, and other
information that fully demonstrate how the project will comply with the applicable regulations and
requirements.
Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse: A reference website maintained by the Department of
Environmental Quality that contains detailed design standards and specifications for control measures
that may be used in Virginia to comply with the requirements of the Virginia Stormwater
Management Act and associated regulations.
VSMP Authority Permit: An approval to conduct a land-disturbing activity issued by the
Administrator for the initiation of a land-disturbing activity, in accordance with this Ordinance, and
which may only be issued after evidence of general permit coverage has been provided by the
Department.
Waste-load allocation or waste-load (WLA): The portion of a receiving surface water's loading or
assimilative capacity allocated to one of its existing or future point sources of pollution. WLAs are a
type of water quality-based effluent limitation.
Streams: Water bodies identified as streams on the US Geological Survey topographical maps, the National
Wetlands Inventory, or county soil maps.
Story: That portion of a building, other than the basement, included between the surface of any floor and
the surface of the floor next above it. If there be no floor above it, the space between the floor and the
ceiling next above it.
Story, Half: A space under a sloping roof, which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face
not more than three (3) feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two thirds of the
floor area is finished off for use.
Street: A strip of land subject to vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic providing means of access to property;
also designated as road, lane, drive, avenue, right-of-way, highway, boulevard, trail, court, place, terrace,
etc. (see Street, Public)
12 - 42 Updated March 2020
Street, Arterial: A highway utilized primarily as a supplement to, and an extension of, the interstate
highway system, defined in the Virginia State Highway Commission Standards as an arterial highway. A
minimum right-of-way of one hundred twenty (120) feet is required and carrying capacity is in excess of
eight thousand (8,000) vehicles per lane per day.
Street, Collector: Any existing or future street shown as a collector street on the adopted Comprehensive
Plan or that carries a volume of through traffic between four hundred (400) and three thousand (3,000)
vehicles per day.
Street, Interstate: A thoroughfare utilized to carry interstate traffic with a minimum right-of-way of three
hundred (300) feet in rural area and carrying capacity in excess of fifteen hundred (1,500) vehicles per lane
per hour.
Street, Line: The dividing line between a street or road right-of-way and the contiguous property.
Street, Local: A street that carries or is anticipated to carry a volume of traffic less than four hundred (400)
vehicles per day, the right-of-way of which shall not be less than fifty (50) feet.
Street, Primary Thoroughfare: A street that carries or is anticipated to carry a volume of traffic exceeding
three thousand (3,000) vehicles per day, the right-of-way of which shall not be less than seventy (70) feet,
and should, where feasible, have a minimum right-of-way of ninety (90) feet.
Street, Private: A local or collector street constructed to Town and State standards or the equivalent
thereto, guaranteed to be maintained by a private corporation by means of a covenant, deed, and easement
acceptable to the Town of Warrenton. Such streets shall have guaranteed public vehicular access.
Street, Public: All public property reserved or dedicated for street traffic, improved to the standards set by
the Town of Warrenton or the Virginia Department of Transportation. The lot frontage and setback
requirements of this ordinance refer to the public street.
Street, Secondary Collector: A street that carries or is anticipated to carry a volume of through-traffic
exceeding four hundred (400) vehicles per day, the right-of-way of which shall not be less than fifty (50)
feet nor more than ninety (90) feet depending upon existing or anticipated traffic volume.
Street, Service Drive: A public right-of-way generally parallel with and contiguous to a major highway.
Primarily designed to promote safety by eliminating pernicious ingress and egress to the major safe and
orderly points of access to the major highway.
Street, Width: The total width of the strip of land dedicated or reserved for public travel includes roadway,
curb and gutter, sidewalks, planting strips, and where necessary, utility easements.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground,
or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground. This includes, among other things,
drainage structures, dwellings, buildings, signs, fences, walls, etc., but not private driveways.
Studios for artists, photographers, and sculptors: A work space for the creation of artworks,
photography and related or similar activities.
Studios and trade schools: A work space for the conduct, teaching and/or practice of artist or business
trades.
12 - 43 Updated March 2020
Subdivide: To divide any tract, parcel, or lot of land into two (2) or more parts for the purpose of
transferring ownership of any part or for the purpose of building development of any sort. The term
"subdivide" includes the term "resubdivide" and when appropriate to the context shall relate to the process
of subdividing.
Subdivision: means the same as “subdivision” as defined in Article 5 of the Town Subdivision Ordinance.
Subdivision Agent: An employee of the Community Development Department designated by the Planning
Director to administer the Subdivision Ordinance and any other similar duties as may be assigned by the
Planning Director.
Substations: An appurtenant structure for collecting, processing or distributing a public utility commodity,
including electric substations but not including any part of a water or sewer system.
Surveyor, Land: An individual who is certified and licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia and who
is registered with the State Department of Professional and Occupational Registration as a "registered land
surveyor."
Taxicabs stands: An office, kiosk or other station at which taxis are dispatched.
Taxidermist: A person who prepares animal carcasses for ornamental display.
Tea Room: A room or rooms within a private residence, where teas, other beverages, and food products
are provided for compensation. The operator of the facility shall live on the premises.
Temporary family health care structure: A transportable residential structure, providing an environment
facilitating a caregiver's provision of care for a mentally or physically impaired person, that (i) is primarily
assembled at a location other than its site of installation, (ii) is limited to one occupant who shall be the
mentally or physically impaired person, (iii) has no more than 300 gross square feet, and (iv) complies with
applicable provisions of the Industrialized Building Safety Law (§ 36-70 et seq.) and the Uniform Statewide
Building Code (§ 36-97 et seq.). Placing the temporary family health care structure on a permanent
foundation shall not be required or permitted.
Theaters: A building, structure or place designed or used primarily for the commercial exhibition of motion
pictures to the general public or used for the performance of plays, acts, dramas or musical productions by
actors, actresses and/or musicians.
Time of Concentration: The time it takes for runoff to travel from the most hydraulically distant part of
the watershed to a point of reference, (i.e. basin outlet, drop inlet, etc.).
Tire recapping and retreading: A business which re-caps and/or re-treads motor vehicle tires.
Total maximum daily load (TMDL): The sum of the individual waste-load allocations for point sources,
load allocations for nonpoint sources, natural background loading and a margin of safety. TMDLs can be
expressed in terms of either mass per time, toxicity, or other appropriate measure. The TMDL process
provides for point versus nonpoint source trade-offs. TMDLs for the Chesapeake Bay include phosphorus,
nitrogen and total suspended solids (TSS).
Tourist Home: A dwelling where only lodging is provided for compensation for up to five (5) persons (in
contradistinction to hotels and boardinghouses) and open to transients.
12 - 44 Updated March 2020
Town: The Town of Warrenton, Virginia, a municipal corporation.
Town Arborist: International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) Certified Arborist contracted by the Town to
oversee the preservation of Town’s tree inventory.
Town Engineer: The person designated to serve in this capacity by the Town Manager.
Town Manager: The duly appointed Town Manager of Warrenton, Virginia.
Townhouse: (see Dwelling, Townhouse).
Transitional Housing: The housing is designed to provide temporary housing for not more than four (4)
unrelated persons for a maximum of six months. Transitional housing and counseling services shall be
provided by a coalition of churches and/or human service organizations. A house coordinator must reside
on the premises, and a substitute house coordinator shall be on the premises if the house coordinator is away
from the residence for more than one day.
Transmission Line, Major: A main trunk line that carries electricity, telecommunications signals or other
similar items, and connects to one or more smaller lines that provide the service to specific customers.
Transmission and receiving towers: Any structure used for the purpose of supporting one (1) or more
antennas or microwave dishes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or pole towers. The
term includes radio, television and telephone transmission towers, alternative antenna support structures
such as buildings and rooftops, and other existing support structures, including monopoles. Additional
definitions include:
(1) Alternative Tower Structure: Man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and
similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas
or towers.
(2) Antenna: Any exterior apparatus designed for telephone, radio, or television
communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves, provided that this
definition shall not be interpreted to include an antenna that is designed to receive direct broadcast
satellite service, including direct-to-home satellite services, that is one (1) meter or less in diameter;
or an antenna that is designed to receive video programming services via multipoint distribution
services; including multi-channel, multipoint distribution services, instructional television fixed
services, and local multipoint distribution services, and that is one (1) meter or less in diameter or
diagonal measurement; or an antenna that is designed to receive television broadcast signals.
(3) FAA: The Federal Aviation Administration.
(4) FCC: The Federal Communications Commission.
(5) Height: When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from ground level to
the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna.
(6) Telecommunication Facility: Any structure used for the purpose of supporting one (1) or more
antennas or microwave dishes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or pole towers.
The term includes radio and television transmission towers, alternative antenna support structures
such as buildings and rooftops, and other existing support structures.
(a) Telecommunication Facility, Freestanding: A structure that stands alone for
the sole purpose of supporting antennas, dishes and other such telecommunications
equipment.
(b) Telecommunication Facility, Attached: A structure or building whose main
purpose is to support or house other uses, and to which antennas, dishes and other
12 - 45 Updated March 2020
such telecommunications equipment is attached so as to avoid constructing a
freestanding tower.
Travel Lane: Space specifically designated and reserved on the site for the movement of vehicular traffic.
Travel Trailer: A mobile unit less than twenty-nine (29) feet in length and less than four thousand five
hundred (4,500) pounds in weight which is designated for temporary human habitation.
Treatment Plant: The central facility for treatment and purification of water or wastewater, as part of a
public water or sewer system owned and operated by the Town or other government entity, or by an
approved private operator to serve a community area.
Tree canopy; tree cover: Includes all areas of coverage by plant material exceeding five feet in height and
the extent of planted tree canopy at 10 or 20 years maturity, based upon the following published reference:
Manual of Woody Landscape Plants: Their Identification, Ornamental Characteristics, Culture,
Propagation and Uses by Michael A. Dirr (or equivalent professional publication).
Tree, Canopy: A deciduous tree that normally exceeds thirty (30) feet in height at maturity, and is shown
on the list of species in Article 8 of this Ordinance.
Tree, Ornamental: A tree that normally does not exceed thirty (30) feet in height at maturity, and is shown
on the list of species in Article 8 of this Ordinance.
Tree Protection Zone: An area that is radial to the trunk of a tree in which no construction activity shall
occur. The tree protection zone shall be fifteen (15) feet from the trunk of the tree to be retained, or the
distance from the trunk to the dripline, whichever is greater. Where there are a group of trees or woodlands,
the tree protection zone shall be the aggregate of the protection zones for the individual trees.
Truck sales and service repair garages: A business which sells trucks and/or which provides repair and
maintenance services for trucks.
Use: Activity proposed for any portion or part of a parcel, tract, or lot.
Use, Accessory: (see Accessory Use).
U.S.G.S.: U.S. Geological Survey.
U.S.C. & G.S.: U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey.
Utility: (1) A system of facilities provided by any agency which, under public franchise or ownership, or
under certificate of convenience and necessity, provides the public with electricity, gas, heat, steam,
communication, rail transportation, water, sewage collection, or other similar service; (2) A closely
regulated private enterprise with an exclusive franchise for providing a public service; (3) the component
parts of such facilities, including poles, wires, transformers, underground pipelines or conduits. Treatment
plants are defined as separate items.
Variance: In the application of the Zoning Ordinance, a reasonable deviation from those provisions
regulating the shape, size, or area of a lot or parcel of land or the size, height, area, bulk, or location of a
building or structure when the strict application of the ordinance would unreasonably restrict the utilization
of the property, and such need for a variance would not be shared generally by other properties, and
12 - 46 Updated March 2020
provided such variance is not contrary to the purpose of the ordinance. It shall not include a change in use,
which change shall be accomplished by a rezoning or by a conditional zoning.
Vehicular Use Area: The entire paved area that encompasses all parking spaces, loading areas, stacking
spaces, and the access drives that provide access to those spaces but that does not include the entry drive or
driveway with no direct access to a parking space, stacking space, or loading space.
Vending Machine: An automated device for the sale of goods, typically snacks, beverages and the like.
Vending Gallery: A building or structure containing multiple vending machines.
Veterinary Hospital: A place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and the
boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the hospital use.
Video Game Gallery: (see Amusement Arcade)
Virginia Stormwater Management Act: Article 1.1 (§62.1-44.15:24 et seq.) of Chapter 6 of Title 62.1 of
the Code of Virginia.
Virginia Stormwater Management Program (VSMP): A program approved by the State Board after
September 13, 2011, that has been established by a locality to manage the quality and quantity of runoff
resulting from land-disturbing activities and shall include such items as local ordinances, rules, permit
requirements, annual standards and specifications, policies and guidelines, technical materials, and
requirements for plan review, inspection, enforcement, where authorized in this article, and evaluation
consistent with the requirements of this article and associated regulations.
Virginia Stormwater Management Program authority (VSMP authority): Authority approved by the
State Board after September 13, 2011, to operate a Virginia Stormwater Management Program.
Visitor Center: A facility established for the purpose of disseminating information about the Town,
County of Fauquier or the region. The facility may provide an interpretative area, and small auditorium for
visitors or tourists.
Warehouse: A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials.
Wall: A structure which serves to enclose or subdivide a building, usually presenting a continuous surface
except where penetrated by doors, windows, and the like.
Wall, Retaining: A wall constructed to support soil or sub-surface structures.
Water Storage Tank: An enclosed structure used for the storage of water for distribution.
Water and Sewer Systems: (see Public water and sewer systems)
Watercourse: Any naturally occurring, constant or intermittent, surface water and its associated banks,
bed, and floodplains.
Watershed: The total drainage area contributing runoff to a single point.
12 - 47 Updated March 2020
Waterway: A water body, or body of water, including periodic and permanent, partially or wholly
inundated areas. Waterways can include ephemeral, intermittent, and perennial streams, lakes, estuaries and
shorelines, ponds including vernal ponds, lakes, impoundments, and wetlands.
Wayside Stand, Roadside Stand, Wayside Market: Any structure or land used for the sale of agricultural
or horticultural produce, livestock, or merchandise produced by the owner or his family on their farm.
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs
and similar areas.
Wholesale Establishments: A business and its premises where goods are sold on a bulk basis to
distributors and direct sales to the general public are limited. Wholesale establishments are also
characterized by the use of trucks for delivery or pick-up of goods sold.
Woodland: An area comprising one (1) or more acres of wooded land where the largest trees have at least
a six (6) inch caliper, or a grove of trees forming one (1) canopy where ten (10) or more trees have at least
eight (8) inch calipers.
Yard: An open space on a lot other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward,
except as otherwise provided herein.
Yard, Front: An open space on the same lot as a building between the nearest front line of the building
(exclusive of steps) and the front lot or street line, and extending across the full width of the lot.
Yard, Rear: An open unoccupied space on the same lot as a building between the nearest rear line of the
building (exclusive of steps) and the rear line of the lot, and extending the full width of the lot.
Yard, Sale: Use of the premises of a residential dwelling for general sales of a temporary nature, open to
the public with the purpose of disposing of personal, family, or household goods or articles. The term yard
sale includes but is not limited to activities known as garage sales, porch sales, backyard sales, and moving
sales.
Yard, Side: An open unoccupied space on the same lot as a building between the nearest side line of the
building (exclusive of steps) and the side line of the lot, and extending from the front yard line to the rear
yard line.
Zero Lot Line: The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one (1) or more of the building's
sides rests directly on a lot line. The side(s) of the building resting on the line typically does not include
windows.
Zoning Administrator: An employee of the Community Development Department designated by the
Planning Director to administer the Zoning Ordinance and any other similar duties as may be assigned by
the Planning Director.
Zoning Ordinance: The Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Warrenton, Virginia.
Message Type Non-commercial
message
Residential Use
(Except RMF)
Residential Use
(In RMF)
Sign Type Yard & Banner
Signs Yard & Banner Yard & Banner Banner Yard A-Frame Banner Yard
Permit Required
(criteria) N/A N/A N/A
>9 sqft triggers permit; max 36
sqft area for all banner signs
combined; not mounted above
roofline; 15 days/four times per
year [new business may have
60 days to cover existing signs]
>9 sqft triggers permit; Max:
2 faces (back to back), 24
sqft, 6 ft high; 15 days/four
times per year
Allowed during business hours; Max:
one per first-floor business, 9 sqft, &
3 ft high; 7 ft wide sidewalk (4 ft
clearance); clear pathway; no
blocking structures/parking; internal
weighted; no attached banners,
pennants, etc.; wood / metal / sturdy
material; ARB required for material
other then wood (CBD)
>9 sqft triggers permit; max
36 sqft area for all banner
signs combined; not
mounted above roofline; 15
days/four times per year
[new business may have 60
days to cover existing signs]
>9 sqft triggers permit;
Max: 2 faces (back to
back), 24 sqft, 6 ft high;
15 days/four times per
year
No Permit (if within
criteria) & No Time
Limit
Max: 9 sqft area,
6ft high (each)
Max: 1 sign,
6 sqft, 4ft high
Max: 1 sign,
8 sqft, 6ft high N/A
12345678
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Updated September 2019
Prohibited Signs (Article 6-8)
Signs which are not securely affixed to the ground or otherwise affixed in a permanent manner to an approved supporting structure unless specifically permitted as a temporary sign
Signs mounted on or above the roofline of any building
Portable signs with the exception of sidewalk signs authorized under Section 6-16
Vehicle signs viewed from a public road with the primary purpose of providing signage not otherwise allowed by this Article. Vehicles or trailers shall not be parked continuously in one location to be used primarily as
additional signage. This does not apply to a vehicle parked at a driver’s residence and is the primary means of transportation to and from his or her place of employment
Any sign that copies or imitates an official sign, purports to have official status, or threatens public safety
Windblown devices, with the exception of flags as allowed in this ordinance
Flags attached to vehicles for sale or lease that are not used for personal use by the vehicle owner or lessee
Signs that employ any parts or elements which revolve, rotate, whirl, spin or otherwise make use of motion to attract attention. This shall not include changeable copy signs as allowed in Article 6
Flags that flutter, similar to, and including feather signs
Any sign not specifically allowed by Article 6
Signs with moving or flashing lights, except as noted in the changeable copy sign section
Beacons and searchlights, except for emergency purposes
Pennants and streamers
Signs that are applied to trees, bus shelters, utility poles, benches, trash receptacles, newspaper vending machines or boxes, or any other unapproved supporting structure, or otherwise placed in the public right-ofway
except as provided for in Section 6-6.12
Signs that obstruct or substantially interfere with any window, door, fire escape, stairway, ladder, or opening intended to provide light, air, ingress, or egress to any building
*Complete detailed temporary sign requirements are located in Article 6-15 of the Town of Warrenton 2006 Zoning Ordinance.
Temporary Signs (On-Site Only)*
Zoning District/Use All Districts
Commercial Message
Non-Residential District
Residential District
Non-Residential Use
Max: 9 sqft each; 18 sqft total sign area for each 100 ft of
frontage
Max: 9 sqft each; 18 sqft total sign area for each 100 ft
of frontage
WARRENTON HISTORIC DISTRICT
CRITERIA & STANDARDS FOR
ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL OF SIGNS
The following signs may be approved administratively pursuant to Sections 3-5.3.4.2.6 (a) and
(b) of the Zoning Ordinance.
Section I – CRITERIA FOR GENERAL SIGN TYPES
A. Administrative Approval of one sign
Wall Sign
? Wall signs are either painted directly onto the building surface or are on a panel or
signboard mounted on the face of the building.
? Wall signs should be attached in the least damaging means to the building’s materials
using the mortar joints instead of compromising the strength of a brick.
? A cornice sign is one placed on the frieze or broad flat under panel of the storefront
cornice. Applied raised letters of wood or metal are effective for such signs.
Staff may administratively approve a wall sign for a building that meets the following criteria:
? A wall sign of up to 20 square feet may be administratively approved.
? Wall sign boards must be round, oval, square, or rectangular. May have rounded or
notched corners.
? Wood and MDO are acceptable materials for administrative approval provided that they
are painted.
? A sign approved administratively may contain no more than 3 colors, background
included. Colors deemed by staff to be potentially too bold, bright, or fluorescent will
require review and approval by the Architectural Review Board.
? Lettering may be applied by painting or applying vinyl lettering.
? Lettering style must be consistent with the Historic District Guidelines. Lettering is
limited to 50 characters or less. Lettering size must meet requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance.
? Graphics, company/organization logos, etc. may be approved administratively. Graphics
and logos must consist of solid, uniform colors. Colors utilized by the graphic/logo
count towards the total number of colors (3) allowed for administrative approval.
Graphics and logos will be limited to two (2) square feet, measured horizontally and
vertically at its widest points.
? The use of trim and borders are acceptable and should adhere to above color
requirements. Trim and borders must consist of a solid color for administrative approval.
Simple lines for the purpose of delineating and separation of information are to be
considered “trim and borders”, and may be administratively approved. For the purposes
of administrative approval, a line is considered the shortest distance between two points.
Projecting Sign
? Projecting signs hang from an iron or steel bracket, which is affixed to a building in
the least harmful manner.
? Signs must hang from an approved bracket (minor addition – can be Administratively
Approved)
? The bottom edge of the projecting sign should be eight (8) feet above the sidewalk.
Projecting signs should not be larger than six (6) square feet. The sign panel should
have a minimum six-inch (6") clearance from the face of the building, and extend to
its outermost part less than four (4) feet. Projecting signs will be reviewed according
to their scale and size and to the scale and size of the building to which they are
proposed.
Staff may administratively approve a projecting sign for a building that meets the following
criteria:
? A projecting sign of up to six (6) square feet may be administratively approved.
? Projecting signs must be square, rectangular, round, or oval. The sign may have rounded
or notched corners.
? Wood and MDO are acceptable materials for use if they are painted.
? A sign approved administratively may contain no more than 3 colors, background
included. Colors deemed by staff to be potentially too bold, bright, or fluorescent will
require review and approval by the Architectural Review Board.
? Lettering may be applied by painting or applying vinyl letters.
? Lettering style must be consistent with the Historic District Guidelines. Lettering is
limited to 50 characters or less. Lettering size must meet requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance.
? Graphics, company/organization logos, etc. may be approved administratively. Graphics
and logos must consist of solid, uniform colors. Colors utilized by the graphic/logo
count towards the total number of colors (3) allowed for administrative approval.
Graphics and logos will be limited to two (2) square feet, measured horizontally and
vertically at its widest points.
? The use of trim and borders are acceptable and should adhere to above color
requirements. Trim and borders must consist of a solid, uniform color for administrative
approval. Simple lines for the purpose of delineating and separation of information are to
be considered “trim and borders”, and may be administratively approved. For the
purposes of administrative approval, a line is considered the shortest distance between
two points.
Size
? Allowable area for signs is per the specific regulations in Article 6 of the Zoning
Ordinance for each sign type within each District, with the exception of projecting
signs that are limited to six (6) square feet in area. The administrative approval of
one wall sign is limited to twenty (20) square feet in area.
Material
? The following sign materials are permitted:
o Wood and MDO (Medium Density Overlay or engineered wood) are
acceptable for flat wall signs and hanging signs.
o Aluminum is acceptable for individual pin-mounted letter signs.
Section II – GENERAL REQUIREMENTS APPLYING TO ALL SIGNS
? Applicant must obtain a sign permit (and/or building permit) through Planning &
Community Development.
? Signs must be professionally made.
? All administratively approved sign(s) must be consistent with the Warrenton Design
Guidelines recommendation that, “Sign requests will be considered relative to the
individual characteristics, size and scale of the building, existing signage and site
conditions.”
? Prior to receiving an administrative approval for signage, Staff will conduct research
and visit the site to evaluate the subject property, as well as its context, to determine if
the proposed signage is appropriate. Signs that are out of proportion or scale with
contiguous signs on the block will be referred to the ARB for their review and
approval.
? Signs installed without ARB or Staff approval (after-the-fact signs) must be reviewed
and approved by the ARB.
? Regardless of whether the sign meets the above Criteria, Staff may determine that the
sign(s) must be approved by the ARB.
Amendment to the Warrenton Historic District Guidelines for Metal Roofs
(Supersedes Town Council Resolution adopted February 12, 2002)
Adopted by Town Council – January 14, 2014
Existing Roofs (page 62)
Also in the 1980s, the steel industry developed a Galvalume product composed of steel dipped in
an alloy of fifty-five percent aluminum and forty-five percent zinc to provide a thirty to forty
year maintenance-free standing-seam surface. The material alone may be compatible with
traditional metal substances. However, it comes either pre-painted in the synthetic, acrylic and/or
vinyl coating explained above for a potential twenty-year lifetime of the baked-on coating or
unpainted. If left bare, this luminous galvanized metal has a bright and glaring metallic finish
which also does not replicate the appearance of historic or contributing standing-seam metal
roofs. As of October 2013, Terne, the most widely used paintable roof material is no longer
being manufactured, making unpainted or bare standing seam roofs less practical to obtain.
When formed onsite, pre-painted/finished Galvalume is the closest available match to traditional
standing seam roofs, and should be considered appropriate when applied per the guidelines.
Similarly, other pre-painted metals should be considered appropriate when applied consistent
with the guidelines.
Galvalume
Galvalume is a steel product with an aluminum-zinc alloy coating. The coating is 45
percent zinc and 55 percent aluminum. Visible crystals are closer together than
galvanized steel, creating a smoother appearance. The product is also available as
Galvalume Plus, which has a thin, clear acrylic coating. Pre-painted finishes are
available, or it may be field painted. The aluminum zinc-alloy offers excellent corrosion
protection. However, the product is not recommended for agricultural applications, or
around concrete and mortar.
Terne Coated Copper and Stainless Steel
Sheet copper coated with a 50/50 zinc-tin alloy by a hot dipping process. The factory
satin surface begins to darken immediately upon exposure. Time and the actual color
and shade of the grayish patina will vary based upon environmental conditions. Terne
Coated Copper may be formed by the same methods as traditional copper. Terne Coated
Stainless Steel is stainless Steel coated with the same 50/50 zinc-tin alloy by a hot
dipping process, and the surface finish and weathering will be the same as the Terne
Coated Copper. Terne Coated Steel can be formed on-site, but it does however have
increased physical properties compared to copper. Both products are fully paintable.
These are new products scheduled to begin production in late 2013.
Guidelines for Existing Roofs (page 63-64)
5. When a contributing roof covering is deteriorated beyond repair, the new roofing if possible
should match in material, dimension, space composition, texture, pattern, design and details. If
the existing material is not available, the material utilized should match as closely as possible.
10. Pre-painted/pre-finished metal roofs may be applied to contributing buildings, consistent
with the following criteria:
The material shall be no heavier than 26 gauge, and must be formed from rolled material
on site.
Running Seams shall be less than 1 ½ inches high and shall be hand or machine crimped
on site. The distance between seams should be no greater than 18 inches. Snap locking
seams are not an acceptable method to join pans. Running seams are required to be
double locked.
Hip and ridge seams shall be less than 1 ½ inches high and shall be hand or machine
crimped. Hip and Ridge seams may be single locked. Hip and ridge caps are not
acceptable.
Dull or matte finishes are required. Bright colors are discouraged. The applicant shall
supply a sample of the pre-finished metal roofing materials they wish to apply, including
at least one (1) crimped seam. Color chips are not acceptable.

TOWN OF WARRENTON SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
ADOPTED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL
February 14, 2006
As Amended by Town Council December 9, 2014, April 9, 2019, December 10, 2019, and August 11, 2020
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
2
TOWN OF WARRENTON SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE TITLE PAGE
TITLE AND PURPOSE
................................................................................................... 4
1.1. Title ............................................................................................................................................... 4
1.2. Authorization ................................................................................................................................ 4
1.3. Purpose .......................................................................................................................................... 4
1.4. Applicability ................................................................................................................................. 4
1.5. Adoption, Amendment, and Recordation of this Ordinance. ........................................................ 5
1.6. Interpretation and Meaning. .......................................................................................................... 5
1.7. Relationship to Zoning Ordinance ................................................................................................ 5
1.8. Validity ......................................................................................................................................... 5
1.9. Effective Date ............................................................................................................................... 5
ADMINISTRATION AND GENERAL REGULATIONS ................................
.............. 6
2.1. Administration .............................................................................................................................. 6
2.2. Duties ............................................................................................................................................ 6
2.3. Additional Authority ..................................................................................................................... 6
2.4. Subdivision Plat Recordation ........................................................................................................ 7
2.5. Transfer of Land ............................................................................................................................ 7
2.6. Issuance of Permits ....................................................................................................................... 7
2.7. Variations and Exceptions ............................................................................................................. 7
2.8. Complementary Ordinances .......................................................................................................... 8
2.9. Violations and Penalties ................................................................................................................ 8
2.10. Appeals ..................................................................................................................................... 9
2.11. Fees ........................................................................................................................................... 9
2.12. Vacation of Plat ......................................................................................................................... 9
2.13. Dedication and Reservation of Land ......................................................................................... 9
2.14. Boundary Adjustments ............................................................................................................ 10
2.15. Partition by the Court .............................................................................................................. 10
PLAT PREPARATION AND PROCEDURE ................................................................ 11
3.1. Purpose of Preliminary Plat ........................................................................................................ 11
3.2. Preliminary Plat to be Submitted ................................................................................................ 11
3.3. Preliminary Plat Requirements.................................................................................................... 11
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
3
3.4. Items to Accompany Preliminary Plat......................................................................................... 13
3.5. Planning Commission to Act on Preliminary Plat....................................................................... 14
3.6. Disposition of Preliminary Plat After Action .............................................................................. 14
3.7. No Guarantee .............................................................................................................................. 14
3.8. Period of Validity ........................................................................................................................ 14
3.9. Final Plat to be Submitted ........................................................................................................... 15
3.10. Final Plat Requirements .......................................................................................................... 15
3.11. Documents to Accompany Final Plat ...................................................................................... 16
3.12. Planning Commission/Subdivision Agent to Act on Final Plat .............................................. 18
3.13. Disposition of Plat After Final Approval ................................................................................ 18
3.14. Bonding ................................................................................................................................... 19
STANDARDS ................................................................................................................. 21
4.1. Suitability of Land; Conformance to Town Public Facilities Manual ........................................ 21
4.2. Streets .......................................................................................................................................... 22
4.3. Lots ............................................................................................................................................. 23
4.4. Blocks ......................................................................................................................................... 24
4.5. Easements ................................................................................................................................... 25
4.6. Permits ........................................................................................................................................ 25
4.7. Special Floodplain Requirements ................................................................................................ 25
4.8. Trees and Woodlands .................................................................................................................. 26
4.9. Responsibility for Required Improvements................................................................................. 27
4.10. Monuments ............................................................................................................................. 27
4.11. Curbs, Gutters and Sidewalks ................................................................................................. 28
4.12. Drainage .................................................................................................................................. 28
4.13. Street Identification Signs ....................................................................................................... 28
4.14. Location of Utility Structures .................................................................................................. 28
4.15. Water Service .......................................................................................................................... 28
4.16. Sewage Service ....................................................................................................................... 29
4.17. Lighting ................................................................................................................................... 29
4.18. Pro Rata Share of Improvements ............................................................................................ 29
DEFINITIONS ................................................................................................................ 30
5.1. Words and Terms ........................................................................................................................ 30
TITLE AND PURPOSE
This ordinance regulates the subdivision of property into lots, streets, alleys, and other public areas, and provides for the making, recording, certification and approval of plats of such subdivisions.
1.1. Title
This Ordinance is known and may be cited as the 'Subdivision Ordinance of the Town of Warrenton, Virginia.'
1.2. Authorization
The Town Council of Warrenton, Virginia, is authorized to adopt subdivision regulations pursuant to the provisions of Title 15.2, Chapter 22, Article 6 (Land Subdivision and Development), of the Code of Virginia 1950, as amended.
1.3. Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish reasonable and desirable subdivision standards and procedures for the Town of Warrenton. These are part of the implementation portion of the comprehensive planning process to guide and facilitate the orderly growth of the community, and to promote the public health, safety, convenience, and welfare. More specifically, the purposes of these standards and procedures are to provide a guide for the change that occurs when lands and acreage become urban in character as a result of development for residential, business, or industrial purposes, to provide assurance that the purchasers of lots are buying a commodity that is suitable for appropriate development and to make possible the provision of public services in a safe, adequate, and efficient manner. Subdivided land sooner or later becomes a public responsibility in that roads and streets must be maintained and numerous public services customary to urban areas must be provided. This Ordinance is designed to assist the Town in meeting these responsibilities.
1.4. Applicability
These regulations apply to all divisions of land into parcels or adjustments to the boundaries of parcels within the Town. No existing subdivision may be modified except by approval in accordance with this and other applicable ordinances of the Town. This Ordinance governs residential and nonresidential subdivisions. No plat of a subdivision may be recorded unless and until it has been approved and certified in accordance with the regulations set forth in this chapter. No lot of a subdivision may be sold or transferred before a plat has been approved and recorded, unless the subdivision was created prior to the adoption of the Town’s original subdivision ordinance. Nothing herein may be construed as preventing the recordation of an instrument by which land is transferred or title passed as between the parties to the instrument.
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
5
1.5. Adoption, Amendment, and Recordation of this Ordinance.
1.5.1. The Planning Commission prepares and recommends the subdivision ordinance and transmits it to the Town Council. The Town Council may approve and adopt a subdivision ordinance only after notice has been published, and a public hearing held, in accordance with Virginia Code §15.2-2204.
1.5.2. The Planning Commission on its own initiative may, or at the request of the Town Council must, prepare and recommend amendments to the subdivision ordinance. The procedure for amendments is the same as for the original ordinance. The Town Council may not adopt any amendment without first referring it to the Planning Commission for recommendation. If the Planning Commission makes no recommendation within 60 days of such a referral, the Town Council may act on the amendment.
1.5.3. A certified copy of this Ordinance and any and all amendments thereto must be filed in the office of the Town Planning Director and in the office of the Clerk of the Fauquier County Circuit Court.
1.6. Interpretation and Meaning.
The provisions of this Ordinance are the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. Words used in the present tense include the future tense, except where the natural construction of this Ordinance provides otherwise. Words in the singular number include the plural and words in the plural include the singular.
1.7. Relationship to Zoning Ordinance
Subdivisions must also comply with applicable provisions of the Town’s Zoning Ordinance (and map).
1.8. Validity
If any section, clause, sentence, phrase, or word of this Ordinance is for any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, that decision will not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the Ordinance.
1.9. Effective Date
1.9.1. This Ordinance was duly considered, following required public hearings, and was adopted by the Town Council of Warrenton on February 14, 2006.
1.9.2. This Subdivision Ordinance of the Town of Warrenton, Virginia, took effect at 12:01 am, February 15, 2006.
1.9.3. This Ordinance applies to all subdivisions proposed after the effective date given in Section 7-2.1.
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
6
ADMINISTRATION AND GENERAL REGULATIONS
2.1. Administration
The administration and enforcement of these regulations, insofar as they pertain to public improvements required herein as authorized in §§ 15.2-2241 through 15.2-2245, is vested in the Town Council. Except as provided above with regard to public improvements, the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance is to be carried out by the Planning Commission or Subdivision Agent.
2.1.1. The Subdivision Agent approves or disapproves of all preliminary subdivision plats up to fifty (50) lots, in accordance with this Ordinance. The Planning Commission approves or disapproves of all preliminary subdivision plats of greater than fifty lots, in accordance with this Ordinance.
2.1.2. The Planning Commission or Subdivision Agent, as applicable, approves or disapproves all final subdivision plats in accordance with this Ordinance.
2.1.3. In the performance of their duties, the Planning Director, Subdivision Agent, Planning Commission and the Council may call for verbal or written opinions or decisions from other departments of the Town, as well as pertinent reports from State and other local government departments, including consultants where deemed necessary, in considering details of any proposed subdivision plat, waiver, or request for a variation or exception.
2.1.4. The Town Council reserves the right to elect, by Resolution of record, whether it will or will not accept the dedication of any proposed subdivision, street, alley or public improvement, in accordance with State Code.
2.2. Duties
The Planning Commission shall perform its duties regarding subdivisions and subdividing in accordance with this Ordinance and Title 15.2, Chapter 22, Article 6, of the Code of Virginia. The Planning Director shall appoint a Subdivision Agent, whose responsibility shall be to ensure that the requirements of this Ordinance are met in accordance with all local, state, and federal laws.
2.3. Additional Authority
In addition to the regulations and requirements contained in this Ordinance concerning the platting of subdivisions, the Planning Director or Subdivision Agent may establish any reasonable additional administrative procedures deemed necessary for the proper administration of this Ordinance.
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
7
2.4. Subdivision Plat Recordation
2.4.1. From and after the effective date of this Ordinance, any owner or proprietor of any tract of land within the Town of Warrenton who subdivides the same as herein provided, must cause a plat of such subdivision to be made in accordance with the regulations set forth in this Ordinance and in the Code of Virginia, and a copy of the plat to be recorded in the office of the Clerk of Fauquier County Circuit Court.
2.4.2. No final subdivision plat may be recorded unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission/Subdivision Agent and certified by the Planning Director.
2.4.3. A Final Plat becomes null and void if it is not recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Fauquier County within six (6) months from the date of approval by Planning Commission/Subdivision Agent, unless an extension is granted by the Planning Commission/Subdivision Agent upon written application by the subdivider.
2.4.4. Nothing in this Ordinance will preclude or otherwise limit vested rights recognized under state law.
2.5. Transfer of Land
No parcel of land in a subdivision, as defined in this Ordinance, created after the effective date of this Ordinance may be transferred, sold, or offered for sale until a Final Plat has been approved and recorded as provided for in this Ordinance.
2.6. Issuance of Permits
No official of the Town may issue any zoning permit, building permit, or occupancy permit for any structure on any land subdivided as defined in this Ordinance after the effective date of this Ordinance until a Final Plat has been approved and recorded as provided in this Ordinance.
2.7. Variations and Exceptions
The Town Council, after a public hearing and a recommendation from Planning Commission following the procedures set forth in the zoning ordinance for a Special Use Permit, may grant variations in or exceptions to the specific regulations of this Ordinance where variations and exceptions are authorized, in cases of unusual situations or when strict adherence to the regulations would result in substantial injustice or hardship, in accordance with §15.2-2242(1).
2.7.1. The Council may not grant a variation or exception unless it is consistent with the intent of this Ordinance and would still preserve and protect the public interest. In granting a variation or exception, the Council may do so only to the minimum extent necessary in the circumstances and may require other action
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
8
by the subdivider to assure that the purpose of the affected regulation is accomplished.
2.7.2. The subdivider shall submit a written petition to the Council for a variation in or exception to the provisions of this Ordinance at the time of the submittal of the Preliminary or Final Plat, as applicable, in accordance with the procedures and policies established by the Planning Director and Subdivision Agent. The Town Council will not consider any petition that is not in writing. The petition must state fully the grounds for the requested variation or exception, including any basis for claiming an unusual situation, substantial injustice, and/or substantial hardship. If the subdivider seeks a variation in a requirement, the petition must state the extent to which he wishes the requirement to be varied. The written petition shall be accompanied by conceptual plans showing all other required improvements so it may be determined that if granted, the variation or exception would still allow the public improvement requirements to be met.
2.7.3. This Article does not apply to acquisition of lands by the Town to construct new streets and to widen existing public streets, ways, and alleys.
2.7.4. The Town Council authorizes the Subdivision Agent to permit the separation of one (1) parcel from a tract as it exists at the time of adoption of this Ordinance without complying with all requirements of this Ordinance if:
a. It is not in conflict with the general meaning and intent of this Ordinance.
b. No new streets are required to serve the parcel or the residual tract,
c. Neither the parcel nor the residual tract is less than provided in the Zoning Ordinance.
d. Both lots meet the lot frontage and width requirements as provided in the Zoning ordinance.
2.8. Complementary Ordinances
This Ordinance is intended to complement and be consistent with this Zoning Ordinance. The creation of a subdivision in no way exempts the land included within it from the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance or other Town ordinances or regulations.
2.9. Violations and Penalties
2.9.1. It is a violation of this Ordinance for any person or agent to disobey, neglect, or refuse to comply with any of its provisions.
2.9.2. Any violation of this Ordinance is punishable by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500) for each lot or parcel of land involved as set forth in § 15.2-2254 of the Code of Virginia, as amended.
2.9.3. All departments, officials, and public employees of the Town of Warrenton
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
9
vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses must conform to the provisions of this Ordinance. Any permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance is null and void.
2.9.4. Where there has been a violation of this Ordinance, the Town Council, notwithstanding the imposition of any fine in accordance with this section, may seek equitable and other relief to enjoin any violation, in any Court of competent jurisdiction.
2.10. Appeals
2.10.1. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Planning Director, his agents, or any other administrative official acting pursuant to this Ordinance may appeal, in writing, the decision to the circuit court having jurisdiction of such land and the court shall hear and determine the case as soon as may be, provided that his appeal is filed with the circuit court within 60 days of the written decision by the Director or other agent.. The filing of an appeal under this section postpones the review period under Virginia Code §§ 15.2-2259 and -2260.
2.10.2. If the Planning Commission disapproves a Final Plat, and the subdivider contends that the disapproval was not properly based on the Ordinance or was arbitrary or capricious, he or she may appeal the determination to the Circuit Court of Fauquier County. The appeal must be filed with the Circuit Court within sixty (60) days of the Commission’s written disapproval.
2.11. Fees
The Town Council may, by resolution, establish a schedule of fees to compensate the Town for costs incurred for administration, examining plats, making investigations, advertising, travel, and other work incidental to the approval of plats. To request a refund or waiver of fees established under the provisions of this Article, the subdivider must submit the request in writing to the Town Council. The written request must detail the reasons for the request and the amount of refund or waiver requested. The Town Council will render a decision on any such request within sixty (60) days of receipt of such written request.
2.12. Vacation of Plat
Any plat of record may be vacated in accordance with the provisions of § 15.2-2270, et seq., of the Code of Virginia, as amended.
2.13. Dedication and Reservation of Land
2.13.1. The subdivider must dedicate to the Town of Warrenton all land required for public streets and alleys as provided for in this Ordinance. Regardless of dedication, all streets and alleys must meet the minimum design standards in this Ordinance and of the Town’s Public Facilities Manual.
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
10
2.13.2. The subdivider must dedicate to the Town of Warrenton such land for parking lots, public utilities, public stormwater management facilities and parks, as the Planning Commission or Town Council determines necessary to comply with the requirements of any Town ordinance, including the design standards of this Ordinance and the Town’s Public Facilities Manual. Such land may be dedicated in fee simple or by easement, as appropriate, subject to the approval of the Planning Commission at the preliminary plat stage and Town Council at the final plat stage. A maintenance plan for the long-term care and operation of such land and facilities subject to an easement must be provided to the Town by a property owners association or the owner, subject to the approval of the Planning Commission at the preliminary plat stage and Town Council at the final plat stage. The Planning Commission or Town Council will determine the necessary size, location, and character of land to be dedicated or reserved.
2.13.3. Reservations of small strips of land at the ends of public or private streets, or along property lines, are prohibited.
2.14. Boundary Adjustments
The sale and exchange of parcels between adjoining lot owners, and boundary adjustments, are permitted and can be approved by the Planning Director without review or approval by the Planning Commission or Town Council, subject to all of the following conditions:
a. The sale or exchange does not create an additional building lot, a public or private street, or any other public improvement.
b. The sale or exchange does not leave a parcel that does not conform to the lot size requirements of the zoning district in which the property is located.
c. The applicant submits a duly executed survey of the property, in conformance with the submission requirements for final plats set forth in this Ordinance and suitable for recordation in the Circuit Court Clerk's office, with notation indicating the amount of acreage exchanged and that no new building lot is created.
d. The applicant submits a copy of the new deed for review and approval.
2.15. Partition by the Court
The provisions of this Ordinance do not apply to the partition of any tract of land ordered by a Court of competent jurisdiction.
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
11
PLAT PREPARATION AND PROCEDURE
3.1. Purpose of Preliminary Plat
Any person proposing a subdivision of land under this Ordinance must submit to the Planning Director a Preliminary Plat showing the general design and layout of the area proposed to be subdivided for plats involving more than fifty (50) lots. The landowner may submit to the Planning Director a Preliminary Plat for fifty (50) or fewer lots for tentative approval, but this is not a requirement. The purpose of this is to enable the subdivider to ascertain whether his plans are in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and to reduce deficiencies in final plat submissions and corresponding cost to review those plats.
3.2. Preliminary Plat to be Submitted
3.2.1. The subdivider must submit twelve (12) paper copies of the Preliminary Plat, together with the preliminary street and utility plans, to the Planning Director. In addition to the paper copies, the subdivider must also provide to the Planning Director one digital copy of all submittals in a software and storage format suitable to the Town, as determined by the Planning Director.
3.2.2. The Planning Director must determine whether the submitted plat application is complete, in accord with Section 3-4 of this Ordinance and all other pertinent submission requirements. Within ten (10) business days of submission, the Planning Director must notify the subdivider whether the application is accepted as complete for processing (“officially accepted”) and, if it is not, what items are required to make the application complete and eligible for official acceptance.
3.2.3. Once the Planning Director has officially accepted the plat application, he must promptly deliver copies of the plans to the Planning Commission and other Town or State officials, as required, and retain the other copies.
3.3. Preliminary Plat Requirements
The Preliminary Plat must meet the following requirements:
3.3.1. It must be legibly drawn and may be on more than one (1) sheet. The scale must be one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet.
3.3.2. It must show the following information, except where a variation or exception has been requested or approved:
a. Date of plat and name of the surveyor or engineer preparing the same accompanied by an original seal and signature.
b. Scale.
c. Number of sheets comprising the plat.
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
12
d. North meridian, designated “true" or 'magnetic', and direction oriented to the top of the sheet and each sheet comprising plat shall be so oriented.
e. Name and signature of owner or their agent.
f. Name of subdivision which may not duplicate nor too closely approximate that of any existing subdivision in the Town of Warrenton or in Fauquier County.
g. Sources of data used in preparing the plat, particularly the deed book and page number of the last instrument in the chain of title.
h. Names of all adjoining property owners and the location of their common boundaries together with zoning classifications and including the proposed subdivision.
i. Historical buildings, structures, and sites designated on the Virginia Landmarks Register.
j. The boundary lines of the proposed subdivision and any of any larger tract of which the subdivision forms a part, shown on a reduced scale insert.
k. All adjoining roads and streets with their numbers and/or names.
l. Boundary lines and total acreage of the proposed subdivision and the acreage remaining in the original tract, if any. In case only a part of a tract of land is proposed for subdivision, the Administrator may require the Preliminary Plat to show a proposed future subdivision of such remaining acreage or a part thereof to make certain that proper orientation of future streets can be developed with the platted streets.
m. Location of existing buildings within the subdivision and within two hundred
n. (200) feet thereof.
o. Location and description of all existing monuments.
p. Topographical contour lines, existing and finished, as required for approval of drainage and sewer facilities.
q. Proposed locations, widths, and names of all streets.
r. The approximate location, number, and the proposed use of all lots and other areas, including water courses, marshes, impoundments, lakes, and those areas to be used or parking, recreation, commercial purposes, or for public or governmental use, and existing utility installation.
s. Proposed lot numbers and block letters.
t. If the proposed subdivision consists of land acquired from more than one (1) source of title, the outlines of the several tracts must be included on the Preliminary Plat by broken lines, and the tracts must be identified on the Preliminary Plat.
u. A tree inventory, in accord with Article 8 of the Town’s Zoning Ordinance, showing the location of all trees on the site with a caliper of six (6) inches or greater. Wooded areas must be designated by symbols that indicate the perimeter of the area covered by the canopy of the trees. Trees to be removed must be indicated. Trees and or wooded areas to be
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
13
retained, and methods to be used to assure adequate protection for trees adjacent to disturbed areas, must be indicated. Such methods must conform to Section 3, Subsection 1.85, Tree Preservation and Protection of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook and the requirements of the Town’s Zoning Ordinance.
v. A landscape plan, prepared by a registered landscape architect, indicating the location, number, and type of plantings, and planting specifications as required by this Ordinance and Article 8 of the Town’s Zoning Ordinance. Such plan must be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals thirty (30) feet.
3.3.3. Phasing
a. If the subdivision is to be developed in phases, a declaration of phase sections must be shown on the Preliminary Plat.
b. The maximum length of road segments for any phase without a second egress may not exceed 700 feet, in accord with the standards set forth in Article 4 of this Ordinance.
c. Continuity of utility lines (water, storm water management, etc.) must be ensured.
d. Temporary turn-arounds must be shown as needed.
3.4. Items to Accompany Preliminary Plat
The items as described below must accompany the Preliminary Plat at the time it is submitted to the Planning Director:
3.4.1. A tentative proposal for providing each building lot with a safe water supply and an adequate means of sewerage in conformance with the design standards set out in this Ordinance and in the Public Facilities Manual.
3.4.2. Preliminary plans and specifications of any streets or public parking areas to be included in the subdivision and any special treatment which will be required in their construction, including the drainage system which will be required and in conformance with the design standards set out in this Ordinance and in the Public Facilities Manual.
3.4.3. A statement by the subdivider indicating whether he proposes to dedicate or reserve land for public use or for the common use of future property owners in the subdivision and, if so, a statement giving an outline of the terms proposed and acreage involved. If private streets are involved, the subdivider must submit specific provisions for their maintenance.
3.4.4. A statement summarizing proposed restrictive covenants and reservations.
3.4.5. A check payable to the Town of Warrenton to cover the required fees as established by Town Council.
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
14
3.4.6. A completed Preliminary Plat checklist, available from the Town Planning Department.
3.5. Planning Commission to Act on Preliminary Plat
3.5.1. The Planning Commission discusses the Preliminary Plat with the subdivider to determine whether it generally conforms to the requirements of this Ordinance and the Zoning Ordinance. The Planning Commission will then advise the subdivider in writing, by formal letter or by legible markings on his copy of the Preliminary Plat, concerning any additional data that might be required; the nature, character and extent of public improvements that will be required; and any other conditions that might have to be met as a prerequisite to approval of the final subdivision plat.
3.5.2. The Planning Commission must approve the Preliminary Plat if it has been properly drawn, all additional data requested by the Planning Commission has been provided, and the proposed subdivision conforms to the requirements and purposes of this Ordinance and the Zoning Ordinance. Otherwise, the Planning Commission must disapprove the Preliminary Plat and make a good faith effort to identify all deficiencies in the submission. The Commission must state the deficiencies in the plat that cause the disapproval by reference to specific adopted ordinances, regulations, or policies and must identify the modifications or corrections that would permit approval of the plat. If only minor changes are required for approval, the Commission may approve subject to specified required revisions by writing such requirements on the plat or by placing upon it a reference to an accompanying statement.
3.6. Disposition of Preliminary Plat After Action
One (1) copy of the Preliminary Plat with the action of the Planning Commission noted thereon will be returned to the subdivider, and an annotated copy will be kept by the Planning Director and Town Council for comparison with future plats submitted by the subdivider.
3.7. No Guarantee
Approval of the Preliminary Plat does not constitute a guarantee of approval of the Final Plat. Likewise, official acceptance of any plat does not guarantee its approval.
3.8. Period of Validity
Within one (1) year after receiving official notification concerning the approval of the Preliminary Plat, the subdivider must file with the Planning Director a final subdivision plat in accordance with this Ordinance and pursuant to § 15.2-2260 and 15.2-2209.1 as amended.. The approved Preliminary Plat shall be valid for a period not to exceed five (5) years provided a Final Plat is submitted within the one (1) year timeframe as noted above, and the subdivider diligently pursues approval of the final subdivision plat.
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
15
However, no sooner than three (3) years following such preliminary subdivision plat approval, and upon 90 days' written notice by certified mail to the subdivider, the Commission or other agent may revoke such approval upon a specific finding of facts that the subdivider has not diligently pursued approval of the final subdivision plat.
3.9. Final Plat to be Submitted
3.9.1. Twelve paper copies of the Final Plat must be submitted to the Planning Director, who will forward it to the Planning Commission or Subdivision Agent, as applicable. Together with the paper copies, one digital copy of the Final Plat must be provided to the Planning Director in a software and storage format suitable to the Town, as determined by the Planning Director.
3.9.2. Twelve (12) copies of the Final Plat drawn in accordance with Section 4-11 and twelve (12) copies of the Final Plat reduced in size to approximately eight (8) inches by fourteen (14) inches must be submitted. One copy each of the full size Final Plat and of the reduced size Final Plat must be provided on a durable, reproducible material such as Mylar, acceptable to the Planning Director. Such reproducible copies must be submitted together with the paper copies.
3.10. Final Plat Requirements
The Final Plat must adhere to the following requirements:
3.10.1. The Final Plat must be prepared by a certified professional engineer or land surveyor with their seal, who must endorse upon the plat a certificate signed by him setting forth the source of title of the land subdivided and the place of record of the last instrument in the chain of title.
3.10.2. The Final Plat must be substantially in accordance with the Preliminary Plat (together with any changes or additions required by the Planning Commission as a requirement for its approval), except that a Final Plat may include all or any part of the area covered by the Preliminary Plat.
3.10.3. The Final Plat must be legibly and accurately drawn upon sheets having a size of fifteen (15) inches by twenty (20) inches. The plat must be drawn at a scale of one inch equals one hundred (100) feet. If the subdivision is shown on more than one (1) sheet, the sheet number, total number of sheets, and subdivision name must be shown on each sheet, and match lines must clearly indicate where the several sheets join.
3.10.4. The Final Plat must also show the following details:
a. A boundary survey.
b. Location and dimensions of all lot and street lines and center lines of all streets, both within and adjoining the subdivision: names and widths of all
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
16
streets; and boundaries of all easements, school sites, parks, or other public areas.
c. All dimensions shown in feet and decimals of a foot to the closest one- hundredth of a foot; and all bearings and degrees, minutes and seconds, to the nearest ten (10) seconds.
d. Curve data showing radius, delta, and arc either at the curve or in a curve data table.
e. Location and approximate bearing of alt property lines intersecting the subdivision perimeter boundary.
f. Number of each lot and letter or number of each block.
3.10.5. The Final Plat must show any land or water areas are being dedicated or reserved for streets, alleys, parking space, or for other public use, or for the common use of future property owners of the subdivision.
3.10.6. The Final Plat must show or have appended to it an unexecuted copy of a proposed Certificate of Owner's Consent to Subdivision suitable for recording, containing a statement to the effect that the subdivision is with the free consent and in accordance with the desire of the owners, proprietors, trustees, and lien holders thereof, as applicable, and setting forth in full all restrictive covenants, reservations and dedications applicable to the proposed subdivision.
3.10.7. The Final Plat must provide on the first sheet space for:
a. The surveyor's certificate, as to title.
b. The surveyor's certificate, as to monuments.
c. All restrictive covenants, or reference thereto.
d. Approval by the Planning Commission/Subdivision Agent.
3.11. Documents to Accompany Final Plat
When delivered to the Planning Director, all Final Plats must be accompanied by the following:
3.11.1. A water supply and sewerage handling facilities plan conforming to the Public Facilities Manual and demonstrating that each building lot will have a safe water supply and an adequate means of handling sewerage.
3.11.2. Plans for all streets, street signs, and drainage systems, including profiles, elevations, inverts and specifications, acceptable and in conformity with the Public Facilities Manual.
3.11.3. A detailed estimate, prepared by a certified professional engineer, of the costs for construction and installation of the following on-site and off-site improvements:
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
17
a. Any street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, bicycle trail, drainage or sewerage system, waterline as part of a public system or other improvement dedicated for public use, located within any the subdivision and maintained by the Town, the Commonwealth, or any other public agency.
b. Any other site-related improvements required by this Ordinance or other Town ordinance for vehicular ingress and egress, including traffic signalization and control; for public access streets; for structures necessary to ensure stability of critical slopes; and for storm water management facilities.
c. Cost estimates must be based on per-unit quantities and costs for respective public- or private-sector construction within the Warrenton region. The estimates must include a reasonable allowance for estimated administrative costs, inflation during the anticipated time of project completion (determined using the most recent yearly rate of change in the Consumer Price Index), and potential damage to existing roads, utilities or other public facilities.
d. Each cost estimate must include an estimated time frame for phasing and completion of all improvements.
e. Cost estimates, including estimated time frames, will be reviewed and approved, approved with revisions, or disapproved by the Town Engineer
f. and/or Director of Public Works for the Town with notice provided in writing and addressed to the owner, or the subdivider’s designated agent, as identified on the plat documents.
3.11.4. A completed and accurate Final Plat Checklist, available from the Town Planning Department, must also be submitted with the Final Plat.
3.11.5. A Tree Protection Plan, in accord with the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance that indicates the location of trunks and driplines for trees or wooded areas that are to be retained. In the case of wooded areas, the trunks and driplines of perimeter trees shall be sufficient indication of location. Methods of protection must be clearly indicated, including details of all retaining walls, tree guards, tree wells, indications that grading changes will not alter surface water movement to or from trees to be retained, and methods to mark trees and wooded areas to be preserved during grading and construction activities.
3.11.6. A check payable to the Town of Warrenton to cover all required fees and costs.
3.11.7. An unexecuted copy of the proposed deed of dedication, accompanied by a certificate signed by the subdivider and duly acknowledged before some officer authorized to take acknowledgements of deed, to the effect that this is a true copy of the proposed deed of dedication which will be presented for recordation. The deed must:
a. Contain a correct description of the land subdivided and state that the
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
18
subdivision is with the free consent and in accordance with the desire of the undersigned owners, proprietors, and trustees, if any.
b. Contain language such that when the deed is recorded it will operate to transfer in fee simple to the Town the portions of the platted premises designated on the plat and set apart for public streets, alleys, or other public use and to grant such easements as are shown on the plat to create a public right of passage.
c. Contain all protective or restrictive covenants, including those referred to in Section 4-11.7(c) and including provision for the maintenance of private streets, if any.
3.11.8. An Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan approved by the appropriate agent in accordance with Article 4.
3.11.9. A Tree Survey in accordance with the requirements of Article 10-4.2.15.
3.11.10. A landscape plan, prepared by a registered landscape architect, indicating the location, number, and type of plantings, and planting specifications as required by this Ordinance and Article 8 of the Town’s Zoning Ordinance. Such plan must be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals thirty (30) feet.
3.11.11. A lighting plan in accordance with Article 9-8 of the Zoning Ordinance.
3.12. Planning Commission/Subdivision Agent to Act on Final Plat
Within sixty (60) days after any Final Plat and the accompanying documents required by this Ordinance have been officially accepted, the Planning Commission or Subdivision Agent, as applicable, will render a decision of approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval. Following disapproval of a plat the Planning Director, on behalf of the Planning Commission/Subdivision Agent, shall provide written notification to the subdivider stating the reasons for disapproval. The Planning Commission shall act on any Final Plat that is subject to a Preliminary Plat approval.
3.13. Disposition of Plat After Final Approval
Following approval, two (2) copies of the Final Plat measuring fifteen (15) inches by twenty (20) inches and one (1) copy of the reduced size plat will be returned to the subdivider. The subdivider must submit to the Clerk of Court one (1) copy of the reduced size plat for recordation and one (1) copy of the full size Final Plat for filing in the subdivision plat book. One (1) additional copy of the full size plat must be delivered to the Treasurer of the Town of Warrenton, and the remaining copies thereof, with the accompanying documents, shall be retained in the files of the Administrator. Any surety bond, approved by Town Attorney to be posted by the subdivider pursuant to the requirements of this Ordinance must be delivered to the Planning Director. A cash escrow, check or letter of credit, if any, must be delivered to the Finance Director. The Final Plat shall remain valid for a period of five (5) years after recordation in accordance with § 15.2-2261 and 15.2-2209.1 as amended. Modifications to an approved final plat
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
19
during the period of validity shall be in accordance with § 15.2-2261 C and D of the Code of Virginia, as amended.
3.14. Bonding
3.14.1. Upon approval of the cost estimates required in 3-12.3, the owner or developer is required to submit: (1) a certificate certifying that the construction costs have been paid to the person constructing such improvements covered by the cost estimates; or (2) a cash escrow, certified check, or performance and payment bond surety with escalation clause for the cost of improvements to insure completion; or (3) a bank or savings institutions letter of credit, on certain designated funds satisfactory to the Planning Director as to the institution, the amount and the form.
3.14.2. The Town Council, or its designated administrative agent, may grant periodic partial releases of any bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee required for the completion of publicly dedicated improvements under the following conditions:
a. No more than three (3) periodic partial releases may be executed within any twelve (12) month period.
b. At least thirty (30) percent of the facilities covered by any performance guarantee are completed.
c. Less than eighty (80) percent of the facilities covered by any performance guarantee are completed.
d. The owner or developer has submitted a written notification to the Planning Director of the percentage of work complete and the request for partial release of funds.
e. Inspections by Town personnel and/or state agency personnel reveal no defects and/or deficiencies in the work completed. Such defects and deficiencies must be directly related to the construction of the facilities covered by said bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee. Identified defects and/or deficiencies and suggested corrective measures will be identified, within thirty (30) days receipt of a written request for partial release, and notice provided in writing and addressed to the owner, or their designated agent, as identified on the site plan documents.
f. The Town may accept a certificate of partial completion from either a duly licensed professional engineer or land surveyor, without the necessity of further inspection.
If the above requirements and conditions are met, the Town Council will grant a periodic partial release within thirty (30) days of receiving a written request from the subdivider. If the Town Council takes no action within the time specified above, the request will be deemed approved and the partial release granted to the owner or developer.
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
20
3.14.3. A Maintenance Bond shall be provided by the subdivider to ensure full completion of required improvements and their durability, including landscaping, erosion and sediment control, finish paving and As-Built drawings. Such bond shall constitute 15% of the original bond or Letter of Credit and shall be available for release within 12 months after the release of the original bond, subject to approval of the Planning Director that the maintenance and finish items specified herein have been properly completed.
3.14.4. Final completion and acceptance of publicly dedicated or maintained improvements and facilities will result in the release of any remaining bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee by the Town. Final acceptance occurs when a public facility is accepted and taken over for operation and maintenance by the state agency, the Town, or other public authority that is to be responsible for maintaining and operating the facility or improvement upon acceptance.
a. The owner or developer must notify the Town Council in writing of the completion of all facilities and improvements and must request final release of the performance guarantee.
b. Within thirty (30) days of receiving a written request for partial release, the Planning Director will notify the subdivider or developer in writing whether the request has been approved. If it is disapproved, the notice will identify any required approval by an applicable state agency that is lacking and any defects or deficiencies in construction and suggested corrective measures.
c. The Planning Director may accept a certificate of completion from either a duly licensed professional engineer or land surveyor, or from a department or agency designated by the Town, without the necessity of further inspection.
d. If no notice is given to the subdivider within the time specified above for final release, and an additional request in writing is sent by the subdivider by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the Town Manager, and neither the Town Council nor the Planning Director has acted within ten
e. (10) working days of receiving the request, it shall be deemed approved and final release granted.
3.14.5. As-Built drawings shall be provided for all subdivisions and related required improvements, in accord with this Ordinance and the Town’s Zoning Ordinance, as a condition for full final bond release. Twelve (12) paper copies such drawings and one digital copy shall be provided to the Planning Director upon completion of all site improvements.
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
21
STANDARDS
4.1. Suitability of Land; Conformance to Town Public Facilities Manual
4.1.1. Land encumbered by any of the following characteristics may be deemed by the Planning Commission or their Agent as being unsuitable for subdivision:
a. Land lying within a 100-year flood area designated by the Flood Insurance Study and accompanying maps as completed by the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration.
b. Land having physical characteristics, such as poor drainage, highly erodible soils, and wetlands, where subdivision would increase danger to health, life, or property or aggravate erosion or flood hazard.
c. Slopes with grades in excess of twenty-five (25) percent
4.1.2. The Planning Commission or Subdivision Agent may approve the subdivision of any land which falls under 4-1.1 provided that:
a. Sufficient land is provided in each subdivided lot to provide a building site free from flood, steep slopes, or other danger or nuisance.
b. The developer installs adequate protective measures as may be required to prevent increased danger to health, life, or property and to render the land safe and otherwise acceptable for development of steep slope areas with grades in excess of twenty-five (25) percent.
c. To demonstrate that sufficient controls are planned, the following factors should be incorporated on an erosion and sediment control plan to be submitted with the preliminary plat:
d. Identify the proposed density of development on steep slopes and the extent of grading proposed to accommodate this development;
e. Indicate whether the soils are particularly prone to erosion and likely to be subject to accelerated erosion rates due to alteration of the natural topography and disturbance or removal of existing ground cover;
f. Show the proposed placement of buildings as they relate to the contour lines and natural form of the terrain. Building placement should be designed to retain these natural features of the site. Development on steep slopes shall be designed to minimize grading;
g. Illustrate adequate protective measures for steep slopes that are graded or temporarily denuded of existing ground cover as needed per the Site Conservation Manual and per the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, including the use of terracing, retaining walls, replanting or supplemental planting with suitable vegetation, or a combination of these methods, to reduce excessive runoff and soil erosion, provided further that provisions for the maintenance of and responsibility for any structural slope control is provided for in a manner deemed acceptable to the Town;
h. Ensure that adequate protection exists for structures and properties that lie
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
22
below the steep slopes in case of slope failure or excessive runoff and sedimentation by explaining why each protective measure was chosen in the narrative of the plan; and
i. Illustrate if the design of the proposed development uses other innovative design techniques that might eliminate or reduce the need for grading and/or development on steep slopes.
j. The requirements of Section 4-7 of this Ordinance are met.
4.1.3. In connection with this Section, the Planning Commission may require the subdivider to furnish topographical maps, elevations, flood profiles, and other relevant data as necessary.
4.1.4. All construction of public infrastructure as required in this Ordinance must conform to the Public Facilities Manual.
4.2. Streets
4.2.1. Streets must connect with existing streets and provide access to adjoining subdivisions. The Town Council may grant a waiver from this requirement for specific locations only if it deems the requirement fails to serve the health, safety, and welfare of the public or conflicts with the Comprehensive Plan.
4.2.2. Whenever a future inter-parcel connection is required, a “Future Street Extension Notice – This Street Will Be Extended In The Future” sign shall be placed at the end of the street. If the property is developed in phases, the sign shall be placed at the end of the street as each phase develops. The required sign shall not exceed nine (9) square feet in size and shall consist of a metal material that is legible at all times.
4.2.3. Streets must intersect at as near right angles as practical. Offsets or jogs must be avoided, except in cases in where the Town Council grants a variation based on a determination that they are consistent with and necessary to accommodate traffic- calming measures recommend by the Comprehensive Plan. No street may intersect another street at an angle of less than eighty (80) degrees.
4.2.4. Proposed streets in a subdivision must be extended to the boundary lines of such adjacent property. Temporary turnaround must be provided at the ends of such streets, by means of temporary easements or otherwise.
4.2.5. Where the adopted Comprehensive Plan indicates a proposed right-of-way greater than that existing along the boundaries of a subdivision or lot, such additional right-of-way must be dedicated for public use when the plat is recorded.
4.2.6. Where lots in a subdivision abut on one (1) side of an existing public right-of- way, the subdivider must dedicate such additional land so that the distance as measured from the center line of the right-of-way to the subdivision property
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
23
line is one-half of the required width of the right-of-way. The required width will be determined by the Town of Warrenton or as required by the Virginia Department of Transportation, where applicable.
4.2.7. Half-streets along the boundary of land proposed for subdivision are prohibited. All new streets must be platted and constructed to meet the full width required by this Article and such construction is the sole responsibility of the subdivider.
4.2.8. Proposed streets that are in alignment with other existing and named streets must bear the names of the existing streets. In no case, however, may the names of other proposed streets duplicate existing street names irrespective of the use of the suffix “Street”, “Avenue”, “Boulevard”, “Drive”, “Way”, “Place”, “Lane”, or “Court”. Street names must be indicated on the Preliminary and Final Plats, and may not be used without approval by the Planning Commission. Names of existing streets may not be changed except by approval of the Town Council.
4.2.9. Streets must have a minimum right-of-wav of fifty (50) feet. Private streets, where approved by the Town Council, must have a minimum right-of-way of thirty (30) feet. Alleys, if provided, must have a minimum right-of-way of twenty (20) feet.
4.2.10. Dead-end streets (cul-de-sacs) are prohibited unless specifically recognized as such on the Comprehensive Plan or approved by variation or exception by the Town Council. All dead end streets authorized by the Town Council must be designed to have one (1) end permanently closed, must be no longer than seven hundred (700) feet and must be provided with a permanent turn-around terminus, the diameter of which must be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet. Such turn- arounds may have a landscaped island in the center.
4.2.11. All streets and their drainage facilities must be designed in compliance with the requirements of the Public Facilities Manual or, where applicable, the Virginia Department of Transportation.
4.2.12. Improvements must be made to streets and intersections as identified in the Comprehensive Plan when justified by the traffic projected to be generated by the proposed development.
4.3. Lots
4.3.1. Except as specifically provided in the Zoning Ordinance, each lot must abut a public street dedicated by the subdivision plat or an existing dedicated public street, except that private streets may be permitted, with a recommendation from Planning Commission and subsequent approval by Town Council by means of a request for a variation and exception in accordance with Article 2-7. When granted, the following conditions shall apply:
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
24
4-3.1.1 An acceptable arrangement for maintenance is shall be provided, either through the creation of a condominium or through the creation of a homeowner's association with an appropriate provision to be included in the deed of each parcel to be sold.
4-3.1.2 Such private streets shall be clearly labeled “Private Street” on both the Preliminary and Final Plats.
4-3.1.3 For a townhome, condominium, mixed-use, or multifamily residential design approved under the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, lots may be permitted to front on common parking areas.
4-3.1.4 Lots designed to be dedicated as Open Space should be designed to front on a public or private street, but at the discretion of the Planning Director or Subdivision Agent may be accessed by an ingress-egress easement providing for public access to these areas, if the lot design and configuration otherwise meets the Open Space requirements in the Zoning Ordinance.
4.3.2. No subdivision may result in the creation of unbuildable lots. Such lots (sometimes known as “outlots”) are prohibited. However, nothing in this Article shall be construed as to prevent the creation of reasonable accommodations for the provision of Open Space.
4.3.3. Where the land covered by a subdivision includes two (2) or more parcels in separate ownership, and lot arrangement is such that a property ownership line divides one (1) or more lots, the land in each lot so divided must be transferred by deed to unified ownership, simultaneously with the recording of the Final Plat. The deed is to be deposited with the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Fauquier County and held with the Final Plat until the subdivider is ready to record same, and they both shall then be recorded together.
4.3.4. Pipestem lots are prohibited, except for the purposes of providing Open Space in accordance with the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
4.3.5. In subdivisions and all developments within the Town, stormwater management (SWM/BMP) facilities designed to handle runoff from multiple lots shall be placed in a common area unless prior approval has been obtained from the VSMP Administrator. In no case shall SWM/BMP facilities be on individual lots except where permitted in the Zoning Ordinance. This provision shall not preclude the use of Low Impact Design (LID) practices such as bioswales, rain gardens, dry wells, etc. on the individual lots for which they are designed, so long as no structures designed to treat multiple properties are placed on, or traverse, individual lots.
4.4. Blocks
4.4.1. Unless Town Council grants a variation and exception in order to protect the
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
25
public health and safety, the maximum total perimeter length of blocks is sixteen hundred (1,600) feet. Minimum block length on one side shall be four hundred (400) feet. Maximum block length on one side is six hundred (600) feet. Minimum block depth is two hundred (200) feet. Maximum block depth is four hundred (400) feet.
4.4.2. Blocks must be wide enough to allow two (2) tiers of lots of minimum depth, unless prevented by topographical conditions or size of the property.
4.4.3. Where a proposed subdivision will adjoin a primary thoroughfare or collector street, the Planning Commission may require that the greater dimension of the block front or back upon such street to avoid unnecessary ingress or egress.
4.4.4. Subdivisions of twenty (20) or more lots, or lots intended for multifamily development of twenty (20) or more dwelling units, must have more than one (1) means of vehicular ingress and egress to provide adequate access by emergency vehicles and personnel. If the subdivider can demonstrate that more than one (1) means of access cannot be provided, additional width along the single means of access, or elimination of on-street parking, may be required.
4.5. Easements
4.5.1. Easements for utilities must be provided at a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet. If two (2) utilities are located within one (1) easement area, the minimum easement width is twenty (20) feet. If more than two (2) utilities are located within an easement area, the easement width must be established by the Town Engineer.
4.5.2. Where a subdivision is traversed by a stream or other natural drainage way, the Planning Commission may require the subdivider to dedicate a suitable right-of-way or easement for storm water drainage, or to construct adequate water drains.
4.5.3. Provision must be made for permanent maintenance responsibilities for any land under easement that is dedicated to the Town, to the Commonwealth of Virginia, or to a property owners association.
4.6. Permits
Where it is necessary to place public utilities or facilities within public streets or rights- of-way, approval must first be obtained from the Town Council upon written recommendation from the Town Engineer.
4.7. Special Floodplain Requirements
4.7.1. Sanitary Sewer Facilities
All new or replacement sanitary sewer facilities and private package sewage
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
26
treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems) must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into the flood waters. In addition, they must be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage and impairment.
4.7.2. Water Facilities
All new or replacement water facilities must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system, and be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
4.7.3. Drainage Facilities
All storm drainage facilities must be designed to convey the flow of surface waters without damage to persons or property. The system must ensure that surface waters will drain away from buildings and on-site waste disposal sites. The Town of Warrenton may require a primary underground system to accommodate larger, less frequent floods. Drainage plans shall be consistent with local and regional drainage plans. The facilities must be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
4.7.4. Utilities
All utilities such as gas lines, and electrical and telephone systems being placed in flood- prone areas must be located, elevated (where possible), and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flooding occurrence.
4.7.5. Streets and Sidewalks
Streets and sidewalks must be designed to minimize their potential for increasing and aggravating the levels of flood flow. Drainage openings must sufficiently discharge flood flows without increasing flood heights.
4.8. Trees and Woodlands
4.8.1. Tree protection zones must be established for all trees and woodlands designated for retention in accord with the requirements of Article 8 of the Zoning Ordinance.
4.8.2. When the original grade cannot be retained at the tree protection zone line, a retaining wall must be constructed outside the tree protection zone. All retaining walls must be designed and constructed in accord with the standards of the Public Facilities Manual.
4.8.3. All trees which have experienced any disturbance or have had damage to roots or branches must be fertilized. This shall be accomplished in early fall (September- October) or mid-spring (April-May), with fall application
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
27
preferred. Fertilizer must be broadcast over the surface in an area twice the size of the tree protection zone, or a minimum area of one thousand (1,000) square feet per tree, whichever is larger. Fertilizer grade must have approximately three (3) parts nitrogen to one (1) part phosphorous and one (1) part potassium (3-1-1 ratio) and be applied at a rate equivalent to one (1) pound nitrogen per one thousand (1,000) square feet.
4.8.4. In instances where there is no alternative to locating underground utilities within a tree protection zone, tunneling must be used wherever possible to avoid trenching. Where trenches are to be used, they must be located as far away as possible from tree trunks and tamped lightly to avoid air pockets.
4.8.5. No deciduous or evergreen tree of eighteen (18) inch caliper or greater, and no flowering or ornamental tree of ten (10) inch caliper or greater, may be removed unless the subdivider demonstrates that the tree poses a risk to life or property; that the tree has been damaged or is otherwise unhealthy and unlikely to survive; or that retention of the tree would render the property unusable for any permitted use designated by the Zoning Ordinance for that parcel.
4.8.6. In instances where trees are removed prior to approval of a site grading plan, or in violation of an approved tree protection plan, the subdivider must replace those trees in the location of the trees illegally removed.
4.9. Responsibility for Required Improvements
The subdivider or developer must provide the improvements required by this Ordinance. All improvements must be installed at the cost of the subdivider or developer. No subdivider or developer may commence the construction of any required improvement without obtaining a construction permit in compliance with all fees and procedures set out by this Ordinance.
4.10. Monuments
4.10.1. Permanent reference monuments must be placed in the center line of all streets at all points of curvature, points of tangent, points of compound curve, reverse curve, and intersections of streets and alleys. Such permanent reference monuments must be of stone or reinforced concrete, at least twenty-four (24) inches long and four (4) inches square with a suitable center point, and must be set flush with the finished grade.
4.10.2. Solid metal pins or steel pipe not less than 3/4 inches in diameter and at least twenty-four (24) inches long must be set in place flush with the finished grade at the following points:
a. At all intersections of streets and alleys with the subdivisions boundary lines.
b. At all points and boundary lines where there is a change in direction or
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
28
curvature.
c. At all lot corners.
4.10.3. All monuments must be inspected and approved by the Town Engineer before any improvements are accepted by the Town.
4.11. Curbs, Gutters and Sidewalks
Curbs, gutters, and sidewalks are required in all subdivisions, however, the Town Council may grant variation and exceptions of sidewalk requirements in subdivisions with a density of less than one dwelling unit per acre. This is not to be construed as a conflict with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, Article 10, Site Development Plans, which deals with zoning ordinance requirements for sidewalks and does not apply to subdivisions. Therefore, where the Subdivision Ordinance applies to a project, the requirements of this section shall be met.
4.12. Drainage
A drainage system must be provided by means of culverts, ditches, catch basins, and any other facilities that are necessary to provide adequate drainage and disposal of surface and storm waters from and across all streets and adjoining property. Such drainage system must comply with the regulations of the Public Facilities Manual or, where applicable, the Virginia Department of Transportation. Urban Best Management Practices must be used to reduce storm water volumes and transport of sediment off-site.
4.13. Street Identification Signs
Street identification signs must be installed as specified in the Public Facilities Manual.
4.14. Location of Utility Structures
4.14.1. All utility poles or underground conduits for electric power lines or telephone lines must be placed in easements provided along the rear or side lot lines..
4.14.2. All gas, water, and sewer mains must be installed underground in accordance with the Public Utilities Manual. Electric, telephone, and cable television lines must be installed underground in accordance with the prevailing standards and practices of the utility or other companies providing such services. The Town Council may approve an exception to this requirement where the subdivider or developer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Town Council, acting on recommendation of the Director of Public Utilities, that underground installations are not feasible.
4.15. Water Service
4.15.1. The subdivider or developer must extend public water service to all lots within the subdivision.
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
29
4.15.2. In all subdivisions being serviced by the public water supply system, an acceptable system of fire hydrants must be installed in compliance with the Public Facilities Manual.
4.15.3. The water facilities shall be in compliance with regulations of the Town of Warrenton Public Facilities Manual.
4.16. Sewage Service
4.16.1. The subdivider or developer must extend public sewerage facilities to all lots within the subdivision.
4.16.2. The sewerage facilities must comply with regulations of the Public Facilities Manual.
4.17. Lighting
4.17.1. Street lights must be installed along all public streets at the expense of the subdivider or developer. Such lights must be located within the right-of-way dedicated for the street. The Town of Warrenton will assume responsibility for the payment of monthly electrical bills upon final acceptance of the public street.
4.17.2. Lights must be installed to illuminate public access areas designed or intended for evening use, including parking lots and walkways, associated with multifamily, townhouse, commercial, industrial, public, and institutional uses. Such lighting must be designed, sized and placed to promote the safety, comfort, and convenience of pedestrians and motorists on-site and in the public streets. Lighting facilities must be arranged in a manner that will protect public streets and neighboring properties from direct glare or hazardous interference.
4.18. Pro Rata Share of Improvements
4.18.1. The improvements must be as specified in the Comprehensive Plan or as required by the Planning Commission based on the Comprehensive Plan. In either case, they must be constructed consistent with the Public Facilities Manual.
4.18.2. Where a general sewer and drainage improvement program has been adopted by the Town for a defined area that includes the land to be subdivided, the subdivider must pay a pro rata share of the cost of providing reasonable and necessary sewerage and drainage facilities located outside the property limits of the land proposed for subdivision but necessitated or required, at least in part, by the construction or improvement of the subdivision.
4.18.3. The method of computing a subdivider's pro rata share of such cost is on a directly proportional basis, based on the estimated contribution of runoff or sewerage of that given subdivision to the estimated cost of the total
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
30
improvement for the defined area. The basis for computing the contribution of runoff or sewerage and cost must be consistent with the Public Facilities Manual.
4.18.4. Each such payment must be made prior to the approval of the Final Plat and these funds must be expended only for the construction of those facilities for which the payment was required. Until expended, these funds will be kept in a separate account for each of the individual improvement programs until such time as they are expended for the improvement program. In lieu of payment, before plat approval, the subdivider may furnish the Town with a surety bond or other security in accordance with 3-15, conditioned on payment at commencement of such construction.
DEFINITIONS
5.1. Words and Terms
For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain words and terms used herein shall be interpreted and defined as follows. Words used in the present tense include the future tense, the singular includes the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the natural construction of the word indicates otherwise; the word “lot” includes the word “plot,” and “Parcel”; the word “shall” is mandatory and not advisory; the word “approve” when used in regard to the review of a plat or plan shall be considered to be followed by the words “or disapprove”; any reference to this Ordinance includes all ordinances amending or supplementing the same; and all distances and areas refer to measurements in a horizontal plane.
Acre: a unit of land measure containing 43,560 square feet.
Administrator: The Town Planning Director or his designee, unless specifically stated otherwise herein.
Alley: A permanent service way, with a minimum width of twenty (20) feet, providing a secondary means of vehicular access to an abutting property, and not intended for general traffic circulation.
Applicant-Owner: An individual, corporation, proprietor, trust, trustee, joint venture, partnership, or other entity having legal title to any tract of land or parcel of land to be developed, whether or not they have given their power of attorney to one of their group, or another individual or entity to act on their behalf in planning, negotiation, or in representing or executing the requirements of the ordinances of the Town of Warrenton.
Architect: A person who is recognized by the Commonwealth of Virginia and who is registered with the State Department of Professional and Occupational Registration as a licensed architect.
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
31
Berm: A continuous bank of earth designed and placed to block or partially obscure elements of a site (such as a parking area), or of a building (such as a loading dock). Berms typically range in height from two (2) to six (6) feet, with width-to-height ratios of 2:1 to 5:1. Berms are often used in combination with shrubbery and trees.
Block: That land abutting on one (1) side of a street extending to the rear lot lines (or, for parcels of land extending through to another street, to a line midway between the two (2) streets) and lying between the nearest intersecting and intercepting streets or between the nearest intersecting or intercepting street and boundary of any railroad right-of-way, park, school ground, or unsubdivided acreage or center line of any drainage channel twenty (20) or more feet in width.
Buffer: A landscaped area intended to separate and partially obstruct the view of two (2) adjacent land uses or properties from one another or from the roadway or to block noise or other nuisances; land areas reserved for the purpose of providing screening and separation from adjacent, different land uses.
Building: A structure having one (1) or more stories and a roof designed primarily for support and shelter of persons, animals, or property of any kind. When a structure is divided into separate pans by firewalls, and having separate plumbing, electrical, heating, drainage, and ventilation, each part so divided shall be deemed a separate structure.
Building Area: The area of the horizontal section of the buildings taken at their greatest outside dimensions on the ground floor including all attached structures and covered porches.
Building, Height of: The vertical distance measured from the level of the curb or the established curb grade opposite the middle of the front of the structure to the highest point of the roof if a flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard roof; or to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof. For buildings set back more than ten (10) feet from the street line, the height shall be measured from the average elevation of the ground surface along the front of the building.
Building, Main: The principal structure or one of the principal buildings on a lot, or the building or one of the principal buildings housing the principal use on the lot.
Building Setback Line: A line establishing the distance by which any structure must be separated from any lot boundary line.
Caliper: A measurement of the diameter of a tree trunk taken at four and one-half feet above the soil line; also known as diameter at breast height (DBH).
Capital Improvement Plan: A plan outlining the nature, location, costs, funding, and timing of future capital expenditures for community facilities such as streets, sidewalks, drainage facilities, water and wastewater lines and treatment facilities, parks, public buildings, and required property.
Carport: A structure attached to a dwelling unit, open on at least one (1) side, designed for the
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
32
parking and storage of vehicles by the residents of the dwelling and their guests.
Centerline: The midpoint of the width of a highway or right-of-way.
Clear-cutting: The indiscriminate removal of trees, shrubs, or undergrowth with the intention of preparing real property for nonagricultural development purposes. This definition does not include the selective removal of non-native tree and shrub species when the soil is left relatively undisturbed, removal of dead trees and shrubs, or normal mowing operations.
Clerk: The Clerk of the Circuit Court of Fauquier County having jurisdiction in the Town of Warrenton.
Cluster Development: A residential development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, and preservation of environmentally sensitive areas or historic and cultural resources.
Commission: The Planning Commission of the Town of Warrenton, Virginia.
Comprehensive Plan: Maps, charts, and descriptive matter officially adopted by the Warrenton Town Council as provided by § 15.2-2223 of the Code of Virginia showing, among other things, recommendations for the most appropriate use of land; for the most desirable density of population; for a system of thoroughfares, parkways and recreation areas; for the general location and extent of facilities for water and sewer: and for the general location, character, and extent of community facilities.
Conservation Easement: An easement granting a right or interest in real property that is appropriate to retaining land or water areas and their structures in their built, natural, scenic, open, or wooded condition or for the purpose of maintaining existing land uses.
Construction Standards: Specifications and standards as adopted by or applicable in the Town of Warrenton relating to the construction of all physical improvements.
Council: The Town Council of Warrenton, Virginia
Covenant: A formal agreement of legal validity between two (2) or more parties outlining restrictions, rights, or responsibilities concerning the use of property or structures.
Cul-de-Sac: A street with only one (1) outlet and having an appropriate turn-around for safe and convenient reverse traffic movement.
Density: The number of dwelling units per acre of land.
Density, Gross: The number of dwelling units per gross acre of land on the site or lot.
Density, Net: The number of dwelling units per net acre of land on the site or lot. The net density is equal to the gross site or lot area less floodplain, steep slopes and other unbuildable areas.
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
33
Detention Facility: A facility which serves the purpose of collecting and retaining rainfall falling on a site for controlled release to primary stormwater management facilities as a result of land alteration activities.
Developer or Subdivider: An individual, corporation, proprietor, trust, trustee, joint venture, partnership, or other entity having legal title for, or authorization from the owner, use any tract of land or parcel of land to be developed in planning, negotiation, or in representing or executing the requirements of the ordinances of the Town of Warrenton.
Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the placement of mobile homes, streets, and other paving, utilities, filling, grading, excavation, mining, dredging, or drilling operations.
District: A zoning category or classification within the Town of Warrenton zoning regulations; Zoning District.
Drive-Through Facility (or “Drive-Through”): Any portion of a building or structure from which customers can receive a service, or obtain a product, while in their motor vehicle.
Driveway or Accessway: That space specifically designated and reserved on the site for movement of vehicles from one (1) location to another on site or from the site to a public street.
Dustless Surface: A surface adequately covered in accordance with good construction practice, with a minimum of either two (2) applications of bituminous surface treatment concrete, or bituminous concrete approved by the Town, and to be maintained in good condition at all times.
Dwelling: Any structure, or portion thereof, which is designed for generally permanent residential purposes, not including hotels, boardinghouses, lodging houses, tourist cabins or automobile trailers.
Dwelling, Mobile Home: Manufactured homes are also commonly referred to as “mobile homes” and differ from Modular Homes as defined herein, in that they do not necessarily comply with BOCA or Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code standards. Three types are defined herein as follows:
Mobile (Manufactured) Home, Type A: A multi-sectional manufactured home (“doublewide”) constructed after July 1, 1976, that meets or exceeds the Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Mobile (Manufactured) Home, Type B: A traditional single manufactured home (“singlewide”) constructed after July 1, 1976, that meets or exceeds the Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
34
Mobile (Manufactured) Home, Type C: Any manufactured home (“mobile home”) constructed before July 1, 1976 and which consequently does not meet the criteria of a Type A or Type B manufactured home as defined herein.
Easement: A grant of one (1) or more of the property rights by the owner to, or for the use by, the public, a corporation, or another person or entity.
Engineer: A person who is recognized by the Commonwealth of Virginia and who is registered with the State Department of Professional and Occupational Registration “professional engineer.”
Fence: Any artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose, partition, or screen areas of land.
Floodplain: A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream, or watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation, or an area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Floodway: The floodway is the channel of a stream plus any adjacent floodplain areas that must be kept free of encroachment in order that the one hundred-year flood can be discharged without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot at any point.
Flood Hazard District: The area subject to inundation by waters on the one hundred year flood, which is the flood that has a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Flood Fringe: All that land in a floodplain not lying within a delineated floodway and subject to inundation by relatively low velocity flows and shallow water depths.
Floodproofing: The protection of structures and public utility systems from damage caused by inundation or seepage of flood waters.
Frontage: That side of a lot abutting on a street or way and ordinarily regarded as the front of the lot. The distance between the side lines of any lot measured along a line, measured at the required setback, generally paralleling the street upon which the lot fronts. The minimum width of a lot measured from one side lot line to the other along a straight line on which no point shall be farther away from the street upon which the lot fronts than the building setback line, as defined and required herein. On irregularly shaped lots that make such a measurable line impossible, the frontage shall be measured along the line that can be drawn so as to best meet the intent of the above definition. Lots located on the corners of streets will have at least two front yards.
Geometric Design: Typical cross-sections used in street design. Governing Body: The Town Council of Warrenton, Virginia.
Grade: The average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of a building. In the case where walls are parallel to and within five (5) feet of a sidewalk, the ground level shall be
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
35
measured at the sidewalk.
Gross Floor Area: The sum of the total horizontal areas of all floors of a structure on a lot, measured from the interior faces of exterior walls, basements, elevator shafts, stairwells, and enclosed porches or atriums. This definition does not include floor space not used for human habitation or suitable for temporary storage or merchandise or equipment such as areas designed for heating and ventilating equipment, off-street parking, or areas with less than six (6) feet, six (6) inches or more of structural headroom. The term “floor area” shall include basements, elevator shafts and stairwells at each story, floor space for mechanical equipment with headroom of seven feet or more, attic space, interior balconies and mezzanines. The term gross floor area shall not include cellars or outside balconies which do not exceed a projection of six feet beyond the exterior walls of the building. Parking structures and rooftop mechanical structures are excluded from gross floor area. The gross floor area of structures devoted to bulk storage of materials including, but not limited to, grain elevators and petroleum storage tanks, shall be computed by counting each ten feet of height or fraction thereof as being equal to one floor.
Health Officer: The health director or sanitarian of Fauquier County, Virginia or his designated agent.
Highway Engineer: The Resident Engineer serving the Town of Warrenton, Virginia, of the Department of Highways and Transportation of Virginia, or his designated deputy.
Homeowners Association: A private nonprofit corporation of homeowners for the purpose of owning, operating, developing, and maintaining various common property and facilities.
Impervious Surface: A surface on previously undeveloped land that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water, including gravel driveways and parking areas.
Improvements: All utilities, facilities, buildings, and structures including but not limited to streets, cul-de-sacs, storm and sanitary sewers, water lines, curb and gutter, and landscaping required pursuant to the terms of the Ordinances of Warrenton, Virginia.
Jurisdiction: The limits of territory within which authority may be exercised by the governing body.
Landscape Architect: A person who is certified by the State of Virginia in the practice of landscape design.
Landscaping: The modification of existing site conditions by earthwork, planting, and/or structural installation to complete a desired landscape scheme.
Landscape Design: The planned treatment of land, structures, plants, topography, and other natural features.
Lot: A numbered and recorded portion of a subdivision intended for transfer of ownership or for building development for a single building or accessory building or, in the case of land not
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
36
transferred for sale, a measured parcel of land having fixed boundaries and designated on a plat or survey showing the metes and bounds or simply described by metes and bounds.
Lot Area: The total horizontal area of the lot lying within the lot lines, provided that no area of land lying within any street or right-of-way shall be deemed a portion of any lot area. The area of any lot abutting a street shall be measured to the street right-of-way.
Lot, Comer: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection, the shortest side fronting upon a street shall be considered the front of the lot, and the longest side fronting upon a street shall be considered the side of the lot.
Lot, Coverage: The area of a site covered by buildings or roofed areas.
Lot, Depth of: The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. Lot, Double Frontage: An interior lot having frontage on two (2) streets.
Lot, Interior: A lot other than a comer lot having frontage on one (1) street.
Lot Line: A property boundary line of any lot held in single and separate ownership from adjacent property, except that, in the case of any lot abutting a street, the lot line or such portion of the lot as abuts the street shall be deemed to be the same as the street line, and shall not be the center line of the street, or any other line within the street line even though such may be the property boundary line.
Lot, Pipestem: A lot with access provided to the bulk of the lot by means of a narrow corridor that does not meet the street frontage requirement of the district regulations.
Lot of Record: A lot which has been recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Fauquier County.
Lot, Substandard: See Nonconforming Lot.
Lot, Width of: The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at the required front setback line.
Mobile Home (also “Manufactured Home”): See “Dwelling, Mobile Home.”
Mobile Home Park: A residential neighborhood conforming to the requirements of the former MHP Residential District.
Mobile Home Subdivision: An arrangement of lots designed and intended for the placement of mobile homes for residential purposes, meeting the requirement of the former MHP Residential District.
Noise: Sound of a harsh, loud, or confused kind causing disturbance to occupants of an adjoining property, as provided for in the performance standards of the Zoning Ordinance and any other provisions of the Town Code.
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
37
Nonconforming Activity: (see Nonconforming Use)
Nonconforming Lot: An otherwise legally platted lot that does not conform to the minimum area or width requirements of this Ordinance for the district in which it is located, either at the effective date of this Ordinance, or as a result of subsequent amendments to the Ordinance.
Nonconforming Structure: An otherwise legal building or structure that does not conform with the lot area, yard, height, lot coverage, or other area regulations of this Ordinance, or is designed or intended for a use that does not conform to the use regulations of this Ordinance, for the district in which it is located, either at the effective date of this Ordinance or as a result of subsequent amendments to the Ordinance.
Nonconforming Use: An otherwise legal use that does not conform with the regulations of this Ordinance for the district in which it is located, either at the effective date of this Ordinance or as a result of subsequent amendments to the Ordinance.
One Hundred-Year Flood: A flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every one hundred
(100) years (i.e. that has a one (1) percent chance of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
On-Site: That area within the boundary of any land to be developed or planned for use or development.
Open Space: An area that is intended to provide light and air, and is designed for either environmental, scenic, or recreational purposes and may include, but is not limited to, lawns, decorative planting, walkways, active and passive recreation areas, playgrounds, fountains, swimming pools, wooded areas, and water bodies, but not including driveways, parking lots, and storage yards.
Open Space, Common: Open space within or related to a development, not in individually owned lots or dedicated for public use, but which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of a development.
Parcel: A continuous quantity of land as shown on the parcel maps of the County Commissioner of the Revenue and/or an approved record plat, in the possession of or owned by, or recorded as the property of, the same person or persons.
Performance Bond: A letter of credit, corporate surety, or cash deposit, approved by the Planning Director and Town Attorney in an amount equal to the full cost of improvements required by these regulations and providing for completion of said improvements within a definite period of time (A performance and payment bond also provides for the payment of subcontractors). A bond of surety, and/or cash deposit approved by the Town Council equal to the full cost of improvements required by these regulations and providing for completion of said improvements within a definite term.
Person: An individual, a partnership, or a corporation or any other legal entity by whatever term
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
38
customarily known.
Planner: A person qualified to prepare site development plans, either licensed as such, or meeting the educational training and work experience standards for membership of the American Institute of Certified Planners.
Planning Director: The person designated by the Town Manager to serve in this capacity. All references to the Planning Director in this Ordinance shall also include the Community Development Director.
Plat: A plan, map or drawing of a tract or parcel of land which is to be or has been subdivided.
Plat, Final: A map or plan filed, or to be filed, of record of a subdivision and any accompanying material, as described in this Ordinance.
Plat, Preliminary: A preliminary drawing or drawings, described in this Ordinance, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Administrator for approval.
Porch: A structure attached to a building to shelter an entrance or to serve as a semi-enclosed space, usually roofed and generally open-sided, but it may be screened or glass enclosed.
Profile: A drawing of a side or sectional elevation of an object
Property: Any tract, lot, or parcel or several of the same collected together for the purpose of subdividing, preparing a site development plan, and/or developing.
Public Facilities Manual: The Town of Warrenton Public Facilities Manual. This manual provides standards and specifications for public facilities construction within the Town.
Public Improvement: All public utilities and facilities for which the Town Council may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation or which may affect an improvement for which Town Council responsibility is established. Such improvements shall include, but not be limited to, streets, storm and sanitary sewers, water lines, curb, gutter, sidewalks, and street signs. All such improvements shall be properly bonded.
Public Water and Sewer Systems: A water or sewer system owned and operated by a municipality or county, or owned and operated by a private individual or a corporation approved by the Governing Body and properly licensed by the State Corporation Commission, and subject to special regulations as herein set forth.
Retention Facility: The same as a Detention Facility except that the lower water elevation of the pond may be at a level lower than the normal hydraulic grade line of the drainage system into which it drains. Water detained in this lower elevation must therefore be dissipated by evaporation, seepage into the soil, or retained as a permanent water pool.
Reverse Frontage: A lot with double frontage which is not accessible from one (1) of the streets
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
39
upon which it fronts, usually the street designed for or experiencing the highest vehicular traffic volumes.
Right-of-Way: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or for another special use and may include a fee simple or easement ownership.
Screening: See “Buffer.”
Setback: The minimum distance by which any building or structure must be separated from the front, side, or rear lot line.
Setback Line: The line which establishes the required setback; the same as building restriction line.
Specifications: A detailed, precise presentation of the materials and procedures to be employed in the construction of all physical improvements required by the ordinance applicable in the Town of Warrenton, Virginia.
Standards: Criteria for public improvements set out in the Town of Warrenton Public Facilities Manual.
Steep Slope: A slope exceeding twenty-five (25) percent grade.
Story: That portion of a building, other than the basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it. If there be no floor above it, it will be the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
Story, Half: A space under a sloping roof, which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three (3) feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two thirds of the floor area is finished off for use.
Street: A strip of land intended primarily for vehicular traffic and proving the principal means of access to property, including but not limited to a road, lane, drive, avenue, right-of-way, highway, boulevard, trail, court, place, terrace, or other thoroughfare.
Street, Arterial: A highway utilized primarily as a supplement to, and an extension of, the interstate highway system, defined in the Virginia State Highway Commission Standards as an arterial highway. A minimum right-of-way of one hundred twenty (120) feet is required and carrying capacity is in excess of eight thousand (8,000) vehicles per lane per day.
Street, Collector: Any existing or future street shown as a collector street on the adopted Comprehensive Plan or that carries a volume of through traffic between four hundred (400) and three thousand (3,000) vehicles per day.
Street, Interstate: A thoroughfare utilized to carry interstate traffic with a minimum right-of-way
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
40
of three hundred (300) feet in rural area and carrying capacity in excess of fifteen hundred (1,500) vehicles per lane per hour.
Street, Line: The dividing line between a street or road right-of-way and the contiguous property.
Street, Local: Any existing or future street shown as a local street on the adopted Comprehensive Plan and is used primarily as a means of public access to the abutting properties with anticipated traffic of less than four hundred (400) vehicles per day, and having a right-of-way of not less than fifty (50) feet.
Street, Primary Thoroughfare: Any existing or future street shown as a major, or primary, street on the adopted Comprehensive Plan or that carries a large volume of traffic, or anticipated traffic, exceeding three thousand (3,000) vehicles per day, and having a right-of-way of not less than seventy (70) feet, and where feasible, a right-of-way of ninety (90) feet.
Street, Private: A local or collector street constructed to Town and State standards or the equivalent thereto, guaranteed to be maintained by a private corporation by means of a covenant, deed, and easement acceptable to the Town of Warrenton. Private streets are not a component of the State primary or secondary road system. Such streets shall have guaranteed public vehicular access.
Street, Public: All public property reserved or dedicated for street traffic, maintained by the Town of Warrenton or the Virginia Department of Highways.
Street, Secondary Collector: A street that carries or is anticipated to carry a volume of through- traffic exceeding four hundred (400) vehicles per day, the right-of-way of which shall not be less than fifty (50) feet nor more than ninety (90) feet depending upon existing or anticipated traffic volume.
Street, Service Drive: A public right-of-way generally parallel with and contiguous to a major, highway. Primarily designed to promote safety by eliminating pernicious ingress and egress to the major safe and orderly points of access to the major highway.
Street Width: The total width of the strip of land dedicated or reserved for public travel, including roadway, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, planting strips, and where necessary, utility strips.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground, or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground. This includes, among other things, dwellings, buildings, signs, fences, walls, etc., but not private driveways.
Subdivide: To divide any tract, parcel, or lot of land into two (2) or more parts for the purpose of transferring ownership of any part or for the purpose of building development on any part. The term 'subdivide' includes the term 'resubdivide' and when appropriate to the context shall relate to the process of subdividing.
Subdivision: The process of subdividing or the result of subdividing.
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
41
Surveyor, Land: An individual who is certified and licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia and who is registered with the State Department of Professional and Occupational Registration as a "registered land surveyor."
Subdivision Agent: An employee of the Community Development Department designated by the Planning Director to administer the Subdivision Ordinance and any other similar duties as may be assigned by the Planning Director.
Town Engineer: The person designated to serve in this capacity by the Town Manager.
Town Manager: The duly appointed Town Manager for Warrenton, Virginia.
Travel Lane: Space specifically designated and reserved on the site for the movement of vehicular traffic.
Tree Protection Zone: An area that is radial to the trunk of a tree in which no construction activity shall occur. The tree protection zone shall be fifteen (15) feet from the trunk of the tree to be retained, or the distance from the trunk to the dripline, whichever is greater. Where there are a group of trees or woodlands, the tree protection zone shall be the aggregate of the protection zones for the individual trees.
Use: Activity proposed for any portion or part of a parcel, tract, or lot. U.S.G.S.: U. S. Geological Survey. U.S.C. & G.S.: U. S. Coast and Geodetic Survey.
Utility: (1) A system of facilities provided by any agency which, under public franchise or ownership, or under certificate of convenience and necessity, provides the public with electricity, gas, heat, steam, communication, rail transportation, water, sewage collection, or other similar service; (2) A closely regulated private enterprise with an exclusive franchise for providing a public service; (3) the component parts of such facilities, including poles, wires, transformers, underground pipelines or conduits; treatment plants are considered and/or defined as separate items.
Variance: A variance is a relaxation of the terms of the Subdivision Ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the Ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
Woodland: An area comprising one (1) or more acres of wooded land where the largest trees have at least a six (6) inch caliper, or a grove of trees forming one (1) canopy where ten (10) or more trees have at least eight (8) inch calipers.
Yard: An open space on a lot other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein.
Yard, Front: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot as a building between the nearest front
Town of Warrenton, Virginia Subdivision Ordinance 8/12/2020
42
line of the building (exclusive of steps) and the front lot or street line, and extending across the full width of the lot.
Yard, Rear: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot as a building between the nearest rear line of the building (exclusive of steps) and the rear line of the lot, and extending the full width of the lot.
Yard, Side: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot as a building between the nearest side line of the building (exclusive of steps) and the side line of the lot, and extending from the front yard line to the rear yard line.
Zero Lot Line: The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one (1) or more of the building's sides rests directly on a lot line. The side(s) of the building resting on the fine typically does not include windows.
Zoning Administrator: An employee of the Community Development Department designated by the Planning Director to administer the Zoning Ordinance and any other similar duties as may be assigned by the Planning Director.
Zoning Ordinance: Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Warrenton, Virginia.