CODE OF THE TOWN OF WOODSTOCK, VIRGINIA 
____________ 
Published in 1993 by Order of the Town Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF 
WOODSTOCK, VIRGINIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
J. Timothy Dalke 
Mayor 
____________ 
William C. Moyers 
Oliver N. Peer 
Robert A. Einstein 
William M. Wender
Alma F. Hottle
Johnnie E. Manuel 
Town Council 
____________ 
Larry D. Bradford 
Town Manager 
____________ 
Albert T. Mitchell 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Kathleen A. Black 
Town Treasurer 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Woodstock, Virginia. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1968 Code, as supplemented, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1968 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner or by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. If the new material is to be included between chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 
CHARTERCHT:1CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLECHTCT:1CODECD1:1CODE COMPARATIVE TABLESCCT:1STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLESLT:1CHARTER INDEXCHTi:1CODE INDEXCDi:1 
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Milton E. Lefkoff, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to the Honorable Alma F. Hottle, Councilmember, Mr. Albert T. Mitchell, Town Attorney, Ms. Kathleen A. Black, Town Treasurer, and Ms. Michelle M. Lohr, Town Planner, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION
Tallahassee, Florida 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the Town of Woodstock, Virginia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the Council of the Town of Woodstock: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of the Town of Woodstock, Virginia" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 90, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before July 7, 1992, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance of the town shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for not more than 12 months, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the town may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions and amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the council to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after July 7, 1992, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective March 1, 1993. 
    Adopted this 2nd day of February, 1993. 
/s/ Timonthy J. Dalke
     Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/ Michelle M. Lohr
     Clerk   
Supplement History Table 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No.Date
AdoptedInclude/
OmitSupp. No. 2- 2-2010Include15 6- 1-2010Include15 8- 3-2010Include15 1- 4-2011Include15 4- 5-2011Include15 5- 3-2011Include15 6- 7-2011Include15 9- 6-2011Include1511- 1-2011 Include15 5- 3-2011Include16 4- 3-2012(1)Include16 4- 3-2012(2)Include16 5- 1-2012Include16 6- 5-2012Include16 7- 3-2012Include1610- 2-2012(1)Include1610- 2-2012(2)Include1610- 2-2012(3)Include16 3-19-2013Include16 4- 2-2013Include16 6- 4-2013Include16 9- 3-2013Include16 1- 7-2014(1)Include16 1- 7-2014(2)Include16 1- 7-2014(3)Include16 1- 7-2014(4)Include16 3- 4-2014(1)Include16 3- 4-2014(2)Include16 3- 4-2014(3)Include16 5- 6-2014(1)Include16 5- 6-2014(2)Include16 6- 3-2014Include16 7- 1-2014(1)Include16 7- 1-2014(2)Include16 7- 1-2014(3)Include16 7- 1-2014(4)Include16 8- 5-2014Include16 9- 2-2014Include1610- 8-2014Include16 6- 2-2015Include16 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
  
    An act to provide a new Charter for the Town of Woodstock and to repeal all acts or parts of acts in conflict therewith, and to declare all contracts and obligations heretofore or hereafter made by the present council and government of the Town of Woodstock and all power heretofore or hereafter exercised by them, while in office, to be legal and valid. 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note-The Charter here set out is contained in an act of the General Assembly of Virginia approved March 24, 1922 (Acts 1922, ch. 412, p. 715 et seq.) and all acts amendatory thereof. Acts amending the Charter are cited in parentheses following the section affected. Unless so indicated, the section derives unchanged from the original act. Catchlines to certain sections have been supplied for editorial purposes. They should not be construed to restrict, limit or affect the contents of the sections. Words, punctuation, etc., in brackets have been added for the purpose of clarification. A uniform system of capitalization has been used.

Sec. 1. - Validity and legality of contracts and obligations. 
    Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Virginia, that all contracts and obligations of the Town of Woodstock heretofore and hereafter made by the present council and government by them while in office, and former councils in the corporate name of the council of the Town of Woodstock, not inconsistent with this Charter and the general laws and Constitution of the state, shall be and are hereby declared to be valid and legal. 
Sec. 2. - Body politic and corporate; powers under Constitution, etc. 
    The inhabitants of the Town of Woodstock, Virginia, as its limits are or hereafter may be established, shall be a body politic and corporate, to be known and designated as the Town of Woodstock, and as such shall have and may exercise all power as now or hereafter may be conferred upon or delegated to town [towns] under the Constitution and laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia, as fully and completely as though said powers were specifically enumerated herein[,] and no enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall be held to be exclusive. 
Sec. 3. - Corporate boundaries. 
Editor's note- Code of Virginia, § 15.1-836.2, provides that a municipal charter will not contain the metes and bounds description of the municipality. 
The boundary has been affected by the following decree by the circuit court of Shenandoah County: 
"THIS 13th day of August, 1985, came the Town of Woodstock, Virginia, by its attorney, Albert T. Mitchell, Esquire, and the County of Shenandoah, Virginia, by its attorney, A. G. Lambiotte, Esquire, and petitioned the Court to relocate and change the boundary line between the parties, each a political subdivision, and establish a new boundary line. Upon hearing evidence ore tenus and upon a review of the record, the Court finds as follows: 
(1)
The Boundary Line Agreement dated the 9th day of July, 1985, entered into between the Town of Woodstock, Virginia, and the County of Shenandoah, Virginia, is properly before the Court in accordance with Section 15.1-1031.1 of the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended. 
(2)
That the Town of Woodstock, Virginia, has properly authorized the execution of the aforesaid agreement by its resolution dated the 22nd day of May, 1984, which said resolution is attached hereto and made a part of this decree by reference. 
(3)
That the County of Shenandoah, Virginia, has properly authorized the execution of the aforesaid agreement by its resolution dated the 9th day of July, 1985, which said resolution is attached hereto and made a part of this decree by reference. 
(4)
That the governing bodies of the Town of Woodstock, Virginia, and the County of Shenandoah, Virginia, have caused a description of the boundary line between them, as agreed upon, to be published at least once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper having general circulation in the aforesaid political subdivisions, a certificate of said publication being attached hereto and made a part hereof by reference, and that a copy of the said agreement has been posted as required by Section 15.1-1031.2 of the Code of Virginia as aforesaid. 
THEREFORE, the Court ORDERS and DECREES that the boundary line between the Town of Woodstock, Virginia, and Shenandoah County, Virginia, be changed in accordance with the aforesaid Boundary Line Agreement and its attached plat of survey and survey description. It is further ORDERED and DECREED that this order shall be recorded in the Common Law Order Book of this Court and in the current Deed Book of this Court and indexed in the names of the Town of Woodstock, Virginia, and Shenandoah County, Virginia, and by this order the new boundary line is designated and established. Further, it is ordered that the Clerk of the Court shall forward a copy of this order certified to the Secretary of the Commonwealth. 
ENTER this 22nd day of August, 1985."
There have been numerous boundary line adjustments since the date of the above decree. 
Sec. 4. - Vesting in town of certain statutory powers. 
    The powers set forth in sections 15-77.1 through 15-77.70 of the Code of Virginia as in force on January one, nineteen hundred sixty, are hereby conferred on and vested in the Town of Woodstock, Virginia. 
(Acts 1922, ch. 412, § 4; Acts 1924, ch. 361; Acts 1926, ch. 29; Acts 1928, ch. 354; Acts 1940, ch. 161; Acts 1960, ch. 431, § 1) 
Editor's note- The statutes cited in the above section are now codified in Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-837 through 15.1-907. 
Sec. 4a. - Election and term of mayor and councilmembers; council as continuing body; vacancy in council. 
    A mayor and six councilmembers, all of whom shall be electors of the town, shall be elected at the regular municipal election on the second Tuesday in June, nineteen hundred sixty-two. The mayor shall be elected for a term of four years. The three members receiving the greatest number of votes in said election shall serve as members of the council for terms of four years each. The remaining three members shall serve for terms of two years each. At the regular municipal election to be held on the second Tuesday in June, nineteen hundred sixty-four, and every two years thereafter, three councilmembers shall be elected for terms of four years each. Terms of office shall begin on the first day of September next following their election. Each councilman and the mayor elected as hereinabove provided shall serve for the term stated or until his successor has been elected and qualified. The council shall be a continuing body, and no measure pending before such body shall abate or be discontinued by reason of expiration of term of office or removal of any of its members. Any vacancy in the council shall be filled within thirty days, for the unexpired term, by a majority vote of the remaining members; provided, that if the term of office to be filled does not expire for two years or more after the next regular election for councilmen, following such vacancy and such vacancy occurs in time to permit it, then the council shall fill such vacancy only for the period then remaining until such election, and a qualified person shall then be elected by the qualified voters and shall from and after the date of his election and qualification succeed such appointee and serve the unexpired term. The number of candidates for council equal to the number of vacancies to be filled for full terms receiving the highest number of votes shall be entitled to such full terms and the candidate receiving the next highest number of votes shall be entitled to the unexpired term caused by such vacancy. 
(Acts 1960, ch. 431, § 1; Acts 1962, ch. 21, § 1)
Editor's note- Code of Virginia, § 24.1-90, provides that the election day is the first Tuesday in May of even-numbered years. 
Sec. 4a(1). - Time of municipal elections; when terms of office begin. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter or any amendment thereto, that beginning in the year of nineteen hundred seventy-two, all municipal elections in the Town of Woodstock as provided in this Charter shall be held on the first Tuesday in May in each respective election year, and terms of office shall begin on the first day of July next following such election. 
(Acts 1972, ch. 40, § 1)
Sec. 4b. - Town manager. 
    The council may, without adopting any of the alternative forms of government provided by law, nevertheless employ a person, who may or may not be a resident or qualified voter of such city or town or of this state, to be known as the "town manager," who shall, under the control of the council, have general charge and management of the administrative affairs and work of the town and shall perform such other duties as may be required by him. He shall receive such salary as may be allowed him by the council and may be dismissed at any time by the council. 
(Acts 1960, ch. 431, § 1)
Editor's note- Woodstock is designated as a town, beginning with the first three paragraphs of the Charter. 
Sec. 4b(1). - Voting by mayor. 
    The mayor shall preside over the council, but shall not be entitled to vote on any question except in the case of a tie. 
(Acts 1983, ch. 10)
Sec. 4c. - Ordinances and resolutions. 
    Proposed ordinances shall be introduced in written or printed form, and the enacting clause of all ordinances shall substantially be "Be it Ordained by the Council of the Town of Woodstock," and all ordinances shall be read at two meetings not less than a week apart, one of which shall be a regular meeting and the other of which may be either an adjourned or called meeting, provided the requirement of a second reading may be confined to the reading of the title only upon the vote of four members of the council; provided, further, that emergency measures may be passed upon a single reading. The vote of each member of the council on all ordinances shall be recorded in the minutes. All ordinances passed by the council shall take effect thirty days after the date of passage, unless another later effective date shall be designated therein, except that the council may by affirmative vote of a majority of its members pass emergency measures to take effect immediately upon passage. 
    Every ordinance upon its final passage shall be recorded in a book kept for the purpose, and shall be authenticated by the signature of the presiding officer and the town clerk. 
    A record or entry made by the town clerk or a copy of such record or entry duly certified by such clerk shall be prima facie evidence of the terms of the ordinance or any amendment thereof. 
    All ordinances and resolutions of the council may be read in evidence in all courts and in all other proceedings in which it may be necessary to refer thereto, either from a copy thereof certified by the clerk or from the volume or code of ordinances printed by authority of the council. 
(Acts 1960, ch. 431, § 1; 1-3-78)
Sec. 4d. - Continuation in office of mayor, etc., and in force of liabilities, actions, etc. 
    The present mayor and councilmembers, and all other officers of the Town of Woodstock shall continue to hold office and to perform the duties of their respective offices for the said town for the terms for which they were elected and until their successors be elected and qualify, and all liabilities, actions, claims, [and] contracts heretofore existing under the former charter and amendatory acts under the corporate name of the Town of Woodstock shall remain and continue in force and effect as if this act [Charter] had not been passed. And all ordinances now in force in the Town of Woodstock, not inconsistent with this Charter[,] shall be and remain in full force until altered, amended or repealed by the council of said town. 
(Acts 1960, ch. 431, § 1)
Editor's note- The act here codified, Acts 1960, ch. 431, was in effect from its passage, and was approved on March 31, 1960. 
Sec. 5. - Repealing clause. 
    All acts and parts of acts in conflict with this Charter are hereby repealed and previous Charters and amendments thereto in conflict with this Charter in the corporate name of the council of the Town of Woodstock are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 6. - Effective date. 
    By reason of the fact that it is necessary for the Town of Woodstock to procure without delay additional water supply, an emergency is hereby declared to exist, and by reason thereof this act [Charter] shall be in force from its passage. 
Editor's note- The act here codified was approved on March 24, 1922. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
 This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
YearChapterSection Section
this Charter19224121-64419243614192629419283544194016141960431144a4b 4c 4d 19622114a19724014a1983104b  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Adoption and enforcement of town ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-13.

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the Code of the Town of Woodstock, Virginia and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as the Woodstock Town Code. 
(Code 1968, § 1-1)
State Law reference- Codification and recodification of ordinances, admission in evidence, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37.3. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
    In the interpretation and construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions of the town, the following rules of construction and definitions shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing with such surety, if any, as the council may direct, shall be sufficient. 
    Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the Town of Woodstock, Virginia. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Town Code of Woodstock, Virginia, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Code of Virginia. The words "Code of Virginia," shall mean the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
State Law reference- Computation of time, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.3. 
    Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either/or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)	"And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply.
(2)	"Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)	"Either/or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination; except that the term "and" may be read "or" and the term "or" may be read "and" when the sense requires it. 
    Council. The words "council," or "the council," shall mean the council of the Town of Woodstock, Virginia. 
State Law reference- "Council" defined, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.5. 
    County. The term "county," or "the county" shall mean the County of Shenandoah in the State of Virginia. 
    Delegation of authority. A provision that authorizes or requires a town officer or town employee to perform an act or make a decision authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through subordinates. 
    Following. The word "following," when used by way of reference to any section, shall be construed to mean next following that in which such reference is made. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.6. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only may extend and be applied to females and to corporations as well as males. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.7. 
    Generally. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the town council may be effectuated. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. Provisions shall be interpreted and applied so as to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. In the event of conflicts between provisions, the more stringent provision controls. 
    Health department. The term "health department" shall mean the health department of Shenandoah County. 
    Health officer. The term "health officer" shall mean the director of public health of Shenandoah County or his authorized representative. 
    In the town. The words "in the town" shall mean any territory jurisdiction of which for the exercise of its regulatory power has been conferred on the town by law. 
    May. The word "may" shall be permissive. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.13. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well as to one person or thing; and a word importing the plural number only may extend and be applied to one person or thing, as well as to several persons or things. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.15. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.16; when affirmation may be made, Code of Virginia, § 49-9. 
    Occupant or tenant. The word "occupant" or "tenant" applied to a building or land shall mean any person who holds a written or oral lease of or actually occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Officers, etc. Any reference to an officer, department, board, or commission shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the Town of Woodstock, Virginia." 
    Official time standard. Whenever particular hours are specified in this Code relating to the time within which any act shall or shall not be performed by any person, the time applicable shall be official standard time or daylight saving time, whichever may be in current use in the town. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall include any individual, corporation, partnership, association, company, business, trust, joint venture or other legal entity. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.19. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" means any property other than real property. 
    Preceding. The word "preceding," when used by way of reference to any section, shall be construed to mean next preceding that in which such reference is made. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.23. 
    Premises. The term "premises", as applied to real property, includes lands and structures. 
    Property. The word "property" shall mean real, personal or mixed property. 
    Public grounds. The words "public grounds" shall mean the parks and all public lands owned by the town and those parts of public places which do not form travelled parts of streets as defined in this section. 
    Shall. The word "shall" shall be mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline, or the lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when the person cannot write, his name being written near it and being witnessed by a person who writes his own name as a witness. 
    State or commonwealth. The word "state" or "commonwealth" shall mean the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
State Law reference- "State" defined, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.26. 
    Street. The word "street" shall include avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and approaches thereto and all other public thoroughfares in the town, and shall mean the entire width thereof between abutting property lines. It shall be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council. 
State Law reference- "Highway" defined, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100. 
    Swear or sworn. The word "swear" or "sworn" shall be equivalent to the word "affirm" or "affirmed" in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.28; when affirmation may be made, Code of Virginia, § 49-9. 
    Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense may include the future, as well as the past and present. 
    Town. The term "town" or "the town" shall mean the Town of Woodstock, in the County of Shenandoah and the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
State Law reference- "Town" defined, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.29. 
    Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1968, § 1-2; Ord. of 1-7-2014(1))
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, ch. 50. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.32. 
Sec. 1-3. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    If any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason declared to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this Code. 
(Code 1968, § 1-3; Ord. of 1-7-2014(1))
State Law reference- Severability of statutes, Code of Virginia, § 1-17.1. 
Sec. 1-4. - Provisions of Code construed as continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of the ordinances of the town included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1968, § 1-4; Ord. of 1-7-2014(1))
Sec. 1-5. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; references. 
(a)	The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)	History notes, charter references, cross references and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)	Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
(Code 1968, § 1-5; Ord. of 1-7-2014(1))
State Law reference- Headlines of sections of statutes, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.9. 
Sec. 1-6. - Trial, etc., of violations of Code, etc. 
    The general district court of the county shall have jurisdiction of, and shall try, all cases involving violations of this Code and other ordinances of the town and shall impose such punishment as may be prescribed for violations of the same. 
(Code 1968, § 7-4)
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)	Whenever in this Code or in any other ordinance of the town any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or the doing of any act is required or the failure, neglect or refusal to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the town shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)	Except where otherwise provided, every day any violation of this Code or any other ordinance of the town shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1968, § 7-1)
Charter reference- Power of town with reference to penalty for violation of ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-901, as adopted by § 4 of the town charter. 
Cross reference- Powers and duties of town treasurer, § 2-302. 
State Law reference- Power of town to make ordinances and prescribe fines or other punishment for violation thereof, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-13; precedence of charter provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-840; bond of persons convicted to prevent additional violations, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-902; injunctive relief against continuing violation of ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-905; classification of criminal offenses, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-9; punishment for conviction of misdemeanor, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-11; punishment for misdemeanor where no penalty prescribed, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-12, 18.2-13. 
Sec. 1-8. - General and specific penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)	In this section the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following:
(1)	Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)	Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)	Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)	In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a town officer or town employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)	Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, violations of this Code shall be a class 1 misdemeanor. No penalty shall exceed the penalty prescribed by general law for a like offense and such penalty shall not be any less than such penalty. Persons convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished as follows: 
(1)	For a class 1 misdemeanor, by the penalty provided in state law for a class 1 misdemeanor.
(2)	For a class 2 misdemeanor, by the penalty provided in state law for a class 2 misdemeanor.
(3)	For a class 3 misdemeanor, by the penalty provided in state law for a class 3 misdemeanor.
(4)	For class 4 misdemeanors, by the penalty provided in state law for a class 4 misdemeanor.
(d)	Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance:
(1)	With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)	With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each act constitutes a separate offense. 
(e)	Imposition of penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of license or permit. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(f)	Penalty. Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
(Code 1968, § 7-1.1; Ord. of 6-4-91(2), § 7-1.1; Ord. of 1-7-2014(1))
Sec. 1-9. - Liability of corporations, etc., and agents for violations. 
(a)	Any violation of this Code or other ordinance of the town by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)	Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the town, where such violation was the act or omission or the result of the act, omission or order of any such person. 
(Code 1968, § 7-2)
Sec. 1-10. - Miscellaneous ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect: 
(1)	Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)	Any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered before the effective date of this Code. 
(3)	Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the town or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the town or any evidence of the town's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the town. 
(4)	Any right or franchise conferred by ordinance or resolution.
(5)	Any appropriation or budget ordinance.
(6)	Any ordinance consistent with this Code levying or imposing taxes, fees or other charges.
(7)	Any ordinance providing for any public improvement.
(8)	Any ordinance making any assessment.
(9)	Any ordinance naming, renaming, opening, altering, relocating, accepting, closing or vacating any streets or alleys. 
(10)	Any ordinance relative to position classification, salaries, wages or compensation or bonds of town officers or employees and of members and employees of town boards or commissions. 
(11)	Any ordinance relative to zoning map changes.
(12)	Any ordinance relative to building lines or setback lines.
(13)	Any ordinance annexing territory to the town.
(14)	Any ordinance adopted for purposes which have been consummated.
(15)	Any ordinance which is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	By contract or by town personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been replaced shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions.
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)	Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted in the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
State Law reference- Authority of town to supplement Code, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37.3. 
Sec. 1-12. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)	All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. Portions of this Code repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded from this Code by omission from affected reprinted pages. 
(b)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Town Code of Woodstock, Virginia (or the Town Code), is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)	In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Town Code of Woodstock, Virginia (or the Town Code), is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________, which said section reads as follows:...." The new section shall then be out in full as desired. 
(d)	All provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specifically by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance. 
(Ord. of 1-7-2014(1))
Sec. 1-13. - Code and ordinances effective outside town on property owned or controlled by town. 
    All provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the town now in effect or adopted in the future are hereby extended to all real property belonging to, or under the control of, the town outside the corporate limits of the town, and shall be in full effect therein, insofar as they are applicable. Any words in any such provision indicating that its effect is limited to the corporate limits of the town shall be deemed to mean and include also such outlying real property belonging to, or under the control of, the town, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
(Ord. of 1-7-2014(1))
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Park commission, § 5-36 et seq.; building inspector, § 14-1; electrical inspector, § 14-81 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; law enforcement, ch. 38; chief of police, § 38-51 et seq.; parks and recreation, ch. 50, planning, ch. 54; planning commission, § 54-36 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; taxation, ch. 74; powers and duties of town manager as to traffic and parking, § 78-4 et seq.; utilities, ch. 82; superintendent of public works, § 82-1; taxicab commission, § 86-26; administration and enforcement of zoning chapter, § 90-461 et seq.; board of zoning appeals, § 90-491 et seq.
State Law reference- The Virginia Freedom of Information Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-340 et seq.; counties, cities and towns, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-1 et seq.; government of cities and towns, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-792 et seq.; provisions affecting towns only, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-826 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the town shall begin on July 1 and shall end on the following June 30. 
(Code 1968, § 2-1)
State Law reference- Uniform fiscal year, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-159.8. 
Sec. 2-2. - Procurement. 
    The Virginia Public Procurement Act (Code of Virginia, § 11-35 et seq.) is hereby adopted as if set out at length in this section. 
Secs. 2-3-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Election and term of mayor and councilmembers, council as a continuing body, vacancy in council, § 4a.
State Constitution reference-Procedures of local governing body, art. VII, § 7.
State Law reference- Powers of town vested in governing body, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-7; residence of town officers, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-51; councilmember holding other office, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-800; oaths of councilmembers and mayor, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-829; how council convened, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-832.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-31. - When and where regular meetings held. 
    Regular meetings of the council shall be held in the council chamber on the first Tuesday evening of each month at such hour as the council may designate. 
(Code 1968, § 2-2)
State Law reference- Open or closed meetings, Code of Virginia, §§ 2.1-343, 2.1-344. 
Sec. 2-32. - Special meetings. 
    A special meeting of the council may be called at any time upon the call in writing of the mayor or any three members of the council. The call shall state the purpose for which the special meeting is to be held. No business shall be transacted at a special meeting except the business for which the meeting was called, except by the unanimous consent of all members of the council present. 
(Code 1968, § 2-3)
State Law reference- How council convened, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-832. 
Secs. 2-33-2-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RULES FOR GOVERNMENT OF COUNCIL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Power of council to adopt rules for the regulation of its proceedings, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-826.

Sec. 2-51. - What constitutes a quorum; procedure in absence of quorum. 
    Four members of the council shall constitute a quorum. If a quorum fails to attend within 20 minutes after the time appointed for a regular meeting, the clerk shall enter on the journal the names of those in attendance and the adjournment to the following day for want of a quorum. 
(Code 1968, § 2-5)
Sec. 2-52. - Leaving when member has been marked present at council meeting. 
    After a member of the council shall have been recorded as being present at a meeting of the council, he shall not, without permission of the council, absent himself from the meeting. 
(Code 1968, § 2-6)
Sec. 2-53. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of January 7, 2014(2), repealed § 2-53, which pertained to procedure when member of council desires to speak and derived from Code 1968, § 2. 
Sec. 2-54. - Procedure when nonmember wishes to address council. 
    No person who is not a member of the council shall orally address the council without leave having been first granted by the council on motion of some member thereof. 
(Code 1968, § 2-9)
Sec. 2-55. - Motions when question is under debate; calling the previous question; motion to adjourn. 
    While a question is under debate before the council, no motion shall be entertained except to amend, commit, postpone, for the previous question, to lay on the table, or to adjourn. The previous question shall be called at any time by three members of the council. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and shall be decided without debate. 
(Code 1968, § 2-10)
Sec. 2-56. - Limitation on entertaining private discourse, etc. 
    While the presiding officer of the council is putting any motion or reporting any measure, no person shall entertain private discourse, stand up, or walk across the room. 
(Code 1968, § 2-11)
Sec. 2-57. - Recordation of "ayes" and "nays." 
    At the request of any member present at a council meeting the "ayes" and "nays" on any question shall be recorded. 
(Code 1968, § 2-12)
Sec. 2-58. - Duty of council member to vote. 
    Upon an ordinance or resolution before the council, every member of the council present shall, unless interested or excused by the council, vote "aye" or "nay." 
(Code 1968, § 2-13)
Sec. 2-59. - Procedure for appointments to office. 
    Every appointment to office by the council shall be by viva voce vote, and the votes of a majority of the members present shall be requisite to a choice. 
(Code 1968, § 2-14)
Sec. 2-60. - Suspension of rules. 
    No rule of the council set out in this division shall be suspended without the concurrence of two-thirds of the members present. 
(Code 1968, § 2-15)
Sec. 2-61. - Procedure as to unfinished business. 
    All unfinished business shall be listed and reported to the council at the next regular meeting by the clerk. 
(Code 1968, § 2-16)
Secs. 2-62-2-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMMITTEES 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 2-86. - Special committees; appointment; term. 
    The mayor shall from time to time appoint such special committees as shall be deemed advisable by him or by the council, for such period of time as may be necessary; provided however, that the term of any such committee shall expire at the end of the term of the council during which appointed, if not sooner ended. 
(Code 1968, § 2-20)
Secs. 2-87-2-100. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Standing Committees[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note-

Sec. 2-101. - Appointment; powers and duties. 
    The mayor shall appoint such standing committees as the council, by majority vote, may from time to time direct. Such committees appointed shall have, except as otherwise provided, only advisory powers and duties. 
(Code 1968, § 2-17)
Secs. 2-102-2-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Appointed town officers, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-13; qualification procedures, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-38 et seq.; residence, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-51, 15.1-52; appointments by council, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-794; suspension and removal of officers, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-831; form of general oath of officers, Code of Virginia, § 49-1.

Sec. 2-136. - Devolution of mayor's powers and duties during absence or disability. 
    The powers and duties of the mayor, during the absence or disability of the mayor, shall devolve upon the member of the council elected by the council as vice-mayor. 
(Code 1968, § 2-23)
Charter reference- Election and term of mayor, § 4a. 
Sec. 2-137. - Bond may be required. 
    The council may require any officer or employee of the town, before entering upon his duties, to give bond with surety in an amount approved by the council. 
(Code 1968, § 2-21)
State Law reference- Bonds of officers, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-13. 
Sec. 2-138. - Filling more than one position. 
    Where not otherwise prohibited, the same person may fill two or more of the positions provided in the Charter or this Code and other ordinances of the town. 
(Code 1968, § 2-22)
Secs. 2-139-2-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TOWN MANAGER[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference- Town manager, § 4b.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-166. - Employment; designation. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 15.1-795, and section 4b of the Charter of the town, there shall be employed a general administrative officer of the town government, to be known and designated as the town manager. 
(Code 1968, § 2-24)
Sec. 2-167. - Qualifications; residence requirements. 
    The town manager shall be chosen by the council on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications, and the choice of a person to fill such position shall not be affected by the place of his residence. 
(Code 1968, § 2-25)
Sec. 2-168. - Term; devolution of duties during absence or disability. 
    The town manager shall be appointed for an indefinite period and shall serve at the will of the council. During the absence or disability of the town manager, the council shall designate some properly qualified person to perform the duties of the office. 
(Code 1968, § 2-26)
Sec. 2-169. - Limitations on dealings of council with administrative service and subordinates of town manager. 
    Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the town manager, and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the town manager, either publicly or privately. 
(Code 1968, § 2-27)
Secs. 2-170-2-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POWERS AND DUTIES 

Sec. 2-196. - Responsibility to council for administration of town affairs. 
    The town manager shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of all the affairs of the town coming within his jurisdiction under the Charter, the general law, or the provisions of this Code and other ordinances and the resolutions of the council. 
(Code 1968, § 2-28)
Sec. 2-197. - Supervision over enumerated departments. 
    The departments of the town government over which the town manager shall have general administrative supervision and authority shall be: 
(1)	Finance.
(2)	Planning and community development.
(3)	Police.
(4)	Public works.
(5)	Any other department or special duty which may be assigned to him.
(Code 1968, § 2-29; Ord. of 1-7-2014(2))
Sec. 2-198. - Appointment, suspension, supervision, etc., of employees. 
    The town manager shall appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service, suspend or remove employees of the town, except as otherwise provided and shall direct and supervise their work. His action in all respects shall be subject to review by the council and he shall be accountable to the council only. 
(Code 1968, § 2-30)
Sec. 2-199. - Preparation and submission of budget. 
    The town manager shall, in cooperation with the finance committee of the council, which acts under section 2-104, prepare the budget annually and submit it to the council, together with a message describing the important features and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
(Code 1968, § 2-31)
State Law reference- Budgets, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-159.8 et seq. 
Sec. 2-200. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of January 7, 2014(2), repealed § 2-200 entitled "Annual financial report" which derived from Code 1968, § 2-32. 
Sec. 2-201. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of January 7, 2014(2), repealed § 2-201 entitled "Financial advice; recommendations generally" which derived from Code 1968, § 2-33. 
Sec. 2-202. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of January 7, 2014(2), repealed § 2-202 entitled "Recommendation as to pay schedule" which derived from Code 1968, § 2-34. 
Sec. 2-203. - Recommendations as to adoption of policies. 
    The town manager shall recommend to the council, from time to time, adoption of such policies as he may deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety or welfare of the community or for the improvement of administrative services. 
(Code 1968, § 2-35)
Sec. 2-204. - Consolidation of offices; position as department head. 
    The town manager may consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under his jurisdiction, with the approval of the council. The town manager may be the head of one or more departments. 
(Code 1968, § 2-36)
Sec. 2-205. - Attendance at council and planning commission meetings. 
    The town manager shall attend all meetings of the council and the planning commission unless excused therefrom and take part in the discussion of all matters coming before either body, but having no vote. 
(Code 1968, § 2-37)
Cross reference- Planning commission, § 54-36 et seq. 
Sec. 2-206. - Purchase of materials, etc. 
    The town manager shall supervise the purchase of all materials, supplies, and equipment for which funds are provided in the budget. 
(Code 1968, § 2-38)
Sec. 2-207. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of January 7, 2014(2), repealed § 2-207 entitled "Enforcement of laws" which derived from Code 1968, § 2-39. 
Sec. 2-208. - Investigations; observance of franchises. 
    The town manager shall investigate the affairs of the town or of any department or division and investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the town and in regard to service maintained by the public utilities in the town, and see that all franchises, permits, and privileges granted by the town are faithfully observed. 
(Code 1968, § 2-40)
Sec. 2-209. - Full-time position. 
    The town manager shall devote his entire time to the discharge of his official duties. 
(Code 1968, § 2-41)
Sec. 2-210. - Additional duties. 
    The town manager shall perform such duties in addition to those provided in this article as may be required by the council, not inconsistent with the Charter, state law or with this Code and other ordinances of the town. 
(Code 1968, § 2-42)
Secs. 2-211-2-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TOWN ATTORNEY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Town attorney holding other office, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-50(A)(1).

Sec. 2-241. - Appointment; term; compensation. 
    On July 1, following each regular quadrennial municipal election, or as soon thereafter as the council may be convened, the council shall appoint a town attorney who shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The compensation of such officer shall be as fixed by the council, unless otherwise provided by state law. 
(Code 1968, § 2-43)
Sec. 2-242. - Duties; additional legal assistance. 
    It shall be the duty of the town attorney to attend to and perform all legal services pertaining to the affairs of the town. The council may, if deemed advisable, employ an additional legal assistant. 
(Code 1968, § 2-44)
Secs. 2-243-2-275. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CLERK 

Sec. 2-276. - Appointment; term; compensation. 
    On July 1, following each regular quadrennial municipal election, or as soon thereafter as the council may be convened, the council shall appoint a clerk who shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The compensation of such officer shall be as fixed by the council, unless otherwise provided by state law. 
(Code 1968, § 2-45)
Sec. 2-277. - Duties generally. 
    It shall be the duty of the clerk to attend all meetings of the council and keep a full and correct account of its proceedings and record the same promptly in permanent book form. In addition, he shall keep an ordinance book, which shall be properly indexed. He shall be custodian of all the papers, documents and books of the council and shall perform such other duties as may be required under the laws of the state or under the Charter and ordinances of the town. 
(Code 1968, § 2-46)
Secs. 2-278-2-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TREASURER[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Enforcement of chapter on businesses by town treasurer, § 18-3; taxation, ch. 74.

Sec. 2-301. - Appointment; term; compensation. 
    On July 1, following each regular quadrennial municipal election, or as soon thereafter as the council may be convened, the council shall appoint a treasurer who shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The compensation of such officer shall be as fixed by the council, unless otherwise provided by state law. 
(Code 1968, § 2-47)
Sec. 2-302. - Powers and duties. 
    The treasurer shall receive all taxes, fines, licenses and all other revenues of the town and shall make such disbursements as may be ordered by the council. He shall keep suitable books in which shall be entered regularly all receipts and disbursements, so that the financial condition of the town may at any time be ascertained, and publish after July 1 of each year a full statement of the financial condition of the town. The treasurer shall perform such other duties as may be required under the laws of the state or under the Charter and this Code and other ordinances of the town. The treasurer shall have the authority, with the advice and consent of the council, to appoint deputies to aid him in the discharge of his duties. 
(Code 1968, § 2-48)
Cross reference- Penalty for violation of ordinances, § 1-7; businesses, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Collection of local taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3910 et seq. 
Secs. 2-303-2-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - POLLING PLACES 

Sec. 2-311. - Location. 
    The polling place for the town shall be Central High School, 1147 Susan Avenue, Woodstock, Virginia 22664. 
(Ord. of 4-6-93; Ord. of 8-4-2009)
Secs. 2-312-2-319. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - APPLICANTS AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 2-320. - Criminal history and other background checks of applicants, employees, and volunteers. 
    Pursuant to Sections 15.2-1503.1, 15.2-1505.1, and 19.2-389 of the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended, the town manager, or his or her agent, in the interest of public welfare and safety, is enabled to require fingerprinting and access to information generated from the state and national criminal history record regarding applicants for certain employment or volunteer positions. The town manager shall determine the type and scope of the criminal history record checks and any other background checks to be required and performed for the affected positions. The town manager may require periodic criminal history record information and other background checks for current employees or volunteers. 
    Any applicant, employee, or volunteer shall, if required, submit to fingerprinting and provide personal descriptive information and any other necessary paperwork to be forwarded along with the fingerprints through the Virginia State Police Central Criminal Records Exchange to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the purpose of obtaining state and national criminal history record information regarding such applicant, employee, or volunteer. 
(Ord. of 10-2-2012(2))
Secs. 2-321-2-328. - Reserved. 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Adoption of Code of Virginia, § 15.1-870, pertaining to municipal regulation of animals and fowl, § 4.
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18; licensing of slaughterhouses, § 18-169; health and sanitation, ch. 34; offensive hog pens, chicken houses, etc., § 34-29; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; parks and recreation, ch. 50; protection of refuse containers from animals, § 62-5; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78; waste disposal, § 82-106; definitions relating to zoning, § 90-1.
State Law reference- Livestock and poultry, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-723 et seq.; comprehensive animal laws, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.66 et seq.; cruelty to animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.122 et seq.; dogs deemed personal property, rights relating thereto, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.127; penalties for offenses involving animals, Code of Virginia, §§ 3.1-796.128, 18.2-403.1 et seq.; ordinances prohibiting cruelty to animals, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-29.1:1; offenses relating to disabled or dead animals, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-323; game, inland fisheries and boating, Code of Virginia, title 29.1; estrays, Code of Virginia, § 55-202 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Certain livestock at large or herding in streets, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to allow cattle, sheep, hogs or horses to run at large in the town or to herd in the streets, alleys, parks or any inhabited part of the town. 
(Code 1968, § 3-1)
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, ch. 50. 
Sec. 10-2. - Permitting fowl to go at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any fowl belonging to him to go at large. 
(Code 1968, § 3-2)
Sec. 10-3. - Raising or keeping pigs or hogs prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to raise or keep any pig or hog within the town. 
(Code 1968, § 3-3)
Sec. 10-4. - Cruelty to animals; penalty. 
(a)	Any person who:
(1)	Overrides, overdrives, overloads, tortures, ill-treats, abandons, willfully inflicts inhumane injury or pain not connected with bona fide scientific or medical experimentation, or cruelly or unnecessarily beats, maims, mutilates, or kills any animal, whether belonging to himself or another; 
(2)	Deprives any animal of necessary sustenance, food, drink or shelter;
(3)	Willfully sets on foot, instigates, engages in, or in any way furthers any act of cruelty to any animal; 
(4)	Carries or causes to be carried in or upon any vehicle, vessel or otherwise any animal in a cruel, brutal, or inhumane manner, so as to produce torture or unnecessary suffering; or 
(5)	Causes any of the above things, or being the owner of such animal permits such acts to be done by another; 
shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)	Any person who abandons any dog, cat or other domesticated animal in any public place including the right-of-way of any public highway, road or street or on the property of another shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(c)	Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the dehorning of cattle.
(d)	For the purposes of this section the word "animal" shall be construed to include birds and fowl. 
(Code 1968, § 3-4)
Charter reference- Adoption of Code of Virginia, § 15.1-870, pertaining to prevention of cruelty to animals, § 4. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.122. 
Sec. 10-5. - Disposition of dead animals and fowl. 
    When any animal or fowl shall die in the town, the owner thereof shall cause the carcass to be disposed of in accordance with the directions of the health officer. Every day such carcass shall be allowed to remain in the town shall be deemed a separate offense. If the town authorities shall have to remove such carcass, such removal shall be done at the cost of the owner, in addition to any fine or imprisonment that may be imposed upon the owner for his failure, neglect or refusal to dispose of the carcass in accordance with the directions of the health officer. 
(Code 1968, § 3-5)
State Law reference- Disposal of dead dogs, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.121; burial or cremation of animals or fowl which have died, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-510. 
Sec. 10-6. - Maintenance of premises where animals kept. 
    Any enclosure, stable or paddock in which any animal is kept or maintained shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, so as not to create or cause a nuisance. 
(Code 1968, § 3-5.1)
Sec. 10-7. - Noisy animals and fowl. 
    No person shall have or keep any animal or fowl which, by making or causing frequent or long continued and unreasonable noise, shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity or in any way create or cause a nuisance. Upon complaint being made to the chief of police that the provisions of this section are being violated, such officer may, after investigation, give notice of such complaint to the owner or person in charge of such animal or fowl and order the discontinuance of the disturbance. 
(Code 1968, § 3-5.2)
Cross reference- Nuisances, § 26-86 et seq. 
Secs. 10-8-10-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-36. - Dogs running at large prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to allow such dog to go upon the private property of any person or to run at large in the town or to be upon any street or sidewalk or 
alley of the town, unless accompanied by the owner, some member of the owner's family or an employee of the owner. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1968, § 3-6)
State Law reference- Town may prohibit dogs from running at large, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.93. 
Sec. 10-37. - Dogs barking, howling, etc., dogs. 
(a)	No person shall keep within the town a dog which by barking, howling or other like conduct, disturbs the quiet of any person. Upon complaint being made to the chief of police that this section is being violated, the chief of police shall give or cause to be given to such offender notice of such complaint and shall further order such disturbance to cease. 
(b)	If the owner of the dog in question shall fail after the expiration of 24 hours from the receipt of such notice to cause the discontinuance of such disturbance, he shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1968, § 3-7; Ord. of 1-6-98(1))
Sec. 10-38. - Confinement of vicious or destructive dogs. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in possession of a dog known to him to be vicious or destructive to fail, neglect or refuse to keep such dog, so known to him to be vicious or destructive, confined to the premises owned or occupied by such owner or person in possession. 
(Code 1968, § 3-8)
State Law reference- Regulation of the running at large of vicious or destructive dogs, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.100. 
Sec. 10-39. - Enforcement by Shenandoah County Animal Control Officers. 
    Shenandoah County Animal Control Officers are authorized to enforce the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2000)
Sec. 10-40. - Allowing dogs to defecate. 
(a)	Public property. It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog to allow his dog to defecate on any public street, roadway, curb, public parking lot, or sidewalk. 
(b)	Private property. It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog to allow his dog to defecate on property of another over the objection of the owner to the property, his agent, or a person having control of such property. 
(c)	Exceptions. It shall not be unlawful to allow defecation by such animal within the described public or private property if the owner of the animal removes the animal's excrement immediately and disposes of it in a public trash receptacle or in a public sanitary sewer, or on the owner's own property in a lawful manner. 
(d)	Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(1)	Owner shall be construed to mean:
a.	Any person having a property interest in a dog or other animal; or
b.	Any person who keeps such dog or other animal or has it in his care, or who acts as its custodian. 
(2)	Objection of the property owner shall be construed to mean:
a.	Any verbal or written communication objecting to the defecation of the dog on any specific parcel of property from any source; or 
b.	Notice mailed to the owner of the dog at his last known address of the objection to the defecation of the dog on the parcel of property. 
(e)	Violation. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of $15.00. Each violation and each day's continuation thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)	Enforcement. The town police department shall enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. of 9-1-2009)
Secs. 10-41-10-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RABIES CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, ch. 34.
State Law reference- Regulations to prevent spread of rabies, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.100; control of rabies, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-48.1 et seq.

Sec. 10-61. - Proclamation during prevalence, etc., of rabies in town or county. 
    During the prevalence or suspected prevalence of rabies among dogs in the town or county, the town manager may require by proclamation duly published that the owners or custodians of the dogs within the town shall keep the same upon their own premises for 30 days, unless the dog in question is muzzled and on a leash. The council may extend the duration of such requirement. Every such owner or custodian failing to comply with such proclamation shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor for each offense, and any dog found running at large in violation of the provisions of any such proclamation may be destroyed on order of the court having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1968, § 3-9)
State Law reference- Rabid animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.98. 
Sec. 10-62. - Inoculation or vaccination of dogs, cats. 
    The owner or custodian of any dog or cat which is four months old or over within the town shall cause such dog or cat to be inoculated or vaccinated by a currently licensed veterinarian against rabies as frequently as necessary to maintain immunity. 
(Code 1968, § 3-10)
State Law reference- Certificate of vaccination required to obtain dog license, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.86; rabies inoculation of dogs and domesticated cats, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.97:1. 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Adoption of Code of Virginia, § 15.1-869, pertaining to regulation of light, ventilation, sanitation and use and occupancy of buildings, § 4.
Cross reference- Amusements and entertainments, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 18; licensing of builders and developers, § 18-157; licensing of contracting occupations, etc., § 18-159; environment, ch. 26; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; blasting permit, § 30-28; health and sanitation, ch. 34; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; trailers and trailer camps outside of town, § 42-3; effect of removal of wheels from trailer, § 42-4; planning, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks, and other public places, ch. 66; porches, cellar doors, etc., on sidewalks, § 66-4; subdivisions, ch. 70; taxation, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 82; building sewers and connections, § 82-116 et seq.; zoning, ch. 90.
State Law reference- Authority of town to require removal, repair, etc., of buildings and other structures, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-11.2; local certification to do building-related work, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-11.4, 36-99.1; power of town to regulate the building of houses, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-15(1); construction, maintenance, etc., of municipal buildings, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-846; repair or other abatement of dangerous buildings, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.1-867; limitation of prosecutions of building code violations, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-8; Virginia Industrialized Building Safety Law, Code of Virginia, § 36-70 et seq.; Uniform Statewide Building Code, Code of Virginia, § 36-97 et seq.; effect of building code on other building regulations, Code of Virginia, § 36-98; enforcement of building code, appeals from decisions of local building department, inspection of buildings, Code of Virginia, § 36-105; voluntary apprenticeship, Code of Virginia, § 40.1-117 et seq.; contractors, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-1100 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Building inspector. 
    The building inspector for the town shall be the county department of building inspections. 
(Code 1968, § 4-1)
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 14-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of January 7, 2014(4), repealed § 14-2 entitled "Fire limits" which derived from Code 1968, § 4-2. 
Sec. 14-3. - Erecting or constructing building or structure over water or sewer main or utility easement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or construct a building or structure over any water or sewer main or utility easement. 
(Code 1968, § 4-3)
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 82. 
Secs. 14-4-14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Floodplain regulations in subdivisions, § 70-122; existing structures in floodplain districts, § 90-302; F-C floodplain conservation district provisions, § 90-336 et seq.

Sec. 14-31. - Adoption. 
    There is hereby adopted, except so far as in conflict with the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the town, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and structures, including permits and penalties, that certain building code known as the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, as described in Code of Virginia, § 36-97 et seq. Such building code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this section. The provisions of such building code shall be controlling in the construction of all buildings and other structures contained within the corporate limits of the town; provided: 
(1)	Wherever in the building code herein adopted the word "municipality" is used, it shall mean the Town of Woodstock. 
(2)	Wherever in the building code herein adopted the term "corporation counsel" is used, it shall mean the town attorney for the Town of Woodstock. 
(Code 1968, § 4-4)
Cross reference- Home occupations, § 90-377. 
Sec. 14-32. - When and where copies may be obtained. 
    Copies of the building code, adopted by section 14-31, may be obtained at the office of the town manager during regular business hours. 
(Code 1968, § 4-5)
Sec. 14-33. - Enforcement. 
    The building inspector shall be charged with the responsibility of enforcing the building code adopted by section 14-31. 
(Code 1968, § 4-7)
Secs. 14-34-14-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note-

Secs. 14-56-14-90. - Reserved. 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note-An ordinance adopted Dec. 3, 1996, superseded ch. 18 of the Code in its entirety, and enacted a new ch. 18 to read as herein set out. Former ch. 18 pertained to similar subject matter. For a detailed history of the provisions of former ch. 18, see the Code Comparative Table.
Cross reference- Powers and duties of town treasurer, § 2-302; animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; health and sanitation, ch. 34; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; yard sales, § 46-28; secondhand goods, ch. 58; placing goods, merchandise, etc., on street or sidewalk, § 66-36 et seq.; subdivisions, ch. 70; taxation, ch. 74; vehicles for hire, ch. 86; zoning, ch. 90.
State Law reference- Professions and occupations, Code of Virginia, title 54.1; local license taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700 et seq.; enforcement, collection, refunds, remedies and review of local taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3900 et seq.

Sec. 18-1. - Overriding conflicting ordinances. 
    Except as may be otherwise provided by the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia, and notwithstanding any other current ordinances or resolutions enacted by this governing body, whether or not compiled in the Code of this jurisdiction, to the extent of any conflict, the following provisions shall be applicable to the levy, assessment, and collection of licenses required and taxes imposed on businesses, trades, professions and callings and upon the persons, firms and corporations engaged therein within this locality. 
(Ord. of 12-3-96, § A)
Sec. 18-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise required by the context: 
    Affiliated group means: 
(1)	One or more chains of includable corporations connected through stock ownership with a common parent corporation which is an includable corporation if: 
a.	Stock possessing at least 80 percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least 80 percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of each of the includable corporations, except the common parent corporation, is owned directly by one or more of the other includable corporations; and 
b.	The common parent corporation directly owns stock possessing at least 80 percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least 80 percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of at least one of the other includable corporations. As used in this subdivision, the term "stock" does not include nonvoting stock which is limited and preferred as to dividends. The term "includable corporation" means any corporation within the affiliated group irrespective of the state or country of its incorporation; and the term "receipts" includes gross receipts and gross income. 
(2)	Two or more corporations if five or fewer persons who are individuals, estates or trusts own stock possessing: 
a.	At least 80 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or at least 80 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of the stock of each corporation, and 
b.	More than 50 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or more than 50 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of each corporation, taking into account the stock ownership of each such person only to the extent such stock ownership is identical with respect to each such corporation. 
When one or more of the includable corporations, including the common parent corporation is a nonstock corporation, the term "stock" as used in this subdivision shall refer to the nonstock corporation membership or membership voting rights, as is appropriate to the context. 
    Assessment means a determination as to the proper rate of tax, the measure to which the tax rate is applied, and ultimately the amount of tax, including additional or omitted tax, that is due. An assessment shall include a written assessment made pursuant to notice by the assessing official or a self-assessment made by a taxpayer upon the filing of a return or otherwise not pursuant to notice. Assessments shall be deemed made by an assessing official when a written notice of assessment is delivered to the taxpayer by the assessing official or an employee of the assessing official, or mailed to the taxpayer at his last known address. Self-assessments shall be deemed made when a return is filed, or if no return is required, when the tax is paid. A return filed or tax paid before the last day prescribed by ordinance for the filing or payment thereof shall be deemed to be filed or paid on the last day specified for the filing of a return or the payment of tax, as the case may be. 
    Assessor means the treasurer of this jurisdiction. 
    Base year means the calendar year preceding the license year, except for contractors subject to the provisions of the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715. 
    Business means a course of dealing which requires the time, attention and labor of the person so engaged for the purpose of earning a livelihood or profit. It implies a continuous and regular course of dealing, rather than an irregular or isolated transaction. A person may be engaged in more than one business. The following acts shall create a rebuttable presumption that a person is engaged in a business: (i) advertising or otherwise holding oneself out to the public as being engaged in a particular business; or (ii) filing tax returns, schedules and documents that are required only of persons engaged in a trade or business. 
    Contractor shall have the meaning prescribed in the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3714.B, as amended, whether such work is done or offered to be done by day labor, general contract or subcontract. 
    Definite place of business means an office or a location at which occurs a regular and continuous course of dealing for 30 consecutive days or more. A definite place of business for a person engaged in business may include a location leased or otherwise obtained from another person on a temporary or seasonal basis; and real property leased to another. A person's residence shall be deemed to be a definite place of business if there is no definite place of business maintained elsewhere and the person is not licensable as a peddler or itinerant merchant. 
    Financial services means the buying, selling, handling, managing, investing, and providing of advice regarding money, credit, securities and other investments and shall include the service for compensation by a credit agency, an investment company, a broker or dealer in securities and commodities or a security or commodity exchange, unless such service is otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
    Broker shall mean an agent of a buyer or a seller who buys or sells stocks, bonds, commodities, or services, usually on a commission basis. 
    Commodity shall mean staples such as wool, cotton, etc. which are traded on a commodity exchange and on which there is trading in futures. 
    Dealer for purposes of this chapter shall mean any person engaged in the business of buying and selling securities for his own account, but does not include a bank, or any person insofar as he buys or sells securities for his own account, either individually or in some fiduciary capacity, but not as part of a regular business. 
    Security for purposes of this chapter shall have the same meaning as in the Securities Act (Code of Virginia, § 13.1-501 et seq.), or in similar laws of the United States regulating the sale of securities. 
    Those engaged in rendering financial services include, but without limitation, the following: 
Buying installment receivables
Chattel mortgage financing
Consumer financing
Credit card services
Credit unions
Factors
Financing accounts receivable
Industrial loan companies
Installment financing
Inventory financing
Loan or mortgage brokers
Loan or mortgage companies
Safety deposit box companies
Security and commodity brokers and services
Stockbroker
Working capital financing 
    Gross receipts means the whole, entire, total receipts attributable to the licensed privilege, without deduction, except as may be limited by the provisions of the Code of Virginia, Chapter 37 of Title 58.1. 
    License year means the calendar year for which a license is issued for the privilege of engaging in business. 
    Personal services shall mean rendering for compensation any repair, personal, business or other services not specifically classified as "financial, real estate or professional service" under this chapter, or rendered in any other business or occupation not specifically classified in this chapter unless exempted from local license tax by the Code of Virginia, Title 58.1. 
    Professional services means services performed by architects, attorneys-at-law, certified public accountants, dentists, engineers, land surveyors, surgeons, veterinarians, and practitioners of the healing arts (the arts and sciences dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, treatment and cure or alleviation of human physical or mental ailments, conditions, diseases, pain or infirmities) and such occupations, and no others, as the Virginia Department of Taxation may list in the BPOL guidelines promulgated pursuant to the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3701. The department shall identify and list each occupation or vocation in which a professed knowledge of some department of science or learning, gained by a prolonged course of specialized instruction and study is used by its practical application to the affairs of others, either advising, guiding, or teaching them, and in serving their interests or welfare in the practice of an art or science founded on it. The word "profession" implies attainments in professional knowledge as distinguished from mere skill, and the application of knowledge to uses for others rather than for personal profit. 
    Purchases shall mean all goods, wares and merchandise received for sale at each definite place of business of a wholesale merchant. The term shall also include the cost of manufacture of all goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by any wholesaler or wholesale merchant and sold or offered for sale. Such merchant may elect to report the gross receipts from the sale of manufactured goods, wares and merchandise if it cannot determine or chooses not to disclose the cost of manufacture. 
    Real estate services shall mean rendering a service for compensation as lessor, buyer, seller, agent or broker and providing a real estate service, unless the service is otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, and such services include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Appraisers of real estate
Escrow agents, real estate
Fiduciaries, real estate
Lessors of real property
Real estate agents, brokers and managers
Real estate selling agents
Rental agents for real estate 
    Retailer or retail merchant shall mean any person or merchant who sells goods, wares and merchandise for use or consumption by the purchaser or for any purpose other than resale by the purchaser, but does not include sales at wholesale to institutional, commercial and industrial users. 
    Services shall mean things purchased by a customer which do not have physical characteristics, or which are not goods, wares, or merchandise. 
    Wholesaler or wholesale merchant shall mean any person or merchant who sells wares and merchandise for resale by the purchaser, including sales when the goods, wares and merchandise will be incorporated into goods and services for sale, and also includes sales to institutional, commercial, government and industrial users which because of the quantity, price, or other terms indicate that they are consistent with sales at wholesale. 
(Ord. of 12-3-96, § B)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2; amusements and entertainments, ch. 6; cemeteries, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66. 
State Law reference- Definitions relating to taxation, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1; "contractor" defined, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3714(B); limitation on gross receipts, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3732. 
Sec. 18-3. - License requirement. 
(a)	Every person engaging in this jurisdiction in any business, trade, profession, occupation or calling (collectively hereinafter "a business") as defined in this chapter, unless otherwise exempted by law, shall apply for a license for each such business if (i) such person maintains a definite place of business in this jurisdiction, (ii) such person does not maintain a definite office anywhere but does maintain an abode in this jurisdiction, which abode for the purposes of this chapter shall be deemed a definite place of business, or (iii) there is no definite place of business but such person operates amusement machines, is engaged as a peddler or itinerant merchant, carnival or circus as specified in the Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3717, 58.1-3718, or 58.1-3728, respectively, or is a contractor subject to the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715, or is a public service corporation subject to the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3731. A separate license shall be required for each definite place of business. A person engaged in two or more businesses or professions carried on at the same place of business may elect to obtain one license for all such businesses and professions if all of the following criteria are satisfied: (i) each business or profession is licensable at the location and has satisfied any requirements imposed by state law or other provisions of the ordinances of this jurisdiction; (ii) all of the businesses or professions are subject to the same tax rate, or, if subject to different tax rates, the licensee agrees to be taxed on all businesses and professions at the highest rate; and (iii) the taxpayer agrees to supply such information as the assessor may require concerning the nature of the several businesses and their gross receipts. 
(b)	Each person subject to a license tax shall apply for a license prior to beginning business, if he was not subject to licensing in this jurisdiction on or before January 1 of the license year, or no later than March 1 of the current license year if he had been issued a license for the preceding license year. The application shall be on forms prescribed by the assessing official. 
(c)	The tax shall be paid with the application in the case of any license not based on gross receipts. If, the tax is measured by the gross receipts of the business, the tax shall be paid on or before March 1. 
(d)	The assessing official may grant an extension of time, not to exceed 90 days, in which to file an application for a license, for reasonable cause. The extension shall be conditioned upon the timely payment of a reasonable estimate of the appropriate tax, subject to adjustment to the correct tax at the end of the extension together with interest from the due date until the date paid and, if the estimate submitted with the extension is found to be unreasonable under the circumstances, a penalty of ten percent of the portion paid after the due date. 
(e)	A penalty of ten percent of the tax may be imposed upon the failure to file an application or the failure to pay the tax by the appropriate due date. Only the late filing penalty shall be imposed by the assessing official if both the application and payment are late; however, both penalties may be assessed if the assessing official determines that the taxpayer has a history of noncompliance. In the case of an assessment of additional tax made by the assessing official, if the application and, if applicable, the return were made in good faith and the understatement of the tax was not due to any fraud, reckless or intentional disregard of the law by the taxpayer, there shall be no late payment penalty assessed with the additional tax. If any assessment of tax by the assessing official is not paid within 30 days the treasurer may impose a ten percent late payment penalty. The penalties shall not be imposed, or if imposed, shall be abated by the official who assessed them, if the failure to file or pay was not the fault of the taxpayer. In order to demonstrate lack of fault, the taxpayer must show that he acted responsibly and that the failure was due to events beyond his control. 
    "Acted responsibly" means that: (i) the taxpayer exercised the level of reasonable care that a prudent person would exercise under the circumstances in determining the filing obligations for the business and (ii) the taxpayer undertook significant steps to avoid or mitigate the failure, such as requesting appropriate extensions (where applicable), attempting to prevent a foreseeable impediment, acting to remove an impediment once it occurred, and promptly rectifying a failure once the impediment was removed or the failure discovered. 
    "Events beyond the taxpayer's control" include, but are not limited to, the unavailability of records due to fire or other casualty; the unavoidable absence (e.g., due to death or serious illness) of the person with the sole responsibility for tax compliance; or the taxpayer's reasonable reliance in good faith upon erroneous written information from the assessing official, who was aware of the relevant facts relating to the taxpayer's business when he provided the erroneous information. 
(f)	Interest shall be charged on the late payment of the tax from the due date until the date paid without regard to fault or other reason for the late payment. Whenever an assessment of additional or omitted tax by the assessing official is found to be erroneous, all interest and penalty charged and collected on the amount of the assessment found to be erroneous shall be refunded together with interest on the refund from the date of payment or the due date, whichever is later. Interest shall be paid on the refund of any tax paid under this chapter from the date of payment or due date, whichever is later, whether attributable to an amended return or other reason. Interest on any refund shall be paid at the same rate charged under the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. No interest shall accrue on an adjustment of estimated tax liability to actual liability at the conclusion of a base year. No interest shall be paid on a refund or charged on a late payment, in event of such adjustment, provided the refund or the late payment is made not more than 30 days from (i) the date of the payment that created the refund, or (ii) the due date of the tax, whichever is later. 
(Ord. of 12-3-96, § C)
Sec. 18-4. - Situs of gross receipts. 
(a)	General rule. Whenever the tax imposed by this chapter is measured by gross receipts, the gross receipts included in the taxable measure shall be only those gross receipts attributed to the exercise of a licensable privilege at a definite place of business within this jurisdiction. In the case of activities conducted outside of a definite place of business, such as during a visit to a customer location, the gross receipts shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which such activities are initiated, directed, or controlled. The situs of gross receipts for different classifications of business shall be attributed to one or more definite places of business or offices as follows: 
(1)	The gross receipts of a contractor shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which his services are performed, or if his services are not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which his services are directed or controlled, unless the contractor is subject to the provisions of the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715. 
(2)	The gross receipts of a retailer or wholesaler shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which sales solicitation activities occur, or if sales solicitation activities do not occur at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which sales solicitation activities are directed or controlled; however, a wholesaler or distribution house subject to a license tax measured by purchases shall determine the situs of its purchases by the definite place of business at which or from which deliveries of the purchased goods, wares and merchandise are made to customers. Any wholesaler who is subject to license tax in two or more localities and who is subject to multiple taxation because the localities use different measures, may apply to the department of taxation for a determination as to the proper measure of purchases and gross receipts subject to license tax in each locality. 
(3)	The gross receipts of a business renting tangible personal property shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which the tangible personal property is rented or, if the property is not rented from any definite place of business, then the definite place of business at which the rental of such property is managed. 
(4)	The gross receipts from the performance of services shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which the services are performed or, if not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which the services are directed or controlled. 
(b)	Apportionment. If the licensee has more than one definite place of business and it is impractical or impossible to determine to which definite place of business gross receipts should be attributed under the general rule [and the affected jurisdictions are unable to reach an apportionment agreement], except as to circumstances set forth in the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3709, the gross receipts of the business shall be apportioned between the definite places of businesses on the basis of payroll. Gross receipts shall not be apportioned to a definite place of business unless some activities under the applicable general rule occurred at, or were controlled from, such definite place of business. Gross receipts attributable to a definite place of business in another jurisdiction shall not be attributed to this jurisdiction solely because the other jurisdiction does not impose a tax on the gross receipts attributable to the definite place of business in such other jurisdiction. 
(c)	Agreements. The assessor may enter into agreements with any other political subdivision of Virginia concerning the manner in which gross receipts shall be apportioned among definite places of business. However, the sum of the gross receipts apportioned by the agreement shall not exceed the total gross receipts attributable to all of the definite places of business affected by the agreement. Upon being notified by a taxpayer that its method of attributing gross receipts is fundamentally inconsistent with the method of one or more political subdivisions in which the taxpayer is licensed to engage in business and that the difference has, or is likely to, result in taxes on more than 100 percent of its gross receipts from all locations in the affected jurisdictions, the assessor shall make a good faith effort to reach an apportionment agreement with the other political subdivisions involved. 
(Ord. of 12-3-96, § D)
Sec. 18-5. - Limitations and extensions. 
(a)	Where, before the expiration of the time prescribed for the assessment of any license tax imposed pursuant to this chapter, both the assessing official and the taxpayer have consented in writing to its assessment after such time, the tax may be assessed at any time prior to the expiration of the period agreed upon. The period so agreed upon may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing made before the expiration of the period previously agreed upon. 
(b)	Notwithstanding of the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3903, the assessing official shall assess the local license tax omitted because of fraud or failure to apply for a license for the current license year and the six preceding years. 
(c)	The period for collecting any local license tax shall not expire prior to the period specified in the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3940, two years after the date of assessment if the period for assessment has been extended pursuant to this subdivision, two years after the final determination of an appeal for which collection has been stayed pursuant to the following section 18-6(b) or 18-6(d) of this chapter, or two years after the final decision in a court application pursuant to the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3984 or similar law for which collection has been stayed, whichever is later. 
(Ord. of 12-3-96, § E)
Sec. 18-6. - Appeals and rulings. 
(a)	Any person assessed with a licensing tax under this chapter as the result of an audit may apply within 90 days from the date of the assessment to the assessing official for a correction of the assessment. The application must be filed in good faith and sufficiently identify the taxpayer, audit period, remedy sought, each alleged error in the assessment, the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies, and any other facts relevant to the taxpayer's contention. The assessor may hold a conference with the taxpayer if requested by the taxpayer, or require submission of additional information and documents, further audit, or other evidence deemed necessary for a proper and equitable determination of the applications. The assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct. The assessor shall undertake a full review of the taxpayer's claims and issue a determination to the taxpayer setting forth its position. Every assessment pursuant to an audit shall be accompanied by a written explanation of the taxpayer's right to seek correction and the specific procedure to be followed in the jurisdiction (e.g., the name and address to which an application should be directed). 
(b)	Provided an application is made within 90 days of an assessment, collection activity shall be suspended until a final determination is issued by the assessor, unless the assessor determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of section 18-3(f) of this chapter, but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The term "jeopardized by delay" includes a finding that the application is frivolous, or that a taxpayer desires (i) to depart quickly from the locality, (ii) to remove his property therefrom, (iii) to conceal himself or his property therein, or (iv) to do any other act tending to prejudice, or to render wholly or partially ineffectual, proceedings to collect the tax for the period in question. 
(c)	Any person assessed with a license tax under this chapter as a result of an audit may apply within 90 days of the determination by the assessing official on an application pursuant to section 18-6(a) above to the tax commissioner for a correction of such assessment. The tax commissioner shall issue a determination to the taxpayer within 90 days of receipt of the taxpayer's application, unless the taxpayer and the assessing official are notified that a longer period will be required. The application shall be treated as an application pursuant to the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1821, and the tax commissioner may issue an order correcting such assessment pursuant to the Code of Virginia § 58.1-1822. Following such an order, either the taxpayer or the assessing official may apply to the appropriate circuit court pursuant to the Code of Virginia § 58.1-3984. However, the burden shall be on the party making the application to show that the ruling of the tax commissioner is erroneous. Neither the tax commissioner nor the department of taxation shall be made a party to an application to correct an assessment merely because the tax commissioner has ruled on it. 
(d)	On receipt of a notice of intent to file an appeal to the tax commissioner under section 18-6(c) above, the assessing official shall further suspend collection activity until a final determination is issued by the tax commissioner, unless the assessor determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of section 18-3(f), but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The term "jeopardized by delay" shall have the same meaning as set forth in section 18-6(b) above. 
(e)	Any taxpayer may request a written ruling regarding the application of the tax to a specific situation from the assessor. Any person requesting such a ruling must provide all the relevant facts for the situation and may present a rationale for the basis of an interpretation of the law most favorable to the taxpayer. Any misrepresentation or change in the applicable law or the factual situation as presented in the ruling request shall invalidate any such ruling issued. A written ruling may be revoked or amended prospectively if (i) there is a change in the law, a court decision, or (ii) the assessor notifies the taxpayer of a change in the policy or interpretation upon which the ruling was based. However, any person who acts on a written ruling which later becomes invalid shall be deemed to have acted in good faith during the period in which such ruling was in effect. 
(Ord. of 12-3-96, § F)
Sec. 18-7. - Recordkeeping and audits. 
    Every person who is assessable with a license tax shall keep sufficient records to enable the assessor to verify the correctness of the tax paid for the license years assessable and to enable the assessor to ascertain what is the correct amount of tax that was assessable for each of those years. All such records, books of accounts and other information shall be open to inspection and examination by the assessor in order to allow the assessor to establish whether a particular receipt is directly attributable to the taxable privilege exercised within this jurisdiction. The assessor shall provide the taxpayer with the option to conduct the audit in the taxpayer's local business office, if the records are maintained there. In the event the records are maintained outside this jurisdiction, copies of the appropriate books and records shall be sent to the assessor's office upon demand. 
(Ord. of 12-3-96, § G)
Sec. 18-8. - Exclusions and deductions from "gross receipts." 
(a)	General rule. Gross receipts for license tax purposes shall not include any amount not derived from the exercise of the licensed privilege to engage in a business or profession in the ordinary course of business or profession. 
(b)	The following items shall be excluded from gross receipts:
(1)	Amounts received and paid to the United States, the commonwealth or any county, city or town for the Virginia retail sales or use tax, or for any local sales tax or any local excise tax on cigarettes, for any federal or state excise taxes on motor fuels. 
(2)	Any amount representing the liquidation of a debt or conversion of another asset to the extent that the amount is attributable to a transaction previously taxed (e.g., the factoring of accounts receivable created by sales which have been included in taxable receipts even though the creation of such debt and factoring are a regular part of its business). 
(3)	Any amount representing returns and allowances granted by the business to its customer.
(4)	Receipts which are the proceeds of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the obligor. 
(5)	Receipts representing the return of principal of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the creditor, or the return of principal or basis upon the sale of a capital asset. 
(6)	Rebates and discounts taken or received on account of purchases by the licensee. A rebate or other incentive offered to induce the recipient to purchase certain goods or services from a person other than the offeror, and which the recipient assigns to the licensee in consideration of the sale of goods and services shall not be considered a rebate or discount to the licensee, but shall be included in the licensee's gross receipts together with any handling or other fees related to the incentive. 
(7)	Withdrawals from inventory for purposes other than sale or distribution and for which no consideration is received and the occasional sale or exchange of assets other than inventory, whether or not a gain or loss is recognized for federal income tax purposes. 
(8)	Investment income not directly related to the privilege exercised by a licensable business not classified as rendering financial services. This exclusion shall apply to interest on bank accounts of the business, and to interest, dividends and other income derived from the investment of its own funds in securities and other types of investments unrelated to the licensed privilege. This exclusion shall not apply to interest, late fees and similar income attributable to an installment sale or other transaction that occurred in the regular course of business. 
(c)	The following shall be deducted from gross receipts or gross purchases that would otherwise be taxable: 
(1)	Any amount paid for computer hardware and software that are sold to a United States federal or state government entity provided that such property was purchased within two years of the sale to said entity by the original purchaser who shall have been contractually obligated at the time of purchase to resell such property to a state or federal government entity. This deduction shall not occur until the time of resale and shall apply to only the original cost of the property and not to its resale price, and the deduction shall not apply to any of the tangible personal property which was the subject of the original resale contract if it is not resold to a state or federal government entity in accordance with the original contract obligation. 
(2)	Any receipts attributable to business conducted in another state or foreign country in which the taxpayer is liable for an income or other tax based upon income. 
(Ord. of 12-3-96, § H)
Sec. 18-9. - License fee and tax. 
    Every person or business subject to licensure under this chapter shall be assessed and required to pay annually: 
(1)	a.	For contractors and persons constructing for their own account for sale, $0.10 per $100.00 of gross receipts; 
b.	For retailers, $0.13 per $100.00 of gross receipts;
c.	For financial, real estate and professional services, $0.18 per $100.00 of gross receipts;
d.	For repair, personal and business services and all other businesses and occupations not specifically listed or exempted in this chapter or otherwise by law, $0.13 per $100.00 of gross receipts; 
e.	For wholesalers, $0.05 per $100.00 of purchases;
f.	For carnivals, circuses and speedways, $50.00 for each performance held in this jurisdiction, not to exceed $1,000.00 per year; 
g.	For fortunetellers, clairvoyants and practitioners of palmistry, $500.00 per year;
h.	For massage parlors, $500.00 per year;
i.	For itinerant merchants or peddlers of nonperishable goods - $250.00 per year plus $5.00 per day, not to exceed $500.00 per year; for itinerant merchants or peddlers of perishable goods - $50.00 per year; 
j.	For photographers, $30.00 per year;
k.	For permanent coliseums, arenas or auditoriums having a maximum capacity in excess of 10,000 persons, open to the public, $1,000.00 per year; 
l.	For savings and loan associations and credit unions, $50.00 per year; and
m.	For direct sellers as defined in the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3719.1 with total annual sales in excess of $4,000.00, $0.13 per $100.00 of total annual retail sales or $0.05 cents per $100.00 of total annual wholesale sales, whichever is applicable. 
(2)	Beer and wine.
a.	Every person engaging in the business of wholesaling or retailing beer and wine shall pay for the privilege a license tax as follows: 
1.	Wholesale beer license. For each wholesale beer license, $75.00 per annum. 
2.	Wholesale wine distributor's license. For each wholesale wine distributor's license, $50.00 per annum. 
3.	Retail on-premises wine and beer license for hotel, etc. For each retail on-premises wine and beer license for a hotel, restaurant or club, $37.50 per annum. 
4.	Retail off-premises wine and beer license. For each retail off-premises wine and beer license, $37.50 per annum. 
5.	Retail on-premises beer license for hotel, etc. For each retail on-premises beer license for a hotel, restaurant or club, $25.00 per annum. 
6.	Retail off-premises beer license. For retail off-premises beer license, $25.00 per annum. 
b.	The licenses provided for in subsection (2)a. of this section shall be as respectively defined by the Act of the General Assembly of Virginia as herebefore and hereafter amended known as "The Alcoholic Beverage Control Act," and the words "beer" and "wine," wherever used in this section, shall have the meanings respectively prescribed to them by "The Alcoholic Beverage Control Act." 
c.	No license with reference to which the license tax is set out in this section shall be issued under this section to any person unless such person shall hold or secure simultaneously therewith the proper state license required by "The Alcoholic Beverage Control Act," which state license shall be exhibited to the town treasurer. All dining rooms, restaurants, lunchrooms and club rooms where beer and wine are sold for consumption on the premises, shall at all times be open to inspection to the state police and the police authorities of the town. Any violation of the terms of this provision shall be sufficient grounds for the revocation of the license issued in accordance with this section. 
(3)	Mixed beverages. Every person holding mixed beverage restaurant or caterer's licenses for establishments located within the town shall pay for the privilege a license tax as follows: 
a.	Persons operating restaurants, including restaurants located on premises of and operated by hotels or motels: 
1.	One hundred dollars per annum for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for 50 to 100 persons. 
2.	One hundred seventy-five dollars per annum for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for more than 100 but not more than 150 persons. 
3.	Two hundred fifty dollars per annum for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for more than 150 persons. 
4.	Two hundred fifty dollars per annum for each caterer.
5.	Mixed beverage special events licenses, $10.00 for each day of each event.
b.	A private, nonprofit club operating a restaurant located on the premises of such club, $175.00 per annum. 
(Ord. of 12-3-96, § I; Ord. of 10-6-98; Ords. of 12-1-98(1), (2))
Sec. 18-10. - Adoption of state guidelines. 
(a)	The "Guidelines for Business, Professional and Occupational License Tax," issued by Department of Taxation, Commonwealth of Virginia, January 1, 1997, promulgated for the use of local governments pursuant to the Code of Virginia of 1950, § 58.1-3701, as amended, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter by reference. 
[(b)	Reserved.]
(Ord. of 12-3-96, § J)
Sec. 18-11. - Procedure upon fraudulent, etc., failure to obtain license. 
    If the town treasurer shall ascertain that any person has fraudulently, or with intent to evade the payment of the property license taxes, failed or refused to obtain the proper license as required by this chapter for any one or more of the three license tax years last past, or for the current license tax year, and the liability therefor is ascertained, such omitted license taxes and interest computed at the rate of ten percent per annum from the date on which such license tax first became due shall be assessed for each year of the three license tax years past and for the current license tax year, for which the person so delinquent is assessable, together with an additional penalty of ten percent of such unpaid license taxes. 
(Ord. of 1-6-98(2))
Sec. 18-12. - Penalty for violation of chapter; continuing violations. 
    Any person who is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. Each day any person shall continue to violate the provisions of this chapter after the due date of any license tax prescribed in this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 1-6-98(3))
Chapter 26 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; health and sanitation, ch. 34; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; planning, ch. 54; subdivisions, ch. 70.
State Law reference- Environmental quality, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1200 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Erosion and sediment control program administration, plan review and inspection. 
    The erosion and sediment control program administration, plan review and inspections for the town shall be the responsibility of the County of Shenandoah, or agent. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2011)
Sec. 26-2. - Stormwater management program administration, plan review and inspection. 
    The stormwater management program administration, plan review and inspections for the town shall be the responsibility of the County of Shenandoah, or agent. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2011)
Secs. 26-3-26-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. of June 7, 2011, repealed §§ 26-26, 26-29-26-39. The former sections pertained to erosion and sediment control and derived from Code 1968, §§ 6.1-3-6.1-11, 6.1-13-6.1-15; Ord. of Oct. 5, 1993; Ord. of May 2, 2000; Ord. of Nov. 5, 2001; Ord. of Nov. 6, 2007.
Cross reference- General subdivision and review procedures, § 70-36; erosion and sediment control in subdivisions, § 70-121; F-C floodplain conservation district, § 90-297 et seq.
State Law reference- Erosion and Sediment Control Law, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560 et seq.

Sec. 26-26. - Reserved. 
Sec. 26-27. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for, both during and following development, the control of erosion and sedimentation, and to establish procedures for the administration and enforcement of such controls. 
(Code 1968, § 6.1-1)
Sec. 26-27.1. - Certain state erosion and sediment control provisions adopted. 
    The Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations 4VAC50-30 are hereby adopted in their entirety and incorporated by reference in this chapter as though set out in full herein. The latest edition of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook is the minimum design standards for meeting the requirements of this section and the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 461, 3-3-92; Ord. of 11-6-2001)
Sec. 26-28. - Application. 
    No person may engage in any land disturbing activity until such person has submitted to, has had reviewed by and has had approved by the Shenandoah County Erosion and Sediment Control Administrator, or agent, an erosion and sediment control plan for such land disturbing activity. 
(Code 1968, § 6.1-2; Ord. of 11-6-2001; Ord. of 6-7-2011)
Secs. 26-29-26-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. of June 7, 2011, repealed §§ 26-61, 26-62. The former sections pertained to drainage manual adopted; where copies filed and stormwater detention facilities, respectively and derived from Code 1968, §§ 20.1-1, 20.1-2; Ord. of June 4, 1991, § 2.2; Ord. of Aug. 1, 2006.
Cross reference- Storm drainage in subdivisions, § 70-118.
State Law reference- Stormwater management, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-603.1 et seq.

Secs. 26-61, 26-62. - Reserved. 
Sec. 26-63. - Purpose. 
    The health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the town depends on the design, development, improvement, operation, maintenance, and oversight of a program to effectively manage stormwater (quantity and quality) as well as illicit discharge to include, but not be limited to, the prevention of flood events, degradation of the town's waterways, and erosion of the town's lands. Therefore, to protect the health, safety, and welfare of residents, the town council has adopted the following stormwater quantity and quality management program. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2011)
Sec. 26-64. - Authority. 
    This article is issued under the authority of Code of Virginia, tit. 10.1, ch. 6, art. 1.1 (Code of Virginia, § 10.1-603.2 et seq.) and the state stormwater management program (VSMP) permit regulations (4 VAC 50-60 et seq.); and, the Code of Virginia, tit. 10.1, ch. 5, art. 4 (Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560 et seq.) and regulations (4 VAC 50-30 et seq.). 
(Ord. of 6-7-2011)
Sec. 26-65. - Administration. 
    The County of Shenandoah director of planning and zoning, or agent, is charged with the responsibility for the administration of this article. The director may, at his discretion, delegate authority to implement this article. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2011)
Secs. 26-66-26-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NUISANCES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Adoption of Code of Virginia, § 15.1-867, pertaining to the abatement or removal of nuisances, § 4.
Cross reference- Noisy animals and fowl, § 10-7; telephones attached to poles, trees, etc., § 46-51; placing nuisances on premises, § 62-2.
State Law reference- Power of town to cause nuisances to be abated, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-14(5).

Sec. 26-86. - Generally. 
(a)	A "nuisance" shall be anything done by any person which interferes with the rights of a citizen, in person, property, the enjoyment of his property or his comfort, or which annoys or disturbs another in the free use, possession or enjoyment of his property, or which renders its ordinary use or occupation physically uncomfortable. 
(b)	Except as otherwise provided in this Code or other ordinances of the town, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create, allow, permit or maintain upon any premises in the town, in his possession or under his control, any nuisance or any condition injurious to the public health or morals, or endangering the life or property of others. 
(c)	Any person violating this section, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. Each day such violation is maintained or permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction of any violation of this section, the nuisance, unless immediately abated by the person maintaining, causing or permitting the same, may be abated by the town at the expense and cost of the offender, and the cost thereof shall be charged and collected as a part of the cost of the trial of the case. 
(Code 1968, § 14-9)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2; health and sanitation, ch. 34. 
Sec. 26-87. - Radio and television reception interference. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate within the town any machine, sign, device or equipment using, or operated by, electric power or current in a manner or under conditions causing interference with the use of radios, or with radio reception within the town, or causing interference with the use of television sets, or with television reception within the town. Such unlawful use or maintenance of such machine, device or equipment shall constitute a nuisance. 
(b)	Any person violating any of the foregoing provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-7. In addition to the foregoing penalty the use or operation of any such nuisance shall be abated upon the order of the town manager. 
(Code 1968, § 14-17)
ARTICLE V. - GRAFFITI ABATEMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of localities to remove or repair the defacement of buildings, walls, fences and other structures, Code of Virginia § 15.2-908.

Sec. 26-88. - Definitions. 
    The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings set forth below: 
    Graffiti shall mean writings, drawings, inscriptions, figures or marks of paint, ink, chisel, chalk, dye and other similar substance, or flyers, bills and similar materials, which have been placed on public or private property without the permission of the owner, manager or occupant of the property. 
    Placement of graffiti shall include any form or act of drawing, painting, scrawling, writing, marking, inscribing, scratching, gluing, posting or otherwise affixing graffiti to public or private property. 
    Public or private property shall mean the exterior surface of any building, or any street, alley, sidewalk, or other vehicular or pedestrian right-of-way, or any article of street furniture, utility or public service equipment, or other personal property located outdoors, whether owned by a public entity or by a private person or entity, and visible from any public right-of-way. 
    Town manager shall mean the Woodstock Town Manager, or his designee. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2004)
Sec. 26-89. - Graffiti nuisance prohibited. 
(a)	The placement of graffiti on any public or private property is declared to be a public nuisance and is prohibited. 
(b)	The failure of any property owner, manager or occupant of public or private property to remove or effectively obscure graffiti which has been placed upon property under such person's ownership or control, within ten days after the service of notice as provided in this chapter, is declared to be a public nuisance and is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2004)
Sec. 26-90. - Abatement of graffiti nuisance. 
(a)	Notice and opportunity to abate. Whenever the town manager becomes aware of the existence of graffiti on any public or private property, the town manager shall give, or cause to be given, written notice to remove or effectively obscure such graffiti to the owner, manager or occupant of the property. Such notice may be served by personal service or certified mail, and shall be complete upon delivery or mailing. Such notice shall direct the recipient to remove or effectively obscure such graffiti within ten days of the date of the notice, or to grant the town written permission to enter upon the property and remove or effectively obscure such graffiti, and shall inform the recipient that, in the event of failure to comply, the town may enter upon the property and remove or effectively obscure such graffiti, in the manner provided in this chapter. Prior to the issuance of a notice under this section, the town manager shall contact the owner, manager or occupant of the affected property and attempt to obtain the commitment of such person to remove the graffiti within a reasonable period of time. Only in the event no such commitment is made or, if made, the commitment is not honored may the town manager proceed to issue a notice under this subsection. 
(b)	Abatement by town. If the owner, manager or occupant of the property upon which graffiti has been placed fails to remove or effectively obscure the graffiti, or to grant the town written permission to enter upon the property and remove or effectively obscure such graffiti, within ten days from service of the notice described in subsection (a), the town manager may enter upon the property and remove or effectively obscure the graffiti. 
(c)	Waiver of liability. The failure of the recipient of a notice given pursuant to subsection (a) to comply with the notice by removing or effectively obscuring such graffiti within ten days shall be deemed a waiver of any claim by or on behalf of the notice recipient or, if different, the owner of the property, against the town for damage to the property arising out of the work of removing or obscuring the graffiti. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2004)
Sec. 26-91. - Materials. 
    In no case shall the town be required to clean, paint or repair any more extensive area than where the graffiti is located. Nor shall the town be required to restore the area to its original condition (e.g., color, texture). 
(Ord. of 5-4-2004)
Sec. 26-92. - Penalties. 
(a)	Any person who commits a violation of section 26-89(a) shall be punished as provided in section 18.2-137 or 18.2-138 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(b)	Abatement of the nuisance by the town as provided in section 26-90 shall be the sole remedy for the violation of section 26-89(b). 
(Ord. of 5-4-2004)
Sec. 26-93. - Exemptions. 
    This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit temporary, easily removable chalk or other water soluble markings on streets, sidewalks or other paved surfaces which are used in connection with traditional children's activities, such as drawings or bases for kickball, handball, hopscotch and the like, or to prohibit markings placed on public or private property by the authorized representative of the town or a public utility to indicate the location of service lines and facilities. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2004)
Secs. 26-94-26-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - URBAN FORESTRY 

Sec. 26-100. - Purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(a)	It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance, preservation and removal of trees and shrubs, on public property within the Town of Woodstock. 
(b)	The purpose of this chapter is to further promote the following:
(1)	The planting, maintenance, restoration, and survival of desirable trees and shrubs with the town. 
(2)	The protection of community residents and visitors from personal injury and property damage, and the protection of the town from property damage, caused or threatened by the improper planting, maintenance, or removal of trees and shrubs, located on public property. 
(3)	The reduction of erosion and sedimentation.
(4)	The reduction of stormwater run-off and its associated costs.
(5)	The protection and enhancement of property values and aesthetic qualities in the town.
(6)	The protection and enhancement of the overall environment of the town.
(7)	The enhancement of the quality of life of the town and its citizens.
(8)	To facilitate the long-range planning of tree care in the town.
(Ord. of 9-7-2004)
Sec. 26-101. - Urban forestry advisory commission. 
    An urban forestry advisory commission shall be established to perform the following duties: 
(a)	To develop, implement and maintain an urban forestry management program.
(b)	To develop standards and guidelines for planting, maintenance, and preservation of public trees. 
(c)	To promote education of the general public on proper tree-care practices.
(d)	To support the efforts of other groups interested in urban forestry in the town, such as master gardeners and Woodstock Enhancement Committee. 
(e)	To advise the town manager, town council and appropriate boards and commissions on matters pertaining to municipal plantings, and the designation of historic or landmark trees. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2004)
Sec. 26-102. - Establishment of urban forestry advisory commission. 
(a)	The urban forestry advisory commission shall be made up of a minimum of five members. The members shall be appointed by the town council. In addition, the Virginia Department of Forestry's Area Forester shall serve as a standing committee member. 
(b)	The urban forestry advisory commission shall be made up of citizens with skills and an expressed interest in at least one of the following areas: 
(1)	Urban forestry.
(2)	Landscaping.
(3)	Arboriculture.
(c)	Terms of office. 
(1)	Each member shall be appointed for a term of four years, or until their successors are appointed, except that the initial appointment of two members shall be for a three-year term, one member for a two-year term; the remaining two members for a four-year term. 
(2)	Members may be re-appointed to serve consecutive terms as determined appropriate by the town council. 
(3)	The commission shall elect a chair and vice chair who shall serve annual terms and may succeed themselves. 
(d)	Minutes and rules. 
(1)	The commission shall adopt such rules and regulations as it may consider necessary.
(2)	The commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. It shall keep records of its examinations and other such official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the commission and shall be a public record. 
(3)	All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public.
(4)	A quorum shall be at least three members.
(Ord. of 9-7-2004; Ord. of 3-4-2014(2))
Sec. 26-103. - Authority to receive funding and advisory services. 
(a)	All persons interested in urban forestry in the town are invited to make gifts, devises and bequests to the town to be used for that purpose. All donations of money shall be made through the department of finance, and it is hereby authorized and directed to receive such donations. All such monies shall be used only for the purpose of planting, maintenance, and promotion of the urban forest in the town. Expenditures from these donations shall be made by the town manager as authorized, from time to time, by the town council. 
(b)	The urban forestry advisory commission may, with the consent of the town council, apply for federal, state, or private grants or funding, and/or assistance, and to aid in the performance of their duties. 
(c)	Upon request of the urban forestry advisory commission with approval by the town manager, the departments, boards, commissions, offices and agencies of the town government shall furnish to the commission such available information and render such service as may be needed in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2004)
Sec. 26-104. - Planting, maintenance and protection of public trees. 
(a)	Planting. 
(1)	Any tree or shrub planted on public property shall be of an approved species as outlines in "The Preferred Species List" adopted by this commission. 
(2)	Any tree or shrub not on the preferred species list shall not be planted on public property without the specific approval of the urban forestry advisory commission. 
(3)	Any tree or shrub shall be properly planted according to the standards and guidelines adopted by this commission. 
(b)	Maintenance. 
(1)	All outside contractors hires for pruning and/or maintenance of town owned trees shall meet the following requirements: 
a.	Have a current town business license.
b.	Provide proof of liability and Workmen's Compensation Insurance in amount established by the town council. 
c.	Have at least one Virginia State certified arborist on staff to generally oversee all work. 
(2)	All town-owned trees shall be maintained in accordance with the American National Standards Institute's ANSI A300 Standard Practices (or most recent update). No town-owned tree shall be "topped" nor shall any climbing spurs be used when working on live trees. 
(3)	All tree pruning around utility lines shall be performed in accordance with the guidelines in "Pruning Trees Near Electric Utility Lines" by Dr. Alex L. Shigo. 
(4)	No private citizen shall cut, prune, or elevate any town-owned tree in conflict with guidelines adopted by the urban forestry advisory commission, without prior approval of the town manager. 
(5)	The town should maintain elevation of town-owned trees to a height of 13 feet over roadways and a height of eight feet over public sidewalks where possible. 
(6)	Town maintenance of trees and vegetation in public rights-of-way.
a.	The town is to cut and/or remove weeds, brush, plants, grass or other vegetation growing in the public alleys, unimproved streets and other unimproved rights-of-way. Any adjacent property owner, tenant or citizen, at their own expense, may cut and/or remove any weeds, brush, plants, grass or other vegetation, except trees in excess of three inches caliber measured 12 inches from the ground, growing in the public alleys, unimproved streets and other unimproved rights-of-way and in the unimproved portion of the public right-of-way lying between any public property and private property lines. 
b.	If any tree growing in a public alley, unimproved street or other unimproved right-of-way is dead or growing in such a manner that the branches, limbs or other parts of the tree extend or protrude onto private property in a manner that constitutes a danger to citizens or property, the town will cut and remove or prune such tree once it has been notified of the condition of the tree. It shall be the responsibility of the adjoining property owner or tenant to notify the town when a tree is growing in such a manner that it needs to be cut and removed or pruned. 
(c)	Protection. 
(1)	Abuse, mutilation, or damage to public trees. Unless specifically authorized by the urban forestry advisory commission, it shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree on public property, nor attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or other contrivance to any public tree, nor allow any gaseous liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come in contact with them, nor set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire of the heat thereof will injure any portion of any public tree. Any person found to violate the provisions of this section shall be responsible for the cost of repair, or removal and replacement, of any public tree so damaged. The owner of any vehicle that accidentally damaged any tree on public property shall be responsible for the cost of repair, or removal, and replacement, of any public tree damaged. 
(2)	Protection of trees.
a.	Where any excavation or construction of any building or structure is proposed within the dripline of a tree located on any street or other publicly owned property, such tree shall be guarded with a good substantial fence placed at least three feet from the trunk of the tree, or at a distance in feet from the tree equal to the diameter of the trunk measured in inches at breast height, whichever is greater. All equipment, building material, dirt or other debris shall be kept outside the barrier. 
b.	Except in an emergency situation as determined by the town manager, no person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches, or lay any drive within a distance equal to one-quarter the distance from the dripline to the trunk of any public tree. 
(3)	Placing material on public property. Except for refuse collection activities, no person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any public place of the town any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other materials that may impede the free passage or water, air and fertilizer to the roots within the dripline of any tree growing thereon. 
(4)	Improper planting. Whenever any tree is planted or set out in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, the town manager or the urban forestry advisory commission may pursue removal of said tree and initiate effective remedies. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2004)
Sec. 26-105. - Severability. 
    Should any part or provision of this article be declared invalid by any court, the same shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole or any part thereof other than the part held to be invalid. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2004)
Chapter 30 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; emergency disconnection of electrical equipment, § 14-89; health and sanitation, ch. 34; law enforcement, ch. 38; general powers and duties of chief of police, § 38-52; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; audible alarms, § 46-4; emergency telephone calls, § 46-66 et seq.; parks and recreation, ch. 50; placing trash constituting fire hazard, § 62-3; required information on preliminary plat, § 70-78; general design standards for subdivisions, § 70-111; water supply in subdivisions, § 70-117; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78; traffic violation notices, § 78-11; permits for parades and processions, § 78-12; utilities, ch. 82; erection of fire hydrants, § 82-26; grease, oil and sand interceptors and, generally, § 82-261; definitions relating to cross connection control and backflow prevention, § 82-271; purposes of zoning chapter, § 90-2; general supplementary zoning regulations, § 90-376; conditions for special zoning permits, § 90-390.
State Law reference- Forest resources and the department of forestry, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1100 et seq.; removal, repair, etc., of dangerous structures, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-11.2; nuisances, keeping of combustibles, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-14(5), (6); town fire prevention and building regulations, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-15(1), (4), (5); making of fires, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-872; false fire or ambulance alarms, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212; fire protection, Code of Virginia, § 27-1 et seq.; statewide fire prevention code, Code of Virginia, § 27-94 et seq.; explosives, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-137 et seq.; fireworks, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-142 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Authority of fire department to make bylaws. 
    The fire department is hereby empowered to make bylaws to promote its objects consistent with the laws of the state and ordinances of the town. 
(Code 1968, § 8-1)
State Law reference- Bylaws of fire department, Code of Virginia, § 27-7. 
Sec. 30-2. - Authorization for certain persons. 
    Pursuant to Section 40.1-79.1 of the Code of Virginia of 1950 as amended, the town hereby authorizes any person 16 years of age or older, with parental or guardian approval, to work with or participate fully in all activities of a volunteer fire company, provided such person has attained certification under National Fire Protection Association 1001, level one, fire fighter standards, as administered by the department of fire programs. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2004)
Secs. 30-3-30-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION 

Sec. 30-26. - Statewide Fire Prevention Code Act-Adopted. 
    In accordance with Code of Virginia, title 27, chapter 9 (§ 27-94 et seq.), the council hereby adopts the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code Act, as amended (Code of Virginia, title 27, chapter 9, § 27-94 et seq.). 
(Code 1968, § 8-2.1)
Sec. 30-27. - Same-Administration, enforcement. 
    The act adopted in section 30-26 shall be administered and enforced by the fire marshal of the county; provided, that the fire marshal of the county shall notify the chief of police and the town manager before administering or enforcing such code in any particular incident. The fire marshal of the county shall have the authority to enforce the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code Act (Code of Virginia, title 27, chapter 9, § 27-94 et seq.) upon a written complaint and/or upon discovery of a possible code violation. 
(Code 1968, § 8-2.2)
Sec. 30-28. - Blasting permit. 
    No person shall blast or carry on any blasting operations without having first secured therefor a permit from the town manager and a permit from the fire marshal of the county. Blasting or blasting operations conducted pursuant to such permits shall be carried on subject to such conditions as may be expressed in the permits. 
(Code 1968, § 8-9)
Charter reference- Adoption of Code of Virginia, § 15.1-865, pertaining to local powers as to explosive substances, § 4. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 
Sec. 30-29. - Sale of firecrackers, etc., to minors prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale to any person under 18 years of age any firecracker, torpedo, skyrocket or other substance or thing of whatever form or construction containing nitrates, chlorates, oxalates, sulphides of lead, barium, antimony, nitroglycerin, phosphorus or any other explosive or inflammable compound or substance and intended, or commonly known, as fireworks. 
(Code 1968, § 8-1.1)
Cross reference- Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46. 
State Law reference- Fireworks, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-142 et seq. 
Sec. 30-30. - Parking within fire lanes and fire apparatus access roads. 
    No person shall obstruct in any manner, including the parking of vehicles in any area designated as a fire lane or fire apparatus access road, as defined in the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code. 
Exceptions: 
(1)	Buses, loading or unloading passengers, provided that the driver remains with the vehicle and able to move the vehicle if necessary. 
(2)	Fire, rescue, or law enforcement vehicles while they are involved in emergency operations.
(Ord. of 8-4-2009)
Sec. 30-31. - Obstructing fire hydrants. 
    Post, fences, vehicles, growth, trash, storage and other materials or objects shall not be placed or kept near fire hydrants, fire department inlet connections or fire protection system control valves in a manner that would prevent such equipment or fire hydrant from being immediately discernible. The fire department shall not be deterred or hindered from gaining immediate access to fire protection equipment or fire hydrant. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009)
Sec. 30-32. - Penalties for violations of sections 30-30 and 30-31. 
    Any person violating any provision of sections 30-30 or 30-31 may be subject to fines as follows: 
(1)	Twenty dollars if paid within 30 calendar days at the town office.
(2)	If not paid within 30 calendar days, a summons may be issued, upon which a fine of not more than $250.00 may be assessed. 
    In addition to the above penalties, any vehicle parked in violation of section 30-30 or section 30-31 may be removed to a storage area in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1213, provided, however, that no vehicle shall be removed from private property without the written request of the owner, or occupant of the premises. Any such removal shall be carried out by or under the direction of a law enforcement officer. As promptly as possible, each removal shall be reported to the county fire marshal and to the owner of the vehicle. Before regaining possession of the vehicle, the owner shall pay to the town all costs incidental to its removal and storage and locating the owner. Nothing in this section shall prevent any authorized officer from removing a vehicle in any emergency situation in such manner as he deems necessary. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009)
Secs. 30-33-30-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPEN BURNING 

Sec. 30-41. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Town of Woodstock Ordinance for the Regulation of Open Burning." 
(Ord. of 6-3-97(1))
Sec. 30-42. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect public health, safety, and welfare by regulating open burning within the town to achieve and maintain, to the greatest extend practicable, a level of air quality that will provide comfort and convenience while promoting economic and social development. This article is intended to supplement the applicable regulations promulgated by the state air pollution control board and other applicable regulations and laws. 
(Ord. of 6-3-97(1))
Sec. 30-42.1. - Enforcement and administration; permit required. 
    Open burning is prohibited unless a permit is obtained from the town manager and fire marshal. 
(Ord. of 3-4-2014(3))
Sec. 30-43. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of March 4, 2014(3), repealed § 30-43, entitled "Definitions" which derived from Ord. of 6-3-97(1). 
Sec. 30-44. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of March 4, 2014(3), repealed § 30-44, entitled "Prohibitions on open burning" which derived from Ord. of 6-3-97(1). 
Sec. 30-45. - Exemptions. 
    The following activities are exempted to the extent covered by the state air pollution control board's regulations for the control and abatement of air pollution: 
(1)	Open burning for training and instruction of government and public firefighters under the supervision of the designated official and industrial in-house firefighting personnel; 
(2)	Open burning for camp fires or other fires that are used solely for recreational purposes, for ceremonial occasions, for outdoor noncommercial preparation of food, and for warming of outdoor workers; 
(3)	Open burning for the destruction of any combustible liquid or gaseous material by burning in a flare or flare stack; 
(4)	Open burning for forest management and agriculture practices approved by the state air pollution control board; and 
(5)	Open burning for the destruction of classified military documents.
(Ord. of 6-3-97(1))
Sec. 30-46. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of March 4, 2014(3), repealed § 30-46, entitled "Permissible open burning" which derived from Ord. of 6-3-97(1). 
Sec. 30-47. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of March 4, 2014(3), repealed § 30-47, entitled "Permits" which derived from Ord. of 6-3-97(1). 
Sec. 30-48. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)	Any violation of this article is punishable as a class I misdemeanor.
(b)	Each separate incident may be considered a new violation.
(Ord. of 6-3-97(1))
Chapter 34 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 10; rabies control, § 10-61 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; licensing of sale of patent medicines, § 18-81; nuisances generally, § 26-86; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; solid waste, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 82.
State Law reference- Nuisance birds, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-1011 et seq.; local abatement of nuisances, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-14(5), 15.1-867; local health ordinances to be at least as stringent as state laws and regulations, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-34.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONDITION OF PREMISES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-26. - Drainage of stagnant water and filling of marshes. 
    If any stagnant water or marshy place is found on any premises in the town, the owner thereof shall drain such stagnant water or fill such marsh within 30 days from notification by the town manager. Upon failure of the recipient to comply with such notice, the town manager may have the requisite work done at the expense of the town, and the expense thereof shall be collected from the owner in the same manner in which taxes and levies are collected. It shall be unlawful for the recipient of any such notice from the town manager to fail, neglect or refuse to comply therewith. 
(Code 1968, § 19-10)
Charter reference- Adoption of Code of Virginia, § 15.1-867, pertaining to areas that may be covered by stagnant water, § 4. 
State Law reference- Removal of unhealthful substances, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-11. 
Sec. 34-27. - Condition of drain or running water. 
    If, upon any ground in the town there shall be found a drain or running water, the owner thereof or the abutting property owners shall keep the same clean, free and unobstructed from trash, filth, garbage or vegetation. 
(Code 1968, § 19-11)
Sec. 34-28. - Permitting offensive liquids to flow onto the premises of another or street. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any discharge from water closets, septic tanks, cesspools, or sinks or slop from kitchen or any offensive liquid to flow onto the premises of another or into any street. 
(Code 1968, § 19-12)
Sec. 34-29. - Permitting offensive, etc., hog pens, privies, etc., on premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any hog pen, privy, chicken house or other building, which is offensive to the neighborhood or dangerous to health on any premises in the town. 
(Code 1968, § 19-13)
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 10. 
Sec. 34-30. - Keeping inoperative vehicles on residential or commercial property; removal by owner or town; lien. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, except one within a fully enclosed building or structure or otherwise shielded or screened from public view, on any property zoned for residential or commercial purposes any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, as such are defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, which is inoperative. An "inoperative motor vehicle" shall mean any motor vehicle which is not in operating condition or which, for a period of 60 days or longer, has been partially or totally disassembled by the removal of tires and wheels, the engine or other essential parts required for operation of the vehicle, or on which there are displayed neither valid license plates nor a valid inspection decal. However, the provisions of this section shall not apply to a licensed business which, on June 26, 1970, was regularly engaged in business as an automobile dealer, salvage dealer or scrap processor. 
(b)	The owners of property zoned for residential or commercial purposes shall, at such times as the council may prescribe, remove therefrom any such inoperative motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers that are not kept within a fully enclosed building or structure. 
(c)	The council, through its own agents or employees, may remove any such inoperative motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, whenever the owner of the premises, after reasonable notice, has failed to do so. If the town council, through its own agents or employees, so removes any such vehicle after having given reasonable notice, the town may dispose of such vehicle after giving additional notice to the owner of the vehicle. The cost of any such removal and disposal shall be chargeable to the owner of the vehicle or premises and may be collected by the town as taxes and levies are collected. 
(d)	Every cost authorized by this section with which the owner of the premises shall have been assessed shall constitute a lien against the property from which the vehicle was removed, the lien to continue until actual payment of such costs shall have been made to the town. 
(Code 1968, § 19-15.1; Ord. of 9-4-2001)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-11.1. 
Sec. 34-30.1. - Removal and disposition of certain unattended vehicles; sale; disposition of proceeds. 
(a)	Whenever any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is found on the public streets or public grounds unattended by the owner or operator and constitutes a hazard to traffic, or is parked in such manner as to be in violation of law, or whenever any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is left unattended for more than 48 hours upon any public property or privately owned property other than the property of the owner of such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, within the town or is abandoned upon such public property or privately owned property, without the permission of the owners, lessee or occupant thereof; any such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer may be removed for safekeeping by or under the direction of a police officer to a storage garage or area, or whenever any such vehicle is immobilized on a public roadway by weather conditions or other emergency situation; provided, however, that no such vehicle shall be so removed from privately owned premises without the written request of the owner, lessee or occupant thereof. 
(b)	The person at whose request such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is removed from privately owned property shall indemnify the town against any loss or expense incurred by reason of removal, storage or sale thereof. It shall be presumed that such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, or part thereof, is abandoned if (1) it lacks either: (a) a current license plate, (b) a current county or town plate or sticker or (c) a valid state inspection certificate or sticker, and (2) it has been in a specific location for four days without being moved. Each removal shall be reported immediately to the chief of police, who shall give notice to the owner of the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer as promptly as possible. The owner, before obtaining possession of the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, shall pay to the town all reasonable costs incidental to the removal, storage and locating the owner of the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer. Should the owner fail or refuse to pay the costs or should the identity or whereabouts of the owner be unknown and unascertainable after a diligent search has been made, and after notice to the owner at his last known address and to the holder of any lien of record in the office of the department of motor vehicles against the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, or part thereof, the vehicle shall be treated as an abandoned vehicle under the provisions of Article 1 (§ 46.2-1200, et seq.) of the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended. 
(Ord. of 6-1-93(1); Ord. of 9-4-2001)
Sec. 34-31. - Removal, repair, etc., of buildings and other structures. 
(a)	The owners of property in the town shall at such time or times as the town council of the Town of Woodstock may prescribe, remove, repair or secure any building, wall or any other structure which might endanger the public health or safety of other residents of the town. 
(b)	The town council of the town through its own agents or employees may remove, repair or secure any building, wall or any other structure which might endanger the public health or safety of other residents of the town, wherein the owner and lien holder of such property after reasonable notice and a reasonable time to do so, has failed to remove, repair or secure said building, wall or other structure. For purposes of this section, reasonable notice shall include a written notice (i) mailed by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, sent to the last known address of the property owner and (ii) published in a newspaper having general circulation in the town in accordance with the applicable provisions of § 15.1-504 of the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended. No action shall be taken by the town to remove, repair or secure any building, wall or other structure for at least 30 days following the later of the return of the receipt or newspaper publication. 
(c)	In the event the town council of the town, through its own agents or employees removes, repairs or secures any building, wall or any other structure after complying with the notice provisions of this section, the cost or expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the owners of such property and may be collected by the town as taxes and levies are collected. 
(d)	Every charge authorized by this section with which the owner of any such property shall have been assessed and which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid town taxes and enforceable in the same manner as provided in Articles 3 (§ 58.1-3940 et seq.) and 4 (§ 58.1-3965 et seq.) of Chapter 39 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended. 
(Ord. of 7-2-96(1))
Secs. 34-32-34-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WEEDS, DEBRIS, ETC.[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Adoption of Code of Virginia, § 15.1-867, pertaining to the removal of weeds from private and public property, § 4.
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-901, 15.2-1115

Sec. 34-41. - Where prohibited generally. 
(a)	The owners of property therein shall, at such time or times as the town may prescribe, remove therefrom any and all trash, garbage, refuse, litter and other substances which might endanger the health or safety of other residents of the town; or may, whenever the town deems it necessary, after seven days, have such trash, garbage, refuse, litter and other like substances which might endanger the health of other residents of the town, removed by its own agents or employees, in which event the cost or expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the owners of such property and may be collected by the town as taxes are collected. Trash, garbage, refuse, litter and other debris shall be disposed of in personally owned or privately owned receptacles that are provided for such use and for the use of the persons disposing of such matter or in authorized facilities provided for such purpose and in no other manner not authorized by law. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for the owner of any land or lot within the town to permit grass, weeds, brush and other foreign growth standing more than ten inches in height to remain upon so much of the property as lies within 100 feet of any dwelling house or commercial building. 
(Code 1968, § 19-16; Ord. of 11-6-2007)
Sec. 34-42. - Traffic hazard or menace to public safety. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any land or lot within the town to permit any weeds, tree, shrub, hedge, flower or growth of vegetation of any kind to remain upon such land or lot in such location, size and condition as to constitute an obstruction or hindrance to the safe movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic upon the streets and alleys of the town or as to constitute a menace to public safety. 
(Code 1968, § 19-17; Ord. of 11-6-2007)
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 
Sec. 34-43. - Inspection of site and notice to remove. 
    The town manager or agents of the town shall, upon own initiative or when requested to do so in writing, investigate any land or lot. If it has been determined that there is a violation of section 34-41(a), 34-41(b) or 34-42, the town manager or an agent of the town shall notify the owner of the land or lot upon which the violation exists to cut and/or remove the condition. Such notice shall be in writing and delivered or mailed by certified mail to the last known address of the owner. If, after seven days from the receipt of the certified mail, the condition remains, the owner shall be deemed to be in violation of this division. Whenever the town deems it necessary, after seven days from the time of notice, the town manager or the town's agents shall have such grass, weeds, foreign growth or debris cut and/or removed in which event the cost and expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of such property and may be collected by the town by billing or as taxes are collected. Every charge authorized by this section with which the owner of any such property shall have been assessed and which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid local taxes. 
(Code 1968, § 19-18; Ord. of 11-6-2007)
Sec. 34-44. - Penalty for violation of division. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be subject to a civil penalty, not to exceed $50.00 for the first violation, or violations arising from the same set of operative facts. The civil penalty for subsequent violations not arising from the same set of operative facts within 12 months of the first violation shall not exceed $200.00. Each business day during which the same violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. In no event shall a series of specified violations arising from the same set of operative facts result in civil penalties that exceed a total of $3,000.00 in a 12-month period. 
(Code 1968, § 19-20; Ord. of 11-6-2007)
Chapter 38 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; audible alarms, § 46-4; emergency telephone calls, § 46-66 et seq.; removal of snow from footway, sidewalk, etc., § 66-3; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78; permits for parades and processions, § 78-12; purposes of zoning chapter, § 90-2.
State Law reference- Law enforcement officer training standards, Code of Virginia, § 9-179 et seq.; police and public order, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-131 et seq.; Line of Duty Act, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-136.1 et seq.; general municipal law-enforcement powers, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-137 et seq.; auxiliary police forces, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-159.2 et seq.; malicious bodily injury to law-enforcement officers, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-51.1; impersonation of police officer, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-174, 18.2-175; giving false report to police officer, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-461; criminal procedure, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-1 et seq.; conservators of the peace and special police officers, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-12 et seq.; arrest, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-71 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. of May 6, 2014(1), repealed article I entitled "In General" which derived from Code 1968, § 7-3. 

Secs. 38-1-38-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Powers and duties of police force, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-138.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-26. - Composition. 
    The police department shall consist of a chief of police and such other officers and patrol officers as the council, upon recommendation of the town manager, may deem necessary for the protection of the lives and property of the citizens and the enforcement of state laws, town ordinances and resolutions. 
(Code 1968, § 17-1)
State Law reference- Organization of town police forces, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-131.7. 
Sec. 38-27. - Control by town manager. 
    The police department shall be under the control of the town manager for the purpose of preserving and enforcing peace and order, for the execution of the laws of the state and this Code and other ordinances of the town, and the performance of such other duties as the town manager may prescribe. 
(Code 1968, § 17-2)
Sec. 38-28. - Oath of office. 
    Every member of the police department, before entering upon the discharge of his duties as such, shall take the oath of office prescribed by the state. A certificate of such oath shall be filed with the town manager. 
(Code 1968, § 17-3)
State Law reference- Oath of town officers, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-38, 49-1. 
Sec. 38-29. - Filling vacancies. 
    Subject to section 38-51, the town manager may appoint police officers to fill such vacancies as may occur. He shall report such appointments to the council at its next regular meeting. All appointments under this section shall be made subject to Code of Virginia, §§ 9-179-9-181 and 15.1-131.8, as well as physical examination and examination as to knowledge of the laws, ordinances and regulations. The examination as to laws, ordinances and regulations shall be made by the town manager and may be either oral or written. The physical examination shall be made by such local physician as the town manager may designate. 
(Code 1968, § 17-4)
Sec. 38-30. - Emergency appointments. 
    In time of public emergency; at such times as there are insufficient numbers of regular police officers to preserve the peace, safety and good order of the town; or at any time for the purpose of training, the town manager may appoint as many special police officers as the public necessity may require; provided, that he shall report any such appointment and his reasons for so doing to the next regular meeting of the council. All appointments under this section shall be made subject to the third sentence of section 38-29. 
(Code 1968, § 17-5)
State Law reference- Organization, training and powers of auxiliary police forces, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-159.2; calling auxiliary police officers into service, uniforms, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-159.5. 
Sec. 38-31. - Uniforms. 
    All regular police officers, including the chief of police, shall wear what is known as a police officer's uniform, as prescribed by the town manager and furnished by the town. 
(Code 1968, § 17-6)
State Law reference- Unlawful wearing of officer's uniform or insignia, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-175. 
Sec. 38-32. - Powers of police officers and privates. 
    The officers and privates constituting the police force of the town are hereby invested with all the power and authority which formerly belonged to the office of constable at common law in taking cognizance of and in enforcing the criminal laws of the commonwealth and the ordinances and regulations of the town and all powers which, under the laws of the town, may enable them to discharge the duties of their office. 
(Code 1968, § 17-7)
State Law reference- Powers and duties of police force, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-138. 
Sec. 38-33. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(1), repealed § 38-33 entitled "Duties of police officers generally" which derived from Code 1968, § 17-8. 
Sec. 38-34. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(1), repealed § 38-34 entitled "Attendance; conformity to article; rules and regulations" which derived from Code 1968, § 17-9. 
Sec. 38-35. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(1), repealed § 38-35 entitled "Answering appeals when off duty" which derived from Code 1968, § 17-10. 
Sec. 38-36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(1), repealed § 38-36 entitled "Police blotter" which derived from Code 1968, § 17-11. 
Sec. 38-37. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(1), repealed § 38-37 entitled "Conduct toward offenders and prisoners" which derived from Code 1968, § 17-12. 
Sec. 38-38. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(1), repealed § 38-38 entitled "Drinking, etc., on duty" which derived from Code 1968, § 17-13. 
Secs. 38-39-38-50. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of Oct. 2, 2001 repealed § 38-39 which pertained to political activity and derived from Code 1968, § 17-14. 
DIVISION 2. - CHIEF OF POLICE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2.
State Law reference- Police forces to include a chief of police, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-131.7; records kept by chief of police, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-135.1.

Sec. 38-51. - Appointment. 
    The council, in consultation with the town manager, shall appoint a chief of police, who shall be subject to the administrative control and supervision of the town manager. 
(Code 1968, § 17-15; Ord. of 5-6-2014(1))
Sec. 38-52. - Powers and duties generally. 
    The chief of police shall be the chief executive of the police department, but he shall always be subject to the orders and regulations of the town manager. He shall be under the control of the town manager, for the purpose of preserving and enforcing peace and order and executing the laws of the state and ordinances of the town. It shall be the duty of the police force to respect and obey orders of the chief not in conflict with the rules and regulations. It shall be his duty at all times, day or night, to preserve the public peace; prevent the commission of crimes, and arrest offenders; to protect the rights of persons and of property; to guard the public health; to report nuisances and obstructions in the streets, alleys and other public places; to provide proper police force at fires; to protect the firefighters and property at fires and to discharge such other duties as may be required of him by the town manager. When charges are filed in his office against any member of the police force, or when he shall be informed of any gross neglect of duty, he shall immediately transmit same to the town manager, together with the names of witnesses to be summoned, so that the charges may be fully investigated by the town manager. He shall be responsible for the good order of the town and for the general good conduct of the members of the police force. He shall pay frequent visits at uncertain times to various portions of the town, and thus be able to supervise the conduct of all subordinates. 
(Code 1968, § 17-16)
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66. 
Sec. 38-53. - Records and reports. 
    The chief of police shall make periodic reports in writing from time to time to the town manager as he may require, showing the condition of the police force, the number of times each police officer has been absent and the cause of such absence, the condition of the jail, the number of arrests and the causes of same and the number of ordinance violations reported. He shall keep a record compiled by himself of the work of each police officer, showing marks of credit in the performance of duty, and showing demerits and the cause therefor and any and all complaints with reference to any given member of the force. On the first day of each month, or as soon thereafter as practicable, he shall furnish the town manager with a consolidated written report of the activities of his department for the previous month. Forms for such reports shall be prepared and furnished by the town manager. The chief of police shall keep duplicate records in his office of the reports made to the town manager in pursuance of the requirements of this section. He shall keep records showing the name of each member of the police force, and the area in which each member is stationed from day to day, the date of appointment and time of removal or suspension, and the happening of any vacancies in the department. 
(Code 1968, § 17-17)
Sec. 38-54. - Furnishing town manager with certain information useful in town administration. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police to communicate to the town manager any information from the daily reports of members of the police department or other persons in regard to streets, lights and other matters which will be of use to the town manager in the administration of his office. 
(Code 1968, § 17-18)
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66. 
Sec. 38-55. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(1), repealed § 38-55 entitled "Absence from duty" which derived from Code 1968, § 17-19. 
Chapter 42 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; grounds for revocation of license for trailer park or trailer camp, § 18-39; licensing of trailer parks, trailer camps, § 18-86; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; health and sanitation, ch. 34; planning, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; subdivisions, ch. 70; taxation, ch. 74; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 82; zoning, ch. 90.
State Law reference- Regulation of location of mobile homes, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-466.1; campgrounds, Code of Virginia, § 35.1-1 et seq.; Virginia Industrialized Building Safety Law, Code of Virginia, § 36-70 et seq.; Virginia Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Law, Code of Virginia, § 36-85.2 et seq.; Manufactured Housing Licensing and Transaction Recovery Fund Law, Code of Virginia, § 36-85.16 et seq.; Mobile Home Lot Rental Act, Code of Virginia, § 55-248.41 et seq.

Sec. 42-1. - Parking of trailers. 
    It shall be unlawful within the town for any person to park or place, or allow to be parked or placed, any trailer, mobile home or similar type vehicle or dwelling on any street or other place in town, except in a trailer court; except, that one trailer may be parked or stored in an improved enclosed garage or accessory building, or on any lot or plot of land; provided, that no living quarters shall be maintained or any business practiced in such trailer while it is so parked or stored. Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to prevent or prohibit the trailer, mobile home or similar type vehicle or dwelling, being temporarily parked on a town street if permitted by the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the town. 
(Code 1968, § 25-1)
Sec. 42-2. - Drainage and condition of plots of ground in trailer court. 
    All plots of ground in a trailer court shall be well-drained and kept in a clean and orderly manner by the owner or operator thereof. 
(Code 1968, § 25-2)
Sec. 42-3. - Requirements as to trailers and trailer camps located outside of town. 
(a)	Trailers on individual lots not in trailer parks or camps and trailer camps or parks located outside the town, but connected to the sewer and water systems, either or both, of the town shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations of the state board of health and shall have such area for parking spaces and such sanitary facilities and electrical connections as would meet the minimum standards set forth in chapter 90. Any trailer or trailer camp or park not meeting the requirements set forth in the foregoing provisions of this section shall be denied the use of the water and sewer facilities of the town. 
(b)	In addition to regular payments of water and sewerage charges, there shall be a quarterly service charge of $6.00 for each such trailer or trailer plot which is located outside the town and connected to the sewer and water systems, either or both, of the town. 
(c)	Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the discontinuance of sewer or water service, either or both, to any user outside the town when such discontinuance may be deemed in the best interest of the town by the town manager or the council. 
(Code 1968, § 25-3)
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; utilities, ch. 82. 
Sec. 42-4. - Effect of removal of wheels, etc. 
    Any action toward the removal of wheels or similar transporting devices from any trailer, except for temporary purposes of repair, or toward otherwise permanently attaching such trailer to the ground, shall subject such trailer to the requirements of all the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the town relating to buildings and structures. 
(Code 1968, § 25-4)
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 
Sec. 42-5. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense. 
(Code 1968, § 25-5)
Chapter 46 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 10; sale of fireworks to minors, § 30-29; health and sanitation, ch. 34.
State Law reference- Crimes and offenses generally, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-1 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-1 entitled "Abusive language" and derived from Code 1968, § 14-1; Ord. of 7-2-91(15), § 14-1. 
Sec. 46-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-2 entitled "Assault and battery" and derived from Code 1968, § 14-4; Ord. of 6-4-91(1), § 14-4. 
Sec. 46-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-3 entitled "Attempts to commit misdemeanors; how punished" and derived from Code 1968, § 14-5; Ord. of 7-2-91(12), § 14-5. 
Sec. 46-4. - Audible alarms. 
(a)	Definition. As used in this section, "audible alarm" means a device designed for the detection of unauthorized entry or fire on protected premises, which generates an audible sound when it is activated. 
(b)	Posting of notice. Every person maintaining or using an audible alarm shall post a current notice containing the names and telephone numbers of the persons to be notified for rendering repairs or service and securing the protected premises during any hour of the day or night when the audible alarm is activated. Such notice shall be posted near the alarm in a position so that it is legible from the ground level adjacent to the location of the audible alarm. Any violation of this section shall be a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(c)	Deactivation. Any audible alarm, once activated, must be silenced within 30 minutes, either manually or by an automatic cutoff device. Any violation of this subsection shall be a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(d)	Fees and penalties for false alarms. 
(1)	The owner or lessee of any alarm shall be penalized a fee of $50.00 for each false alarm in excess of four transmitted by such device in any 12-month period, which resulted in a response by police, fire, rescue or other emergency services personnel, and shall be penalized a fee of $100.00 for each such false alarm in excess of eight transmitted by such device in any 12-month period, which resulted in a response by police, fire, rescue or other emergency services personnel. 
(2)	The discretion as to which alarms are false shall be with the town manager and the chief of police. 
(3)	The chief of police shall administer the collection of fees and penalties imposed by this section and shall promptly transmit all such fees and penalties collected to the town treasurer. 
(4)	An alarm intentionally activated by a person in violation of section 46-5 or Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212, shall not be a false alarm for the purposes of this section. 
(Code 1968, § 14-29)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; law enforcement, ch. 38. 
State Law reference- Local regulation of alarm company operators, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-28.2. 
Sec. 46-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-5 entitled "Calling or summoning ambulance or firefighting apparatus without just cause; maliciously activating fire alarms in public buildings" and derived from Code 1968, § 14-3; Ord. of 7-2-91(13), § 14-3. 
Sec. 46-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-6 entitled "Coin-operated devices; unlawful operation" and derived from Code 1968, § 14-6; Ord. of 7-2-91(11), § 14-6. 
Sec. 46-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-7 entitled "Concealing, taking possession, etc., of merchandise without paying purchase price; counseling, aiding or abetting concealment, etc." and derived from Code 1968, § 14-30. 
Sec. 46-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-8 entitled "Crossing established police lines or barricades" and derived from Code 1968, § 14-32. 
Sec. 46-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-9 entitled "Discarding or abandoning iceboxes, etc.; precautions required" and derived from Code 1968, § 14-8; Ord. of 7-2-91(9). 
Sec. 46-10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-10 entitled "Disorderly conduct in public places" and derived from Code 1968, § 14-21. 
Sec. 46-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-11 entitled "Drinking alcoholic beverages, or tendering to another, in public place; penalty" and derived from Code 1968, § 14-20; Ord. of 7-2-91(5), § 14-20. 
Sec. 46-12. - Dumping trash, etc., on public or private property. 
(a)	No person shall dump or otherwise dispose of ashes, dirt, trash, garbage, refuse, litter or other unsightly matter on public property, including a public highway, right-of-way or property adjacent to such highway or right-of-way, or on private property without the written consent of the owner thereof or his agent. 
(b)	When any person is arrested for a violation of this section, and the matter alleged to have been illegally dumped or disposed of has been ejected from a motor vehicle, the arresting officer may comply with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-936, in making such arrest. 
(c)	When a violation of the provisions of this section has been observed by any person, and the matter illegally dumped or disposed of has been ejected from a motor vehicle, the owner or operator of such motor vehicle shall be presumed to be the person ejecting such matter. However, such presumption shall be rebuttable by competent evidence. 
(d)	Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor.
(e)	The provisions of this section shall not apply to the lawful disposal of such matter in landfills. 
(Code 1968, §§ 14-19, 14-31.1, 19-2, 21-8)
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 62. 
State Law reference- Containers for deposit of litter, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1419 et seq.; allowing escape of load material, penalty, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1424; throwing or depositing certain substances upon highway, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-324; dumping trash, etc., on highway, right-of-way or private property, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-346. 
Sec. 46-13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-13 entitled "False reports to law enforcement officials" and derived from Code 1968, § 14-33. 
Sec. 46-14. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-14 entitled "Handbills, etc.; placing on poles, trees, unattended vehicles, etc.; penalty" and derived from Code 1968, § 14-19.1. 
Sec. 46-15. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-15 entitled "Indecent exposure" and derived from Code 1968, § 14-10; Ord. of 7-2-91(8), § 14-10. 
Sec. 46-16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-16 entitled "Injuring, etc., any property, monument, etc." and derived from Code 1968, § 14-14. 
Sec. 46-17. - Loitering prohibited; curfew established. 
    Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 15.1-33.4, it shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in, upon or around any public place, whether or not on private property; and it shall be unlawful for any minor who is not attended by a parent to frequent or be in any public place, whether or not on private property, at any time from 10:00 p.m. until 7:00 a.m. the following morning. 
(Code 1968, § 12-1.1)
Sec. 46-18. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-18 entitled "Obstructing justice; resisting arrest" and derived from Code 1968, § 14-18; Ord. of 7-2-91(6), § 14-18. 
Sec. 46-19. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-19 entitled "Petit larceny" and derived from Code 1968, § 14-11. 
Sec. 46-20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-20 entitled "Pool rooms, bowling alleys, etc.; when closing required" and derived from Code 1968, § 14-12. 
Sec. 46-21. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-21 entitled "Profane swearing and intoxication in public" and derived from Code 1968, § 14-2; Ord. of 7-2-91(14), § 14-2. 
Sec. 46-22. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-22 entitled "Prostitution-Aiding prostitution or illicit sexual intercourse" and derived from Code 1968, § 14-15. 
Sec. 46-23. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-23 entitled "Same-Using vehicles to promote prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse" and derived from Code 1968, § 14-16. 
Sec. 46-24. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-24 entitled "Throwing or depositing hazardous or injurious substances upon highway; removal of dropped or thrown substances" and derived from Code 1968, § 14-31. 
Sec. 46-25. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-25 entitled "Vehicle, aircraft, boat, etc.-Breaking, injuring, defacing, destroying or preventing operation" and derived from Code 1968, § 14-15. 
Sec. 46-26. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-26 entitled "Same-Entering or setting in motion" and derived from Code 1968, § 13-16. 
Sec. 46-27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-27 entitled "Same-Bona fide repossession under lien" and derived from Code 1968, § 13-17. 
Sec. 46-27.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-27.1 entitled "Vending and peddling prohibited on public property" and derived from Ord. No. 462, 4-7-92; Ord. No. 464, 4-7-92. 
Sec. 46-28. - Yard sales; annual number restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct more than four yard sales within the town in any calendar year at any household, residence or business location, or otherwise. For the purpose of this section, a 48-hour period shall constitute one yard sale. Any person violating this section shall be subject to a fine of not more than $50.00 for each offense. 
(Code 1968, § 14-28; Ord. of 1-4-2011)
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 
Sec. 46-29. - Urinating on public property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate in or on any public street, sidewalk or any other public property or private property open to the public, except in toilets open to the public. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than $250.00. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2007)
Secs. 46-30-46-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed article II, §§ 46-51-46-55 which pertained to telephones. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Secs. 46-51-46-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note-

Secs. 46-91-46-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WEAPONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Licensing of pistol dealers, § 18-83.
State Law reference- Local control of firearms, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-29.15.

Sec. 46-116. - Discharging firearms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge firearms within the town. This section shall not apply to military companies or military schools acting under permission of the town manager or to any licensed shooting gallery. For the purpose of this section, firearm shall mean any weapon in which ammunition may be used or discharged by explosion or pneumatic pressure. 
(Code 1968, § 28-1; Ord. of 5-6-2014(2))
State Law reference- Willfully discharging firearms in public places, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-280; shooting in or along road or in street, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-286. 
Sec. 46-117. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-117 entitled "Pointing or brandishing firearm or object similar in appearance" and derived from Code 1968, § 28-2. 
Sec. 46-118. - Discharging, etc., slingshots, airguns, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or use any slingshot, sling, gravel shooter, airgun, bow, crossbow or similar implement in any of the streets of the town. 
(Code 1968, § 28-3)
Sec. 46-119. - Throwing stones, etc., in streets, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw a stone or other missile in any of the streets or public places or grounds of the town. 
(Code 1968, § 28-4)
Sec. 46-120. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-120 entitled "Carrying concealed weapons prohibited; exception" and derived from Code 1968, § 28-5. 
Sec. 46-121. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-121 entitled "Furnishing pistols, dirks, etc., to minors" and derived from Code 1968, § 28-6. 
Sec. 46-122. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of May 6, 2014(2), repealed § 46-122 entitled "Selling or having in possession blackjacks, etc." and derived from Code 1968, § 28-7. 
Sec. 46-123. - Hunting prohibited in town. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt wildlife in the town by any means including, but not exclusive of firearms, slingshots, crossbow, or bow and arrow. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 3-3-98(1))
Chapter 50 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note-Pursuant to § 4 of the town charter, the following are applicable to the town: Code of Virginia, § 15.1-858 (swimming pools, lakes and other waters); Code of Virginia, § 15.1-871 (use of and damage to parks, recreational facilities, etc.); and Code of Virginia, § 15.1-874 (municipal parks, playfields, playgrounds, etc.).
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2; administration, ch. 2; animals, ch. 10; animals in parks, § 10-1; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; planning, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks, and other public places, ch. 66; definitions relating to subdivisions, § 70-1; zoning, ch. 90; definitions relating to zoning, § 90-1; purposes of zoning chapter, § 90-2.
State Law reference- Town parks and playgrounds, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-15; systems of public recreation and playgrounds, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-271 et seq.; liability of town in the operation of recreational facilities, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-291.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1-50-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARK COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2.

Sec. 50-36. - Creation; composition; appointment, term, removal and compensation of members. 
    A park commission is hereby created for the town. Such commission shall consist of five members, one of whom shall be a member of the council and the remaining four shall be qualified voters of the town. The mayor shall appoint the members of the commission and shall make appointments to fill vacancies for the unexpired terms. The term of the councilmanic member shall in all cases correspond with his term of office. The other members shall be appointed for staggered terms of four years. Any appointed member may be removed from office by a two-thirds vote of the council. The compensation of the members of the commission shall be such as the council may from time to time direct. 
(Code 1968, § 18-1)
Sec. 50-37. - Power to act as advisory body and to make recommendations. 
    The park commission is authorized and empowered to act as an advisory body and make recommendations to the council and to the department of recreation for the development of parks and playgrounds and for the beautification of the streets and other public places within the town. 
(Code 1968, § 18-2)
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66. 
Chapter 54 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; parks and recreation, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; subdivisions, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 82; zoning, ch. 90.
State Law reference- Planning, subdivision of land and zoning, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-427 et seq.; Virginia Area Development Act, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-1400 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 54-1-54-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; town manager to attend meetings of planning commission, § 2-205.

Sec. 54-36. - Creation. 
    Pursuant to state law, a planning commission for the town is hereby created. 
(Code 1968, § 15-1)
State Law reference- Creation of local planning commissions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-427.1. 
Sec. 54-37. - Composition, appointment and term of members. 
    The planning commission shall be composed of six members, who shall be appointed by the council, all of whom shall be residents of the town, qualified by knowledge and experience to make decisions on questions of community growth and development. At least one-half of the members so appointed shall be owners of real property. One member of the commission may be a member of the council, and one member may be a member of the administrative branch of government of the town. The term of each of these two members shall be coextensive with the term of office to which he has been elected or appointed unless the council, at the first regular meeting each year, appoints others to serve as their representatives. The remaining members of the commission shall serve for terms of four years each. 
(Code 1968, § 15-2)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-437. 
Sec. 54-38. - Compensation. 
    In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 15.1-437, the council may by a majority vote provide for: 
(1)	Reimbursement of actual expenses incurred by members of the commission;
(2)	Compensation to such members, or any of them, for their services; or
(3)	Both.
(Code 1968, § 15-3)
Sec. 54-39. - Removal of members. 
    Any member of the planning commission may be removed from office for malfeasance in office. 
(Code 1968, § 15-4)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-437. 
Sec. 54-40. - Filling vacancies. 
    Vacancies upon the planning commission, however caused, shall be, to conform with state law, filled by the council for the unexpired term only. 
(Code 1968, § 15-5)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-437. 
Sec. 54-41. - Functions, powers, duties and limitations. 
    The planning commission shall have the functions, powers and duties, and be subject to the limitations which are prescribed by law. 
(Code 1968, § 15-6)
State Law reference- Duties of planning commissions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-444. 
Chapter 58 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18; licensing of sale of junk, secondhand articles, etc., § 18-78 et seq.; licensing of pawnbrokers, § 18-82; zoning, ch. 90.
State Law reference- Ordinances taxing and regulating automobile graveyards and junkyards, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-28; regulation of secondhand dealers, pawnshops, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.1-866; junkyards, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-348.

Sec. 58-1. - Establishment, maintenance, etc., of junkyards, etc., exposed to weather. 
(a)	Except as provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to establish, conduct, operate or maintain, within the town, any junkyard or place of business, which is exposed to the weather, where the business of the buying, selling, collecting or storing of junk is carried on. 
(b)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Junkyard means an establishment or place of business which is maintained, operated, or used for storing, keeping, buying, or selling junk, or for the maintenance or operation of an automobile graveyard, and the term shall include garbage dumps and sanitary fills. 
(c)	This section shall not be operative upon and apply to any junkyard which was established and operating legally within the town prior to November 1, 1952, but the provisions in this subsection shall not be construed to permit any expansion or enlargement of any existing junkyard, nor shall it be construed to permit the sale, transfer or assignment of either ownership or operation of any existing junkyard, as referred to in subsection (a). 
(d)	Any violation of this code section shall be a Class 2 misdemeanor.
(Code 1968, § 19-14; Ord. of 7-1-2014(1))
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-2. - Establishment, maintenance, etc., of automobile graveyards, etc. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, conduct, operate or maintain within the town any automobile graveyard or wrecking yard where wrecked, obsolete or old automobiles, trucks, tractors and other vehicles are collected, junked, stored, dismantled or kept for sale, either assembled or unassembled. 
(b)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Automobile graveyard means any lot or place which is exposed to the weather and upon which more than five motor vehicles of any kind, incapable of being operated, and which it would not be economically practical to make operative, are placed, located or found. 
(c)	Any violation of this code section shall be a Class 2 misdemeanor.
(Code 1968, § 19-15; Ord. of 7-1-2014(1))
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 
Chapter 60 - VENDORS (SOLICITORS) 
ARTICLE I. - DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 60-1. - Definition. 
    For the purpose of this article, a solicitor is any person who goes from house to house or from place to place in the town, selling or taking orders for, or offering to sell or take orders for, goods, wares or merchandise, or any article for future delivery, or for services to be performed presently in the future or for the making, manufacturing or repairing of any article or thing for present or future delivery and who demands, accepts or receives payment or a deposit of money in advance of final delivery. A solicitor does not include, however, solicitors or hucksters of fresh farm products produced by such solicitors or hucksters, solicitors of newspapers or persons licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia under Title 38.2 of the Code of Virginia, pertaining to the sale of insurance. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2010)
Sec. 60-2. - Form and contents of orders; copy to be given to purchaser. 
    All orders taken by solicitors shall be in writing, in duplicate, stating the terms thereof, the amount paid in advance, the name, address and telephone number of the solicitor's employer and one copy shall be given to the purchaser. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2010)
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 60-3. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a solicitor within the town without first having secured a permit from the police department to do so. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2010)
Sec. 60-4. - Application. 
    Any person desiring a permit required by this division, shall make application therefor to the police department on a form to be provided by that department, stating the name and address of the applicant, the name and address of the person, firm or corporation that he represents, and the kind of goods offered for sale, or the kind of services to be performed and any other information on the applicant deemed necessary by the police department for public safety. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2010)
Sec. 60-5. - Fee. 
    The person securing a solicitor's permit shall pay a fee of $20.00 therefor to the town treasurer. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2010)
Sec. 60-6. - Term. 
    A permit issued under this division, shall be in effect for a period of one year. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2010)
Sec. 60-7. - To be carried and produced for inspection. 
    Every permit issued under this division, shall be carried at all times by the holder of the permit and shall be produced for inspection upon demand of any police officer of the town or person being solicited. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2010)
Sec. 60-7.1. - Failure to obtain permit. 
    Any violation of article 1 shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2014(2))
ARTICLE II. - COMMERCIAL SOLICITATIONS FOR CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS 

Sec. 60-8. - Exemptions from article. 
    This article shall not apply to the public solicitation of funds by the sale of tickets, tags, contributions, advertising or otherwise, for events, activities and enterprises described in section 60-9, by the regularly constituted and duly authorized members of bona fide nonprofit organizations, religious, charitable, fraternal, patriotic, political, civic, or philanthropic, where the entire funds or proceeds derived from such enterprise revert to and belong to such organization. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2010)
Sec. 60-9. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person representing or pretending to represent, directly or indirectly, or using the name of, any nonprofit, charitable, philanthropic, educational, patriotic, political or labor organization, lodge or club or any other like association or society, to solicit funds for a public dance, entertainment, charity advertising scheme or similar purposes, through the sale of tickets, tags, contributions, advertising or any other method, where such person shares or receives, directly or indirectly, any part of such fund for such solicitation and promotion, without having first procured a license to do so pursuant to the provisions of section 60-3, et seq. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2010)
Sec. 60-10. - Misrepresentations in application for license. 
    Any misrepresentation or misstatement of a required fact in an application for a license required by section 60-9 shall be sufficient ground for the withholding or revocation of the license and shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2010)
Chapter 62 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Adoption of Code of Virginia, § 15.1-857, pertaining to garbage and refuse disposal, § 4.
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; health and sanitation, ch. 34; discarding or abandoning iceboxes, etc., § 46-9; dumping trash, etc., on public or private property, § 46-12; utilities, ch. 82; supplementary zoning regulations, § 90-376 et seq.; home occupations, § 90-377.
State Law reference- Virginia Waste Management Act, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1400 et seq.; removal of trash, garbage, weeds, etc., from property, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-11; contracts for garbage and refuse pickup and disposal services, waste recovery facilities, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-28.02; ordinances requiring delivery of garbage, trash and refuse to certain facilities, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-28.03; regulation of garbage and refuse pickup and disposal services, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-28.1; mailing of summons for violation of trash ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-76.2; dumping trash, etc., on highway, right-of-way or private property, Code of Virginia, §§ 33.1-346, 33.1-346.1; dump creating fire hazard to public bridge, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-347.

ARTICLE I. - REFUSE COLLECTION 

Sec. 62-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garbage includes kitchen and table refuse, offal and every accumulation of animal and vegetable matter which attend the preparation, dealing in, and storage of food, meats, fruits, vegetables and other provisions for human subsistence. 
    Trash includes paper, rags, paper containers, wooden boxes, tin cans, glass bottles and all household wastes and yard cuttings. 
(Code 1968, § 19-1)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions for the Virginia Waste Management Act, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1400; definitions concerning litter control and recycling, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1414; definitions concerning the siting of hazardous waste facilities, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1433. 
Sec. 62-2. - Placing nuisances, etc., on premises, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place on the private premises of any person, whether his own or that of another, or to allow to remain on premises owned or occupied by him, any rubbish, wastepaper or anything dangerous, offensive or unhealthy, or to maintain or permit a nuisance of any kind on his premises. 
(Code 1968, § 19-2)
Cross reference- Nuisances, § 26-86 et seq. 
Sec. 62-3. - Placing or allowing trash where it constitutes a fire hazard. 
    Trash shall not be placed or allowed to remain where it will constitute a fire hazard. 
(Code 1968, § 19-3)
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30. 
Sec. 62-4. - Garbage to be disposed of promptly or placed in containers; setting out containers for collection, etc., of garbage; removal of containers. 
(a)	All garbage shall be disposed of promptly or placed in containers to be provided by the householder. These containers shall be placed on the curb no earlier than 5:00 p.m. the day before regular weekly collection and no later than 7:00 a.m. the day of regular collection. 
(b)	The householder shall remove the nondisposable containers from public view before sundown on such collection days. 
(Code 1968, § 19-4; Ord. of 1-8-2002; Ord. of 6-7-2011)
Sec. 62-5. - Kind of containers; protection from animals. 
    All garbage and other offensive matter shall be kept in closed containers of five- to 50-gallon capacity with a tightfitting lid or plastic or plastic-type bag containers, securely tied, and placed secure from flies, rodents, dogs and other animals. For containers with greater than 50-gallon capacity, garbage will be placed within a plastic or plastic-type bag containers, may be more than one bag, securely tied, within the greater than 50-gallon capacity container. 
(Code 1968, §§ 19-4, 19-5; Ord. of 6-7-2011)
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 10. 
Sec. 62-6. - Liquids in garbage containers. 
    Liquids shall not be poured or placed in the containers for garbage. 
(Code 1968, § 19-6)
Sec. 62-7. - Containers, etc., for trash. 
    All trash shall be placed in a container per the provisions of section 62-5 of this chapter, or made into a bundle so that it may be readily moved and carried without coming apart or spilling. 
(Code 1968, § 19-7; Ord. of 6-7-2011)
Sec. 62-8. - Removal of garbage and trash by town. 
    Garbage and trash will be removed from premises in the town by the town, or its agent, when such garbage and trash is put into containers or made into bundles as provided in this chapter. The fee for garbage and trash removal from premises shall be set by the town council. 
(Code 1968, § 19-8; Ord. of 3-4-2008; Ord. of 6-7-2011)
Sec. 62-9. - Penalty for violation; evidence of violation. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. The presence of trash or garbage on the private premises of any person or adjacent thereto shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1968, § 19-9)
Secs. 62-10-62-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CURBSIDE RECYCLING 

Sec. 62-20. - Purpose. 
    This council finds that reduction of the solid waste stream through recycling efforts is one effective means of addressing the growing problem and related escalating costs of solid waste disposal. Recycling should also aid in conservation of our nation's material resources. For these reasons, the council finds that the public interest will be better served if the following provisions are enacted to enable the town's curbside recycling program to operate as efficiently as is practicable. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2011)
Sec. 62-21. - Voluntary recycling program. 
    All curbside customers may participate in the town-wide residential recycling program by (1) collecting all of their recyclable materials, and (2) placing such materials in recycling containers in the same location and manner as refuse is placed on the designated day for collection of those materials. Recycling containers shall be removed in the same manner as refuse containers. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2011)
Sec. 62-22. - Ownership of recycling containers. 
    Title to all recycling containers provided to customers by the town or its agent shall remain with the town or its agent. In the event a customer moves, the customer shall leave the recycling container behind to be used by the next customer occupying the property being served. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2011)
Sec. 62-23. - Ownership of recyclable materials. 
    Once a customer places recyclable materials in a recycling container at a designated curbside collection point, title to those materials shall be deemed to be vested in the town or its designated agent. No person shall remove, take, collect or transport any recyclable material that has been placed in a recycling container from any curbside, street right-of-way, alley or other designated collection point without the express authority of the town. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2011)
Sec. 62-24. - Sole purpose of recycling containers. 
    No person shall use recycling containers for anything but participation in the town's curbside recycling program. No person may place garbage or other refuse in a recycling container. It shall be unlawful for any person to borrow, steal, damage or otherwise remove any recycling container from use in the curbside recycling program. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2011)
Sec. 62-25. - Additional recycling regulations. 
    The town is hereby authorized to publish, implement and enforce reasonable regulations necessary to administer the town's curbside recycling program. Such regulations shall serve as a supplement to this article. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2011)
Secs. 62-26-62-40. - Reserved. 
Chapter 66 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Adoption of Code of Virginia, § 15.1-889, pertaining to streets, sidewalks and public ways generally; Code of Virginia, § 15.1-890, pertaining to streets, highways, etc., outside the municipal corporation; and Code of Virginia, § 15.1-893, pertaining to obstructions or encroachments, § 4.
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; definitions relating to businesses, § 18-1; licensing of contracting occupations, etc., § 18-159; general powers and duties of chief of police, § 38-52; chief of police to furnish certain information to town manager, § 38-54; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; parks and recreation, ch. 50; powers of park commission, § 50-37; planning, ch. 54; subdivisions, ch. 70; streets in subdivisions, § 70-112; curbs and sidewalks in subdivisions, § 70-124 et seq.; taxation, ch. 74; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78; permits for parades and processions, § 78-12; utilities, ch. 82; vehicles for hire, ch. 86; site plans, § 90-391.
State Law reference- Authority of town to lay off streets, walks or alleys; alter, improve and light the same; and to permit the temporary use of streets for other than public purposes, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-14(1), (9); limited access streets, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-16; assessments for local improvements, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-239 et seq.; municipal streets and alleys generally, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-363 et seq., 15.1-888 et seq.; franchises, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-894; state highway plat book, Code of Virginia, § 17-69.1; state highway system, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-25 et seq.; occupation of streets, etc., without consent of corporate authorities, Code of Virginia, § 56-14; pipelines and other works in streets and alleys, Code of Virginia, § 56-257 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Plan and survey of town. 
    The survey and plan of the town, showing distinctly each lot, public street and alley therein, the size and number of lots and the width of the streets and alleys, with such explanations and remarks as deemed proper, caused to be made by the street committee of the council, pursuant to ordinance of February 9, 1921, approved by the council, entered in the record book of the council and recorded in the clerk's office of the county, shall remain in such office and be prima facie evidence of the boundaries of such lots, streets and alleys of the town. 
(Code 1968, § 21-1)
Sec. 66-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of July 1, 2014(3), repealed § 66-2 entitled "Signs, banners, etc." and derived from Code 1968, § 21-2. 
Sec. 66-3. - Removal of snow. 
    It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any building, and, where there is no occupant for the owner of such vacant lot or building or any unimproved lot of land, lying on the street, alley or public walk, within the town, where there is a paved footway or sidewalk, to permit snow to remain along the front or side of such premises longer than two hours after the same has ceased to fall, except that if the snow shall cease to fall in the nighttime, it shall be cleared away by 12:00 p.m. the following afternoon. Each violation of this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-7, and if the occupant or owner of the premises, as the case may be, fails or refuses to clean off the snow in accordance herewith, it shall be the duty of the town manager to cause such pavement or sidewalk to be cleaned at the cost of such occupant or owner. 
(Code 1968, § 21-3; Ord. of 11-6-2007; Ord. of 7-1-2014(3))
Charter reference- Adoption of Code of Virginia, § 15.1-867, pertaining to municipal powers as to removal of snow from sidewalks, § 4. 
Cross reference- Law enforcement, ch. 38. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1115. 
Sec. 66-4. - Porches, cellar doors, etc., constructed or erected in or upon sidewalk. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or erect any platform, porch, stairway, cellar door, cellarway or awning post in or upon any sidewalk or pavement. When any sidewalk or pavement having such obstruction is rebuilt, the same shall be removed. 
(b)	At those places where awning posts or cellar doors are on February 9, 1921, in any sidewalk or pavement, the same shall be permitted to remain upon condition that such awning posts be constructed of metal, designed to fit into the curb and be secured by bolts fitted into holes and leaded, and such cellar doors shall run lengthwise with the walk, extending into the same not exceeding 21/2 feet and opening towards the street, and shall remain erect when open and the hinges shall be flush with the surface of such sidewalk or pavement. 
(Code 1968, § 21-4; Ord. of 7-1-2014(3))
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 
Secs. 66-5-66-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROHIBITED AND RESTRICTED USES GENERALLY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Temporary use of streets for other than public purposes, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-14(9).

Sec. 66-36. - Placing goods, merchandise, wood, coal, etc., on street or sidewalk and permitting same to remain. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place any goods, wares or merchandise or other property, or cause the same to be placed, in or upon any street or sidewalk and permit the same to remain without first obtaining a permit from the town manager. 
(Code 1968, § 21-5; Ord. of 7-1-2014(3); Ord. of 8-5-2014)
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 
Sec. 66-37. - Manner of exposure for sale, etc., on sidewalk of goods, merchandise, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to store, keep, expose for show or sale, any goods, wares or other merchandise or property in any gutter or on or over any sidewalk, without first obtaining a permit from the town manager. This section shall not be construed to prohibit permitted mobile food vending authorized under section 66-39. 
(Code 1968, § 21-6; Ord. of 7-1-2014(3); Ord. of 8-5-2014)
Sec. 66-38. - Congregating so as to hinder passage of persons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to congregate upon any crossing or sidewalk in such manner as to hinder or obstruct the passage of other persons desiring to use the same. 
(Code 1968, § 21-7; Ord. of 8-5-2014)
Sec. 66-39. - Mobile food vending. 
    The town manager or his agent is authorized to issue mobile food vending permits to authorize the placement of a mobile food unit on public right-of-way. "Mobile food unit" means a mobile truck, chuck wagon, food trailer, food cart, or pushcart, and does not imply automobiles, trucks, or vans not designed for food preparation. The following shall apply to mobile food vending: 
(a)	A vending permit shall be revocable with or without cause at the discretion of the town manager or his agent. The permit shall be renewed annually, having the same due date as business licenses. 
(b)	Application for mobile food vending shall be made on permit forms provided by the town manager and the application packet shall include a vending site plan, the width of the sidewalk or parking space utilized, dimensions and a photograph of the unit, a diagram of signage to be utilized, certificate of insurance, and copy of a permit issued by the health department. 
(c)	The mobile food vendor shall conform to town requirements pertaining to business license, meals tax, and other applicable fees and taxes required to operate a food business within the town limits. An applicable permit fee shall accompany the application, and is subject to change. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2014)
Sec. 66-40. - Mobile food vending requirements. 
    Mobile food vending sites shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)	A mobile food vending site shall be located no closer than 100 feet from any public entrance to an eating establishment. 
(b)	Where vending occurs on a sidewalk, at least 36 inches shall remain unobstructed. Business conducted at the mobile food vending location shall not cause the obstruction of vehicular or pedestrian passage. 
(c)	The mobile food unit shall be accompanied by an approved trash receptacle and the area around the unit shall be kept free of trash. Publicly-owned trash receptacles are not approved for use by mobile food vendors. 
(d)	The mobile food unit shall abide by all parking requirements and time limitations.
(e)	Vending transactions shall be limited to pedestrians.
(f)	In the case of an emergency, the mobile food unit shall be removed at the request of a police officer or other emergency official. 
(g)	Radio or sound-amplifying devices, flashing signs, sale of merchandise other than food, water, sewer, electrical, or gas connection to a building or other public utility, or the discharge of pollutants to include waste, grease, liquid, gray water, or debris are prohibited. Signage and appearance of the mobile food vending unit shall be appropriate for the neighborhood in which it is operating. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2014)
Secs. 66-41-66-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 66-66. - Permit required. 
    No person, unless specially authorized by the council, shall take up or remove any portion of the surface of the sidewalk or street, or excavate in any public street of the town, without a written permit from the town manager, who shall not refuse such permit to any applicant except for cause, but in case of refusal the applicant may appeal to the council. 
(Code 1968, § 21-9)
Sec. 66-67. - Deposits; acquiescence in provisions of article. 
(a)	Before a permit as required in section 66-66 is granted, the town manager may require a deposit sufficient to pay for resurfacing the street to be disturbed, the amount of such deposit to be determined by the town manager. 
(b)	Every person who shall make application for such a permit shall be deemed to have assented thereby to all the provisions and terms of this article, including the right of the town to collect the actual cost of replacing the pavement, sidewalk or street surface in the manner above directed. 
(Code 1968, § 21-10)
Sec. 66-68. - Duty to prosecute work without delay. 
    It shall be the duty of every person to whom a permit, as required in section 66-66, shall have been granted, to institute at once and prosecute without delay the work for which such permit was obtained, and promptly on its completion to give written notice thereof to the town manager. 
(Code 1968, § 21-11)
Sec. 66-69. - Replacing surface. 
    No pavement, sidewalk or street surface shall be replaced, after being taken up pursuant to a permit as required in section 66-66, by any person except under the direction of the town manager. If the applicant fails to resurface the street disturbed promptly and in a manner approved by the town manager, the town manager is authorized to cause such work to be done at the expense of the applicant. 
(Code 1968, § 21-12)
Sec. 66-70. - Guarding by lights and barriers; responsible for damages caused by excavation. 
    Any person to whom a permit, as required in section 66-66, is granted shall place guards or barriers around the excavation in question and shall protect it by warning lights at night, and shall be responsible for damages to persons or property caused by such excavations until taken in charge by the town manager. 
(Code 1968, § 21-13)
Sec. 66-71. - Article not applicable to work done by town. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to work done by town forces under the supervision of the town manager. 
(Code 1968, § 21-14)
Secs. 66-72-66-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 66-80. - Imposition of public rights-of-way use fee. 
    There is imposed upon all certificated providers of telecommunications service occupying the public rights-of-way of the town, a fee in accordance with Code of Virginia of 1950, § 56-468.1, as amended. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2001)
Chapter 70 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; planning, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 82; zoning, ch. 90; general district provisions for F-C floodplain conservation district, § 90-336; signs in residential districts, § 90-383.
State Law reference- Codification of subdivision ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37.3; land subdivision and development, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-465 et seq.; Virginia Public Records Act, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-76 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Administrator means the representative of the town council who has been appointed by the town council to serve as the agent of the council for the administration of this chapter. The administrator may be, but is not limited to, the town clerk or the town manager, town superintendent, town secretary, etc., if officially designated as such. 
    Alley means a permanent service way providing a secondary means of vehicular access to the side or rear of abutting properties and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Applicant means the owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his representative authorized in writing; a subdivider. 
    Architect means a person licensed to practice as such in the state. 
    Arterial means a road designated as such by the state department of transportation. 
    Bearings means an angular direction measured from one position to another using reference lines. 
    Block means a tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways or boundary lines of municipalities. 
    Bond means any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, property or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the governing body. All bonds shall be approved by the town's attorney whenever a bond is required by this chapter. 
    Building means any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind, including any structure. 
    Building, main means a building or structure in which the principal use of a lot is carried out. 
    Building (setback) line means the minimum distance of a building from the front boundary line or front lot line. 
    Clerk means the clerk of the circuit court of the county. 
    Collector road means a road determined by the state department of transportation as being a collector road. 
    Commission means the planning commission of the town. 
    Comprehensive plan means the town's comprehensive plan. 
    Council means the town council. 
    Cul-de-sac means a local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate turnaround for a safe and convenient reverse traffic movement. 
    Dedication means the deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for any general or public use, reserving to himself no other rights than those that are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property has been devoted. 
    Easement means an authorization by a property owner of any designated part of his property for use by another for a specified purpose. 
    Endorsement means the application of the reviewing or approving authority's stamp and the signature of the appropriate authority on the record plat. 
    Engineer means a person licensed to practice as such in the state. 
    Final plat means the final map or plan of a subdivision and any accompanying material, as described in this chapter. 
    Functional classification means a classification of roads, established by the state department of transportation to determine the function of such roads. 
    Governing body means the town council. 
    Grade means the slope of a road, street or other right-of-way, specified in percentage terms. 
    Half street means a street, generally parallel to and adjacent to a property line, having a lesser right-of-way width than normally required. 
    Health department means the health department of the state. 
    Health officer means the legally designated health authority of the state health department for the county, or his authorized representative. 
    Highway engineer means the resident engineer for the county, employed by the state department of transportation. 
    Highway, limited access, means a freeway or expressway providing a trafficway for through traffic, in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other persons having no legal right to access to or from the same, except at such points and in such manner as may be determined by the state department of transportation. 
    Improvements means all required utilities and facilities as specified in this chapter, including, but not limited to, streets, storm and sanitary sewers and water lines. 
    Individual onsite sewage disposal system means a septic tank, seepage tile sewage disposal system or any other sewage treatment device approved by the state health department. 
    Joint ownership of any type among persons is construed as the same owner. 
    Jurisdiction means the area or territory subject to the legislative control of the governing body. 
    Land surveyor means a person licensed to practice as such in the state. 
    Landscape architect means a person licensed to practice as such in the state. 
    Local road means a road so designated by the state department of transportation. 
    Lot means a tract, plot or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit for the purpose of transfer of ownership or for building development. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection; the shortest side fronting upon a street shall be considered the front of the lot, and the longest side fronting upon a street shall be considered the side of the lot. 
    Lot, depth of, means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot of record means a lot which has been recorded among the land records in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the county. 
    Lot, reverse frontage, means an interior lot having frontage on two streets. 
    Lot, width of, means the mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines. 
    Main building. See "building, main." 
    Monument means a permanent steel pin or iron identifying marker meeting the requirements and specifications of this chapter (see section 7-123). 
    Owner means any person having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided under this chapter. 
    Partial street. See "half street." 
    Performance bond means a bond with surety or cash deposit, approved by the governing body and town attorney, in an amount equal to the full cost of improvements required by this chapter and providing for completion of such improvements within a definite period. See "bond." 
    Planning commission means the planning commission of the town. 
    Plat includes the terms "map," "plot," "replat" or "replot" and means a map or plan of a tract or parcel of land which is to be or which has been subdivided. When used as a verb, "plat" is synonymous with "subdivide." 
    Preliminary plat means the preliminary drawings, described in this chapter, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the planning commission for preliminary approval. 
    Property means any tract, lot or parcel of land, or several of the same collected together for the purpose of subdividing. 
    Public improvement means any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian-way, tree, offstreet parking area, lot improvement or other facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation or which may affect an improvement for which local government responsibility is established. All such improvements shall be properly bonded if required. 
    Record plat means the copy of the final plat which contains the original endorsements of the planning commission and the town council and which is intended to be recorded with and meets the requirements of the county clerk of the circuit court. 
    Resubdivision means a change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat if such change affects any street layout on such map or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line thereon; or if it affects any map or plan legally recorded as a subdivision prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions. 
    Reverse frontage lot. See "lot, reverse frontage." 
    Right-of-way means a strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees or for another special use. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes means that every right-of-way established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, shade trees or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on which each right-of-way is established. 
    Road is defined as a street. 
    Sale or lease means any present or future transfer of ownership, or possessory interest in land, including contract of sale, lease, devise, intestate succession or transfer, of an interest in a subdivision or part thereof, whether by metes and bounds, deed, contract, plat, map, lease, devise, intestate succession or other written instrument. 
    Setback. See "building (setback) line." 
    Sketch plat means a sketch preparatory to the preparation of the preliminary plat to enable the applicant to save time and expense in reaching general agreement with the planning commission as to the form of the plat and the objectives of this chapter. 
    Street means a strip of land, other than private driveways serving a single structure, subject to vehicular or pedestrian traffic, providing means of access to property; also designated as "road," "lane," "drive," "avenue," "right-of-way," "highway," "boulevard," "trail," "court," "place," "terrace," etc. 
    Street of record means any street shown on any subdivision plat recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court, whether such street is constructed or not. 
    Street or alley, public use of, means the unrestricted use of a specified area or right-of-way for ingress and egress to two or more abutting properties. 
    Street, service drive, means a public right-of-way generally parallel with and contiguous to a major highway, primarily designed to promote safety by eliminating pernicious ingress and egress to the major highway right-of-way by providing safe and orderly points of access to the major highway. 
    Street width means the total width of the strip of land dedicated or reserved for public travel, including roadway, curb and gutter, sidewalks, planting strips and, where necessary, utility easements. 
    Structure. See "building." 
    Subdivide means to create new lots to establish a subdivision. 
    Subdivider means a person owning any tract, lot or parcel of land to be subdivided or a group of two or more persons owning any tract, lot or parcel of land to be subdivided who have given their power of attorney to one of their group or to another individual or entity to act on their behalf in planting, negotiating for, representing or executing the legal requirements of the subdivision regulations; the applicant. 
    Subdivision means the division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels of less than three acres each for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development or, if a new street is involved in such division, any division of a parcel of land. The term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. 
    Subdivision agent means any person who represents or acts for or on behalf of a subdivider or applicant in selling, leasing or developing, or offering to sell, lease or develop, any interest, lot, parcel, unit, site or plat in a subdivision, except an attorney at law whose representation of another person consists solely of rendering legal services. 
    Surveyor means a person licensed as such by the state. 
    Town engineer means the individual designated and employed as the town engineer. 
    U. S. C. & G. means the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey. 
(Code 1968, § 22-2)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2; parks and recreation, ch. 50. 
State Law reference- Definitions relating to planning, subdivision of land and zoning, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-430, 15.1-465. 
Sec. 70-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
(a)	The purpose of this chapter is to establish certain subdivision standards and procedure for the town as provided for by the Code of Virginia. 
(b)	These articles are part of a long range plan to guide and facilitate the orderly, beneficial growth of the community and to promote the public health, safety, convenience, comfort and general welfare. More specifically, the purposes of these standards and procedures are to provide a guide for the change that occurs when land becomes urban in character as a result of development for residential, business or industrial purposes; to provide assurance that the purchasers of lots are buying a commodity that is suitable for development and use; and to make possible the provision of public services in a safe, adequate and efficient manner. 
(Code 1968, § 22-1)
State Law reference- Adoption of ordinance to assure the orderly subdivision of land and its development, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-465. 
Secs. 70-3-70-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SUBMISSION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Administration and enforcement of subdivision ordinance, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-466(A)(9), 15.1-474; statutory provisions effective after ordinance adopted, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-473; plat of proposed subdivision and site plans to be submitted for approval, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-475.

Sec. 70-36. - Generally. 
(a)	Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any contract is made for the sale of any part thereof and before any permit for the erection of a structure in such proposed subdivision shall be granted, the applicant, or his agent authorized in writing, shall apply for and secure approval and endorsement of such proposed subdivision, and such subdivision shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court. 
(b)	The town shall not approve the subdivision of land if, from adequate investigations conducted by all public agencies concerned in accordance with this chapter, it has been determined that in the best interest of the public the site is not suitable for platting and development purposes of the kind proposed. Provisions of this chapter shall be relied upon to determine suitability. 
(c)	Land within a 100-year floodplain or known to be subject to flooding and land deemed to be topographically or geologically unsuitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy, or for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property or aggravate erosion. Such land within the subdivision shall be set aside on the plat for such uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or erosion and shall not produce conditions contrary to the public welfare. 
(d)	All plans for the subdivision of land within the corporate limits and within a distance of two miles from the corporate limits shall be reviewed by the town planning commission and other town, state or other officials as deemed necessary and shall be approved or disapproved by the town council in accordance with procedures specified in this chapter. The provisions and requirements of this chapter shall apply to and control all land subdivisions which have not been recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court in and for the county prior to December 1, 1977; provided, that any change in a recorded plat shall constitute a resubdivision and shall make such plat subject to the regulations in this chapter. 
(e)	The town manager shall collect a nonrefundable filing fee for the filing of all preliminary plats, together with the respective application and the town manager shall also collect a nonrefundable filing fee for the filing of all final plats, together with the respective application. All filing fees shall be established by general ordinance enacted by the town council by recorded vote as the town council shall deem appropriate from time to time. Such filing fees shall be for the administration and enforcement of the subdivision ordinances of the town and shall be reasonable fees for inspection of facilities as required to be installed by the subdivision ordinances of the town. Such fees and charges shall in no instance exceed an amount commensurate with the services rendered taking into consideration the time, skill and administrator's expense involved. All such fees and charges heretofore made are hereby validated. 
(f)	The division of land into two parcels (one- and two-lot subdivision), and the abandoning of lot lines where there is not dedication of land to public use other than widening of an existing right-of-way, may be approved by the administrator. Such administratively approved division of the original parcel or newly created parcel shall not be an attempt to circumvent this chapter. In the event that a plan for subdivision is disapproved by the administrator, the subdivider may appeal to the planning commission and town council who then may override the decision of the administrator and approve said plat. 
(Code 1968, § 22-3; Ord. of 7-2-91(3); Ord. of 12-4-2007)
Cross reference- Erosion and sediment control, § 26-26 et seq.; F-C floodplain conservation district, § 90-296 et seq. 
State Law reference- Drainage and flood control, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-466(A)(3). 
Sec. 70-37. - Optional sketch plat. 
(a)	Generally. The applicant may, if he so chooses, submit to the administrator a sketch plat of the proposed subdivision prior to his preparation of engineering preliminary and final plats. The purpose of such sketch is to permit the administrator and town planning commission to advise the applicant whether his plans, in general, are in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. The commission, upon submission of any sketch plat, shall study it and advise the applicant wherein it appears that changes would be necessary. The commission may mark the sketch plat indicating necessary changes, and any such marked copy shall be returned to the subdivider. Plats shall fully comply with requirements of section 70-76. 
(b)	Form. Official submission of the sketch plat by the applicant to the administrator shall consist of the following: 
(1)	Two legible blackline or blueline paper prints, which may be prepared in ink or pencil, of the sketch plat shall be required for this optional submission. 
(2)	Two completed copies of the application for approval of the sketch subdivision plat shall be available at the office of the administrator. 
(c)	Effect. A sketch plat shall be considered a submission for informal discussion between the applicant and the town. Submission of a sketch plat shall not constitute official submission of a plat to the town. 
(d)	Review by planning commission. 
(1)	When a sketch plat has been submitted to the administrator, the plat shall be reviewed by the town planning commission at its next scheduled meeting; provided, that such submission has occurred no less than seven calendar days prior to the scheduled meeting. 
(2)	Such submission shall include application forms available at the office of the administrator.
(3)	The planning commission shall study the sketch plat, taking into consideration the requirements of this chapter (see article IV) and the best use of the land being subdivided. Particular attention will be given to the arrangement, location and width of streets, their relation to the topography of the land, sewage disposal, drainage, lot sizes and lot arrangement, the further development of adjoining lands as yet unsubdivided, the guidelines for the town comprehensive plan and the requirements of other plans and ordinances as adopted by the town. 
(4)	The planning commission may seek the advice of other officials or consultants in reviewing a sketch plat. 
(5)	Within seven calendar days after the meeting at which the sketch plat is reviewed by the town planning commission, the administrator shall send written notice of the planning commission's action, including changes or modifications, and what environmental protection analyses, plans, development controls or other information it may require as a condition for approval of later subdivision plat submissions. Such notice shall be sent to the applicant or his agent and the town council. The planning commission or town council may require additional changes as a result of further study of the subdivision at the time of submission and review of preliminary or final plats. 
(Code 1968, § 22-4)
State Law reference- Local planning commission, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-427.1 et seq., 15.1-437 et seq. 
Sec. 70-38. - Preliminary plat-Submission. 
(a)	Generally. Copies of the preliminary plat and all required supporting data shall be officially submitted to the administrator by the applicant or his representative authorized in writing to submit the plat. The preliminary plat shall be considered the first official submission of a plat for subdivision. If a sketch plat has not been submitted, the subdivider should confer with the administrator or planning commission as to the proper procedure for filing and obtaining approval of plats. Plats shall fully comply with the requirements of sections 70-77 through 70-79. The subdivider should also contact the town engineer to obtain design and construction standards for roads and drainage, the department of health regarding water and sewer system design standards, or the state water control board concerning public sewage system design standards. 
(b)	Form. Official submission of the preliminary plat by the applicant to the administrator shall consist of: 
(1)	Four completed copies of the application for review of preliminary subdivision plat, available at the office of the administrator. 
(2)	Ten legible blackline or blueline paper prints of the preliminary plat as described in this chapter. 
(3)	Ten copies of all other information as required by section 70-79. 
(c)	Distribution by administrator. Three copies of blackline or blueline prints shall be sent to the town planning commission, three copies to the state department of transportation or the town engineer and four copies to the state health department (county office). 
(Code 1968, § 22-5; Ord. of 7-2-91(2))
Sec. 70-39. - Same-Review. 
(a)	When a preliminary plat drawn in accordance with sections 70-77 through 70-79 has been officially submitted, such plat shall be reviewed by the town planning commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting, provided such submission has occurred no less than seven calendar days prior to such meeting. At the discretion of the planning commission the plat may be reviewed at a special meeting. 
(b)	During review of the preliminary plat, the town planning commission shall seek the advice of the town zoning administrator, if applicable, the health department, the state department of transportation, the town engineer and other officials or consultants as required, before making its decision on the plat. Such review shall ensure that the preliminary plat is in accordance with the requirements of this chapter (see article IV), the streets in the proposed subdivision are designed to fit into the existing street system and no harmful effects are created for the present and future residents of the town. All subdivisions shall be reviewed considering the policies of the town comprehensive plan and the requirements and recommendations of all the plans, this Code and other ordinances of the town. 
(c)	If the preliminary plat is approved or disapproved, or the commission deems changes or modifications of the plat submitted are advisable or necessary in the public interest, such decision, the reasons therefor and the sections of this chapter or other ordinances relied upon shall be put in written form by the administrator. Such notice shall be sent to the following: 
(1)	The applicant or his agent.
(2)	The town council.
(3)	The town engineer or the highway resident engineer.
(d)	Such report shall be only a notification of planning commission activity to the governing body. Such report may also include an estimate of the cost of construction of all improvements as required by this chapter and the amount of the performance bond which may be required as a prerequisite for approval of the final subdivision plat (section 70-40(c)(3)(e)). In determining the cost of required improvements and the amount of the performance bond, the commission may consult with a duly licensed engineer, who shall prepare this data for the commission, or may require an estimate of the cost of improvements, prepared and certified by a duly licensed engineer, to be furnished by the applicant. 
(e)	One copy of the plat with all comments shall be maintained for the permanent records of the town, and one copy shall be sent to the applicant or his agent. 
(f)	The town planning commission shall render its decision and communicate it to the applicant no later than 45 days after application for review is officially reviewed for the first time by the commission at its meeting. Failure of the planning commission to render such a decision and communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner required shall be deemed an approval, unless the town requests an extension of time and the applicant has agreed, in writing, to such extension. 
(g)	If the planning commission requires changes to the preliminary plat, the planning commission shall approve or disapprove the plat at its next regularly scheduled meeting, provided such changes are made to the satisfaction of the planning commission, and communicate such decision forthwith; provided, that the resubmission has occurred no less than seven days prior to such meeting. 
(h)	Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute acceptance of a subdivision for recording and does not constitute a guarantee of approval of the final plat. Approval is only an expression of approval of a general plan to be used in preparing the final subdivision plat for final approval and recording upon fulfillment of all requirements of this chapter. 
(i)	When a preliminary plat has been approved or approved subject to conditions, no subsequent changes or amendment in the zoning, subdivision or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied to adversely affect the right of the applicant to commence and to complete any item for which the approval was granted. If such ordinance is amended after preliminary approval of such plat, the plat will be rendered nonconforming and will be subject to all requirements placed on such nonconformities. 
(Code 1968, § 22-6)
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 90. 
Sec. 70-40. - Final plat-Submission. 
(a)	Within one year of town planning commission approval of the preliminary plat, a final plat shall be officially submitted to the administrator. However, an extension of time may be granted by the planning commission upon written request. Final plats submitted after this expiration of time, for which no time extension has been granted, shall be considered as new preliminary plats, and subject to all regulations in effect at the time of submission. The final plat shall conform in all respects to the preliminary plat as previously reviewed by the town planning commission and shall incorporate all modifications required by the town in its review of the preliminary plat. 
(b)	Copies of the final plat and all required supporting data shall be officially submitted to the administrator by the applicant or his representative authorized in writing to submit the plat. Plats should fully comply with the requirements of section 70-80. 
(c)	Official submission of the final plat by the applicant to the administrator shall consist of: 
(1)	Four completed copies of the application for review of final subdivision plat, available in the office of the administrator. 
(2)	Ten legible blackline or blueline paper prints of the final plat, which shall comply with this chapter. 
(3)	Ten copies of all other required information, including, but not limited to, the following, if applicable: 
a.	All offers of dedication, and covenants governing the reservation and maintenance of undedicated open space, which shall bear the certificate of approval of the town attorney as to their legal sufficiency. 
b.	Such deed restrictions as may be imposed upon the property as a condition of sale, together with a statement of any restrictions previously imposed which may affect the title to the land being subdivided. 
c.	Certificate of appropriate approval by of the state health department or state water control board, when required for the water supply or sanitary sewage disposal system for a proposed subdivision. If individual onsite sewage disposal systems are to be used, the applicant shall submit tentative approval by the health department of each lot in the subdivision as having a suitable site for a septic system at the stated lot size. This shall be done on a lot by lot basis. This tentative approval does not guarantee the issuance of a permit for a septic system when construction occurs. The state health department reserves the right to withdraw any tentative approval at the time a permit for a septic system is applied for. 
d.	Approval of the state department of transportation or the town engineer of roads and drainage systems. 
e.	The performance bond, if required, in a form satisfactory to the town attorney and in an amount established by the planning commission upon recommendation of a designated engineer, and including a provision that the principal of the bond shall comply with all the terms of the final subdivision plat approval as determined by the town, including, but not limited to, the performance of all required subdivision and offsite improvements or parts thereof. All improvements and land included in the irrevocable offer of dedication shall be dedicated to the town free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the premises (see section 70-111). 
(Code 1968, § 22-7; Ord. of 12-4-2007)
State Law reference- Final plat, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-466(A)(5). 
Sec. 70-41. - Same-Review. 
(a)	By planning commission. 
(1)	When a final plat drawn in accordance with article III of this chapter has been officially submitted, such plat shall be reviewed by the town planning commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting, provided such submission has occurred no less than seven calendar days prior to such meeting. At the discretion of the planning commission, the plat may be reviewed at a special meeting. 
(2)	The planning commission shall ensure that all requirements of this chapter (see article IV) and other town ordinances are met and that appropriate changes to the preliminary plat have been made, as required by the planning commission. 
(3)	If the review is favorable, the planning commission shall authorize its chairman, with the secretary so attesting, to endorse the record plat and one other paper print with "Reviewed and Approved by the Town Planning Commission," together with the date of such action, record such action in the minutes and forward such plat to the town council. 
(4)	The record plat and one other paper print shall be forwarded to the town council.
(5)	If the final plat is not approved, the reasons for such disapproval shall be transmitted in writing to the town council. Such disapproval shall be forwarded with the final plat for review by the town council. 
(b)	By town council. 
(1)	The town council shall not approve any plats until such plats comply with all town ordinances or until such modifications are made as needed. If not approved, the council shall return the plat to the subdivider with the deficiencies indicated thereon. 
(2)	Before acting on a final plat, the council may arrange for a public hearing with notice as provided for in Code of Virginia, § 15.1-431. 
(3)	If the town council approves the final plat, the record plat shall be endorsed "Approved by the Town Council of the Town of Woodstock" and signed by the mayor and the town manager, together with the date of action. 
(4)	A performance guarantee, cash or other bond or a certificate of satisfactory installation of improvements as required shall be submitted before the final plat is finally approved and endorsed (see section 70-111). 
(5)	The town council shall communicate the result of its review of the final plat to the applicant or his agent and the planning commission no later than 60 days after the application to review the plat was officially submitted for approval at the planning commission's review meeting. 
(6)	Should the town not comply with subsection (b)(5) of this section, the applicant may take action in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 15.1-475. 
(Code 1968, § 22-8)
Sec. 70-42. - Same-Recording. 
(a)	After approval by the town council and with all endorsements indicated on the record plat, the subdivider shall record his record plat in the office of the clerk of the circuit court. No subdivision plat may be legally recorded unless it bears the town approval. 
(b)	Such plat shall be filed and recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court where deeds are admitted to record for the lands contained in the plat and indexed in the general index to deeds under the names of the owners of lands signing such plat and under the name of the subdivision. 
(c)	Any plat not recorded within six months after final approval by the town council shall be considered void, and such approval shall be considered withdrawn. 
(d)	The recordation of such plat shall operate to transfer, in fee simple, to the town such portion of the premises platted as is on such plat set apart for streets, alleys or other public use and to transfer to the town any easement indicated on such plat to create a public right of passage over the same, but nothing contained in this section shall affect any right of a subdivider of land heretofore validly reserved; provided, that where the authorized officials of the town approve, in accordance with this chapter, a plat or replat of land therein, upon the recording of such plat or replat in the clerk's office wherein land records are maintained, all rights-of-way, easements or other interest of the town in the land included on the plat or replat, except as shown thereon, shall be terminated and extinguished; except, that an interest acquired by the town by condemnation or by purchase for valuable consideration and evidenced by a separate instrument of record shall not be affected thereby. 
(Code 1968, § 22-9)
State Law reference- Filing of plat for recordation, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-466(A)(8). 
Secs. 70-43-70-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPECIFICATIONS FOR PLATS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Plat details required, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-466(A)(1).

Sec. 70-76. - Sketch plat. 
(a)	The sketch plat of a proposed subdivision shall be clearly and legibly drawn on white paper, or on a print of a topographic map of the property, at a scale of between one inch equals one foot and one inch equals 100 feet. If the sketch plat requires more than one sheet, a key diagram showing relative location of the several sections shall be drawn on each sheet. 
(b)	The sketch plat shall include, when deemed necessary by the administrator, the following information, which shall be generally in accordance with the standards in article IV of this chapter where applicable. The subdivider should communicate with the administrator before submission of the sketch plat to determine which of the following information will be required: 
(1)	Name of subdivision, name of property or other identifying title.
(2)	Name, address and telephone number of legal owner or agent of property.
(3)	Display of any existing legal rights-of-way or easements affecting the property, including names and widths of existing streets. 
(4)	Existing covenants on the property, if any.
(5)	Name, address and telephone number of persons responsible for subdivision design, design of improvements and boundary surveys. 
(6)	Tract boundaries accurately labeled.
(7)	Name of municipality in which subdivision is located.
(8)	North point, scale (written and graphic) and date.
(9)	Names of adjoining property owners.
(10)	Significant topographical and physical features (water sources, wooded areas, etc.).
(11)	Proposed general street and lot layout, with approximate dimensions.
(12)	A vicinity map, drawn to a scale of between one inch equals 250 feet and one inch equals 2,000 feet, with sufficient information to locate the property in relation to all streets (showing names) and municipal boundaries within 1,000 feet of all subdivision boundaries. 
(13)	Preliminary proposals for connection with existing water supply and sanitary sewerage systems, or alternative means of providing water supply and sanitary waste treatment and disposal; preliminary provisions for collecting and discharging surface water drainage. 
(14)	The approximate location and area of all parcels of land proposed to be set aside for nonresidential use, such as park or playground use or other public use, or for the use of property owners in the proposed subdivision. 
(15)	Whenever the sketch plat does not cover an applicant's holdings which touch the property being subdivided, the applicant shall submit, at the scale of between one inch equals one foot and one inch equals 250 feet, a sketch in pen or pencil of the proposed subdivision area, together with its proposed street system and an indication of the probable future street and drainage system of the remaining portion of the tract. 
(Code 1968, § 22-10)
Sec. 70-77. - Preliminary plat-Preparation. 
(a)	The preliminary plat shall be prepared at a scale of between one inch equals one foot and one inch equals 100 feet and may be prepared in either pen or pencil. The sheets shall be numbered in sequence for filing in the office of the recorder of deeds, but in no instance shall a sheet be less than 18 inches by 24 inches. The preliminary plat may also be used for the final subdivision plat. Preparation in pencil will make required changes and additions easier. 
(b)	The preliminary plat shall be drawn and certified as follows:
(1)	Every plat intended for recording shall be prepared by a surveyor or engineer duly licensed by the state, who shall endorse upon each plat a certificate signed by him setting forth the source of the title of the land subdivided and the place of record of the last instrument in the chain of title. When the plat is of land acquired from more than one source of title, the outlines of the several tracts shall be indicated upon such plat, within an inset block or by means of a dotted boundary line upon the plat. 
(2)	Every such plat or deed of dedication to which the plat is attached shall contain, in addition to the professional engineer's or land surveyor's certificate, a statement as follows: "The platting or dedication of the following described land (here insert a correct description of the land subdivided) is with the free consent and in accordance with the desires of the undersigned owners, proprietors, and trustees, if any." The statement shall be signed (on the final plat) by such persons and duly acknowledged before some officer authorized to take acknowledgement of deeds. 
(Code 1968, § 22-11)
State Law reference- Requisites of plat, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-476; statement of consent to subdivision, execution, acknowledgment and recordation, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-477. 
Sec. 70-78. - Same-Required information. 
    The preliminary plat shall show the following information, in accordance with the standards in article IV of this chapter when applicable: 
(1)	Date, including the month, day and year that the original drawings were completed and the month, day and year that the original drawing was revised, for each revision. 
(2)	True north point, scale (written and graphic) and name of subdivision.
(3)	Name, address and telephone number of recorded owner and applicant.
(4)	Name and address of registered engineer or surveyor responsible for the subdivision plat, surveys and design of improvements. 
(5)	Names of all owners of land next to each boundary of the land being subdivided and the names of all subdivisions, if any, next to the project being considered, with the book and page number where each is recorded. 
(6)	A vicinity map for the purpose of locating the property being subdivided, drawn at a scale of between one inch equals 250 feet and one inch equals 2,000 feet, and showing the relation of the property, set apart by tone or pattern, to adjoining property and to all streets and municipal boundaries within 1,000 feet of each subdivision boundary, giving the names of each such street. The name of the municipality in which the subdivision is located shall also be shown. 
(7)	Total tract boundaries, with dimensions, of the property being subdivided, showing bearings and a statement of total acreage of the property. 
(8)	Zoning data, including all of the following which are applicable:
a.	Existing town zoning district designations and any zoning district boundary lines going through or touching the boundary of the proposed subdivision. 
b.	Any changes in the existing zoning to be requested by the applicant.
(9)	Contour lines at vertical intervals of two feet. Locations and elevation of the data to which contour elevations refer shall be the closest U. S. C. & G. established benchmark, or an established benchmark approved by the town. 
(10)	All water and sewer lines, fire hydrants, utility transmission lines, culverts, bridges, railroads, quarries, strip mines, watercourses, tree masses, rock outcrops and other significant manmade or natural features within the proposed subdivision and within 500 feet from the boundaries of the proposed subdivision. 
(11)	All existing streets, including streets of record, easements and rights-of-way, including names, right-of-way widths, pavement widths and approximate grades of such streets or rights-of-way on or abutting the tract. 
(12)	Existing covenants on the property.
(13)	The full plan of proposed development, including:
a.	Location, width and names of all streets, easements and rights-of-way, with a statement of any conditions governing their use, and functional classification of each with dimensions. 
b.	Setback lines along each street.
c.	Lot lines with dimensions.
d.	Lot numbers and statement of number of lots and parcels. All lots within each block shall be numbered consecutively. 
e.	A statement of the intended use of all nonresidential lots and parcels.
f.	Location of water supply, sanitary or storm sewers and other drainage facilities, with the size and material of each indicated, and any proposed connections with existing facilities. 
g.	Areas proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public use, with any conditions governing such use, dedication or reservation. 
h.	Blocks, consecutively numbered or lettered in alphabetical order. The blocks in numbered additions to subdivisions bearing the same name shall be numbered or lettered consecutively throughout the several additions. 
i.	The 100-year floodplain line.
j.	Municipal boundaries which cut through the subdivision, showing the names of municipalities, if applicable. 
(14)	The location of all proposed monuments.
(Code 1968, § 22-12)
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; zoning, ch. 90. 
Sec. 70-79. - Same-Supplementary data and environmental protection analyses. 
(a)	The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by the following supplementary data shown in accordance with standards in article IV of this chapter as applicable: 
(1)	Street cross section drawings for all proposed streets, showing depth and type of base, type of surface, etc. Cross section drawings may be shown on either the preliminary plat or on separate profile sheets and show tentative profiles along the top of pavement edges or along the top of curb for both sides of each proposed street. Such profiles shall show existing and proposed grades. Information as required by the state department of transportation or the town engineer shall be submitted. Such information shall be submitted to the state department of transportation or the town engineer by the administrator. 
(2)	Where deemed necessary by the town planning commission, the town council, the state department of transportation or the town engineer, a plan for the surface drainage of the tract to be subdivided shall be shown. Such plan shall include stormwater runoff calculations for the entire property being subdivided, as well as the anticipated runoff of areas of higher elevation in the same watershed, and shall show the proposed method of accommodating the anticipated runoff. Such plan shall also show a complete drainage layout, including all pipe sizes and types, drainage easements and the means of transporting the drainage to a well-defined open stream which is considered natural drainage. Drainage computation for the appropriate drainage structures shall also be included. 
(3)	Preliminary designs of any bridges or culverts which may be required. Such designs shall meet all applicable requirements of appropriate state and local agencies and shall be submitted to such agencies by the administrator. 
(4)	Where a preliminary plat shows the proposed subdivision of only a part of the applicant's total property, a sketch may be required showing the prospective street system in the remainder of the property, so that the street system in the submitted portion may be considered in relation to future connections with the unsubmitted portion. To prevent undue hardship in the case of extremely large properties, the town planning commission may, based on existing natural or manmade features, delimit the area for which a prospective street system may be sketched. 
(b)	The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by the following environmental protection analyses where applicable: 
(1)	Erosion and sediment control plans.
(2)	Topsoil control plans.
(3)	Floodplain preservation plans.
(4)	Storm drainage.
(c)	The cost of all supplementary data required in this section, including, but not exclusive of, engineering studies and reviews required by the town to verify the feasibility of the applicant's proposed plan, shall be borne by the applicant. 
(Code 1968, § 22-13)
Sec. 70-80. - Final plat. 
(a)	The subdivision plat submitted to the administrator for final approval shall be clearly and legibly drawn in ink on paper at a scale of between one inch equals one foot and one inch equals 100 feet, on sheets having a size of not more than nine inches by 14 inches. In addition to the requirements of the preliminary plat, the final plat shall include the following, shown in accordance with the standards in article IV of this chapter where applicable: 
(1)	The total tract boundary lines and bearings of the area being subdivided. Such boundaries shall be determined by accurate survey in the field, which shall be balanced and close with an error of closure not to exceed one foot in 10,000 feet; provided, that the boundaries adjoining additional unplatted land of the applicant are not required to be based upon field survey and may be calculated. The location and elevation of all boundary line (perimeter) monuments shall be indicated, along with a statement of the total area of the property being subdivided. In addition, the engineer or surveyor shall certify to the accuracy of the survey, the drawn plat and placement of the monuments. 
(2)	The following data shall be shown for the pavement edges (curblines) and right-of-way lines: The ultimate right-of-way for existing recorded (except those to be vacated) and proposed streets within or abutting the property to be subdivided; the length and width, in feet to the nearest hundredth of a foot, of all straight lines and radii of curved lines; and the angle, in degrees, minutes and seconds. 
(3)	All lot lines shall be completely dimensioned in hundredths of a foot if straight, and by length of arc and radius if curved, with central angle in degrees, minutes and seconds. All internal angles within the lots shall be designated to the nearest second. 
(4)	A statement of the intended use of all nonresidential lots, with reference to restrictions of any type which exist or will exist as covenants in the deed for the lots contained in the subdivision and, if covenants are recorded, including the book and page number. 
(5)	The location of all existing and proposed required street monuments.
(6)	All easements or rights-of-way where provided for or owned by public services and any limitations on such easements or rights-of-way. Rights-of-way shall be shown and accurately identified on the plat, and easements shall either be shown or specifically described on the plat. Easements should be located in cooperation with the appropriate public utilities. 
(7)	A plan for water supply and distribution; locations, size and invert elevations of all sanitary or storm sewers, manholes not to exceed 300 feet apart, inlets and culverts (this data may be submitted as a separate plan). 
(8)	If the subdivision proposes a new street intersection with a state route, state department of transportation approval may be required for all such intersections. 
(9)	A blank oblong space three inches by five inches shall be reserved on the plat for the use of the commission and council. 
(10)	Certificates signed by the surveyor or engineer setting forth the source of title of the owners of the land subdivided and the place of record of the last instrument in the chain of title. 
(11)	When the subdivision consists of land acquired from more than one source of title, the outlines of the various tracts shall be indicated by dashlines, and identification of the respective tracts shall be placed on the plat. 
(12)	All easements and facilities for stormwater management and detention and a notation on the face of the plat in bold print that the subdivision is subject to all provisions of the ordinances of the town concerning stormwater management and detention. 
(b)	The final plat shall be accompanied by supplementary data, where applicable as required for preliminary plats in section 70-79, in addition to all appropriate approvals from the state health department, state department of transportation or the town engineer, the state water control board and any other agency as required. No final plat shall be approved by the town unless all proper approvals are submitted to the town. The standards in article IV of this chapter shall be complied with. 
(Code 1968, § 22-14)
Secs. 70-81-70-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Provisions of subdivision ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-466.

Sec. 70-111. - General standards. 
(a)	The standards and requirements contained in this article are intended as the minimum for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare and shall be applied as such by the town planning commission and town council in reviewing all subdivision plats. 
(b)	Land subject to hazards to life, health or property, such as may arise from fire, floods, disease or other causes, shall not be subdivided for building purposes unless such hazards have been eliminated or unless the subdivision plat shall show adequate safeguards against them. Such safeguards shall be approved by the appropriate regulatory agencies. 
(c)	Subdivision plats shall give due recognition to the policies of the comprehensive plan and to other plans and ordinances of the town, or to such parts thereof as may have been adopted pursuant to statute. 
(d)	All required onsite improvements shall be installed by the applicant at his cost. Before any subdivision plat will be finally approved, the applicant shall install the required improvements to the satisfaction and approval of the town engineer or, in lieu of construction, shall certify that the costs of construction have been paid to the person completing the requirements, or shall furnish bond or cash in an amount calculated by the planning commission with the necessary assistance of appropriate engineers, to secure the required improvements for the subdivision which the subdivider has submitted for final approval. Such bond shall be payable to and held by the town council. The form of such bond shall be approved by the town attorney. The applicant's bond shall not be reduced by the town council until construction has been inspected and approved. 
(Code 1968, § 22-15)
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; F-C floodplain conservation district, § 90-296 et seq. 
Sec. 70-112. - Streets. 
(a)	Applicability of standards generally. All streets within the corporate limits shall meet town standards. All streets within a distance of two miles of the corporate limits and under the jurisdiction of this article shall meet the standards of the state department of transportation. 
(b)	Proposed extensions. The proposed street system shall extend existing or recorded streets at the same width or larger but in no case at less than the required minimum width as specified in this article. Where possible, new intersections along one side of an existing street shall coincide with any existing street intersection on the opposite side of such street. 
(c)	Access to adjoining property. Where, upon recommendation of the town planning commission, it is desirable to provide for street access to adjoining property, the town council shall require street stubs to be extended by dedication to the boundary of such property. 
(d)	New local streets. New local streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic, but the applicant shall give adequate consideration to providing for the extension and continuation of arterial and collector streets into and from adjoining properties. 
(e)	Corrections in width or alignment. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street of improper width or alignment, upon recommendation of the planning commission, the town council shall require the dedication of land sufficient to widen the street or correct the alignment. 
(f)	Additional provisions as to applicability of standards. All streets shall meet the design standards of this article. Town standards shall apply to those proposed streets in the town, while the state department of transportation standards shall apply to proposed streets outside the corporate limits but within a two-mile distance from such limits. 
(g)	Convenience of arrangement. The street arrangement must be such as to cause no unnecessary hardship to owners of adjoining property when they plat their own land and seek to provide for convenient access to such land. 
(h)	Partial and half streets. New half or partial streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to reasonable subdivision of a tract in conformance with the other requirements and standards of this chapter and where, in addition, satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part of the street can be obtained. 
(i)	Street widths. 
(1)	The minimum width of a proposed street right-of-way, measured from lot line to lot line on either side of such right-of-way, shall meet the requirements of the town engineer or of the state department of transportation for secondary roads. 
(2)	Alley rights-of-way shall not be less than 20 feet in width.
(3)	Additional right-of-way and pavement widths may be required by the town planning commission or town council for the purpose of promoting the public safety and convenience or to provide parking in commercial and industrial areas and in areas of high density residential development. 
(j)	Construction of streets. All street construction shall conform to specifications and standards of the town or of the state department of transportation for secondary streets. The construction shall be subject to approval of the state department of transportation or the town, whichever is applicable. 
(k)	Restriction of access. Whenever a proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a limited access highway or expressway, provision shall be made for either a service drive or reverse frontage lots. A service drive shall be approximately parallel to such right-of-way at a distance suitable for an appropriate use of the land between such highway and the proposed subdivision. Such distances shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for ingress and egress to the main thoroughfare. The right-of-way of any major highway or street projected across any railroad, limited access highway or expressway shall be of adequate width to provide for the cuts or fills required for any future separation of grades. 
(l)	Approach angle. All streets shall approach each other at an angle of not less than 80 degrees, unless the commission, upon recommendation of the town engineer or highway resident engineer, shall recommend and the council approve a lesser angle of approach for reasons of terrain, etc. 
(m)	Street grades. Centerline grades shall meet town standards or state department of transportation standards for secondary roads, but in no case shall they be greater than eight percent. 
(n)	Cul-de-sac streets. 
(1)	Dead-end streets are prohibited, unless designed as cul-de-sac streets or designed for future access to adjoining properties. 
(2)	Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such, shall not exceed 500 feet in length and shall not furnish access to more than 20 dwelling units. 
(3)	Any dead-end street intended for access to an adjoining property or because of authorized stage development shall be provided with a temporary all-weather turnaround within the subdivision. 
(4)	Unless future extension is clearly impractical or not desired, the turnaround right-of-way shall be placed adjacent to the tract boundary, with sufficient additional width provided along the boundary line to permit extension of the street at full width. 
(5)	All cul-de-sac streets, whether permanently or temporarily designed as such, shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround which is constructed in accordance with town standards or state department of transportation specifications. The minimum radius shall be 50 feet. 
(6)	Drainage of cul-de-sac streets shall preferably be towards the open end. If drainage is toward the closed end, adequate provisions shall be made for runoff to be carried away. Drainage easements shall be required where necessary. 
(o)	Street names. 
(1)	Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with others already existing and named shall bear the names of the existing streets. 
(2)	The name of a proposed street shall not duplicate or confuse an existing street in the town or in the postal district. The use of the suffixes "street," "road," "avenue," "boulevard," "drive," "way," "place," "court," "lane," etc., shall constitute a duplication if used after a name which is repeated before each suffix. 
(3)	Street names shall be subject to the approval of the town council. Names of existing streets shall not be changed except by approval of the council. 
(p)	Alleys. 
(1)	Alleys may be permitted; provided, that the subdivider produces evidence satisfactory to the town planning commission and town council of the need for such right-of-way. 
(2)	No part of any main structure shall be located within 20 feet of the centerline of an alley. 
(3)	Dead-end alleys shall be avoided, but where this proves impossible, dead-end alleys shall terminate with an all-weather circular turnaround with a minimum radius of 50 feet. 
(4)	Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided.
(q)	Driveways. Private driveways on corner lots shall be located at least 40 feet from the point of intersection of street right-of-way lines. 
(r)	Street signs. Street identification signs, of a design approved by the town council or the town engineer and readable from either side, shall be installed at all intersections. 
(s)	Railroad crossings. The applicant shall be responsible for providing flashing lights and short-arm gates for any road within a subdivision which may cross a railroad track. 
(Code 1968, § 22-16)
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks, and other public places, ch. 66. 
State Law reference- Recordation of plat as transfer of streets, termination of easements, rights-of-way, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.1-478. 
Sec. 70-113. - Blocks. 
(a)	Length. Blocks shall have a maximum length of 1,200 feet and a minimum length of 500 feet. 
(b)	Depth. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots consistent with the town zoning ordinance and section 70-114, subsections (a) and (b), unless prevented by topographical conditions or the size of the property, in which case the town council may approve a single tier of lots. 
(Code 1968, § 22-17)
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 90. 
Sec. 70-114. - Lots. 
(a)	Shape. 
(1)	Lots shall not contain peculiarly shaped elongations which would be unusable for normal building purposes solely to provide necessary square footage. 
(2)	Generally, the depth of residential lots should be not less than one nor more than four times their width. 
(b)	Location. 
(1)	Each lot shall abut on a street dedicated by the subdivision plat or on an existing public street which has been accepted by the governing body. 
(2)	Municipal boundaries shall not cut through lots, but rather shall act as lot lines for those lots adjacent to either side of such municipal boundaries. All lots shall comply with subsection (f) of this section. 
(c)	Corner lots. Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient for maintenance of an adequate site distance at intersections as determined by the council. 
(d)	Sidelines. Sidelines of lots shall be approximately at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. 
(e)	Remnants. All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after subdividing of a tract must be added to adjacent lots or otherwise disposed of, rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels. 
(f)	Lot size. 
(1)	The minimum lot size of any area shall be in accordance with chapter 90 of this Code. 
(2)	The planning commission shall require that tentative approval of the health department be submitted as a basis for evaluating the lot sizes of subdivisions dependent upon individual onsite water or sewer systems. The town shall not approve any subdivision unless tentative approval from the health department is given on a lot by lot basis, stating that the proposed lots have satisfactory sites for the proposed water and sewer systems at the proposed lot size. The issuance of tentative approval does not guarantee the issuance of a permit when application is made for a septic system at the time of construction. The health department reserves the right to reject an application for a septic system based on further testing. 
(3)	In any instance, greater lot areas shall be required in accordance with health department findings where individual septic tanks or individual wells are used if the health official determines that there are factors of drainage, soil conditions or other conditions to cause potential health problems. 
(Code 1968, § 22-18)
Sec. 70-115. - Sanitary sewage disposal. 
(a)	The applicant shall provide the type of sanitary sewage disposal facility determined by the town planning commission to be consistent with existing physical, geographical and geological conditions. The following types of sanitary sewage disposal facilities are listed in order of desirability: 
(1)	Public sanitary sewage collection and treatment system.
(2)	On-lot disposal with septic tank and drainfield.
(b)	Sanitary sewers, whether public or onsite, shall be designed and constructed in strict accordance with department of health, state water control board or town standards, whichever are applicable. 
(c)	Sanitary sewers shall not be used to carry stormwater.
(Code 1968, § 22-19)
Cross reference- Sewers and sewage disposal, § 82-81 et seq. 
Sec. 70-116. - Soil evaluation test requirements. 
(a)	Soil evaluation tests shall be performed by the health department for all subdivisions where onsite sewage disposal systems are to be used. 
(b)	Soil evaluation tests shall be made by the health department in accordance with the procedure required by the state health department and shall be approved by the health department. The results of such tests shall be submitted with the final plat. 
(c)	The town council shall not approve any subdivision using septic tanks unless a tentative approval from the health department is received stating that all lots in the subdivision have a suitable site for a septic tank system. If the analysis of the soil evaluation test results reveals that the soil is unsuitable for the intended use at the lot size proposed, the town planning commission and town council shall require that the lot size be increased in accordance with the testing results as determined by the state health department. This tentative approval does not guarantee that a permit will be issued for installation of a septic tank system. The health department reserves the right to reject any further request for permits based on further inspection and tests. 
(Code 1968, § 22-20)
Sec. 70-117. - Water supply. 
(a)	Whenever an existing public water supply system is determined by the town to be geographically and economically accessible to a proposed subdivision, the applicant shall provide an approved distribution system which shall be designed to connect with such system in accordance with town and state health department standards. Such systems shall furnish an adequate supply of water to each lot, with adequate main sizes and fire hydrants located to meet the specifications of the insurance services office. A copy of the approval of such system by the appropriate public agency or utility company shall be submitted with the final plat. Suitable agreements shall also be established for the ownership and maintenance of such distribution system. 
(b)	Where an individual onsite water supply system is to be utilized, each lot so served shall be of a size and shape to allow safe location of such system in accordance with state health department standards. 
(Code 1968, § 22-21)
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; water system, § 82-26 et seq. 
Sec. 70-118. - Storm drainage. 
(a)	Storm sewers and related installations shall be required only when the runoff of stormwater cannot be satisfactorily handled within the street pavement. 
(b)	Where existing storm sewers are reasonably accessible, according to the town planning commission, the proposed subdivision shall be required to connect with such storm sewers. 
(c)	In the design of storm drainage facilities, problems shall be avoided which may arise from the concentration of stormwater runoff onto adjacent developed or undeveloped properties or the collection of water at low points in the subdivision and along streets. Water shall be drained away from onsite sewage disposal facilities. 
(d)	Storm drainage facilities should be designed not only to handle the anticipated peak discharge from the property being subdivided but also the anticipated increase in runoff that will occur when all the property at a higher elevation in the watershed is fully developed. 
(e)	Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream and of such width as will be adequate to preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage, or for the purpose of widening, deepening, relocating, improving or protecting such drainage facilities. Any changes in the existing drainageway shall be subject to the approval of the state water control board. 
(f)	All streets shall be so designed as to provide for the discharge of surface water from their rights-of-way. 
(g)	The applicant shall provide for all such drainage improvements, together with a certified engineer's or surveyor's statement that such improvements will be adequate for proper development. The highway resident engineer or town engineer shall then approve or disapprove the plans. 
(Code 1968, § 22-22)
Cross reference- Stormwater management, § 26-61 et seq. 
Sec. 70-119. - Stormwater management. 
    All subdivisions are subject to and shall comply with the requirements for stormwater management as set forth in chapter 26, article III of this Code. 
(Code 1968, § 22-22.1)
Sec. 70-120. - Utility easements. 
(a)	Easements with a minimum width of 20 feet shall be provided for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water mains or other utility lines intended to service the abutting lots. No structures or trees shall be placed within such easements. 
(b)	To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be centered on or adjacent to rear or side lot lines, and easements shall be in accordance with requirements of appropriate utility companies. 
(Code 1968, § 22-23)
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 82. 
Sec. 70-121. - Erosion and sediment control. 
    Erosion and sediment control shall meet the standards and specifications of the erosion and sediment control ordinance of the town. 
(Code 1968, § 22-24)
Cross reference- Erosion and sediment control, § 26-26 et seq. 
Sec. 70-122. - Floodplain regulations. 
(a)	The subdivider shall consult all available engineering and soils studies and delineate the 100-year floodplain on the plat of his land. 
(b)	The town shall not approve any plat in which a structure or street will be located within the area subject to flooding by a flood of 100-year frequency, unless such structure is adequately floodproofed and approved under the town's building code or the street approved by the state department of transportation or the town, whichever is applicable. 
(Code 1968, § 22-25)
Cross reference- Building code, § 14-31 et seq.; F-C floodplain conservation district, § 90-296 et seq. 
Sec. 70-123. - Monuments. 
(a)	As required by this chapter, all monuments must be installed by the subdivider. Upon completion of subdivision streets, sewers and other improvements, the subdivider shall make certain that all monuments required by the town are clearly visible for inspection and use. Such monuments shall be inspected and approved by the town before any improvements are accepted by the governing body. 
(b)	Steel pins shall be used as monuments at all street corners and at all points where the street line intersects the exterior boundaries of the subdivision and at right angle points, and points of curve in each street. Such monuments shall meet the specifications of the state department of transportation or the town, whichever is applicable. 
(c)	All other lot corners shall be marked with an iron pipe not less than three-fourths inch in diameter and 24 inches long and driven so as to be flush with the finished grade. When rock is encountered, a hole shall be drilled four inches deep in the rock, into which shall be cemented a steel rod one-half inch in diameter, the top of which shall be flush with the finished grade line. 
(Code 1968, § 22-26)
Sec. 70-124. - Curbs. 
(a)	Curbs, where required by the town, shall be installed along both sides of all streets, except along alleys. Curbs shall meet the standards and specifications of the state department of highways and transportation or the town engineer. Adequate provision shall be made for driveway entrances. 
(b)	Installation shall be in accordance with this chapter and other regulations of the town. 
(Code 1968, § 22-27)
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66. 
Sec. 70-125. - Sidewalks. 
(a)	When required by the town, sidewalks with a minimum width of four feet shall be installed on both sides of all streets within the subdivision and the side of each street touching the subdivision; except, that no sidewalks shall be required along service streets. 
(b)	All sidewalks shall be installed in accordance with this chapter and other regulations of the town. 
(Code 1968, § 22-28)
Sec. 70-126. - Streetlights. 
    The installation of all streetlights shall be in accordance with the design standards and specifications of the town and/or the state department of transportation. The developer shall be responsible for all costs in the installation of streetlights including but not exclusive of, the electric service to the streetlight pole, the streetlight pole, the light fixtures and elements, and all other things and matters necessary for the proper installation of the streetlights. The type of streetlight pole shall be one acceptable to the town standards and designs, and the sites and placement of the streetlights shall be in accordance with the town's standards and determined by the town manager. 
(Code 1968, § 22-29)
Secs. 70-127-70-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EFFECTUAL CLAUSES 

Sec. 70-151. - Modification of provisions. 
    Where the subdivider can show that strict adherence to a provision of this chapter would cause unnecessary hardship and where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, in the opinion of the town council, a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such provisions, the council may authorize an exception. Any exception thus authorized is to be stated in writing in the minutes of the commission and town council with the reasoning on which the departure was justified. No such modification may be granted by this chapter which is opposed in writing by the health official, highway engineer or town engineer. Modifications shall be clearly defined and entered on the final plat and signed by the mayor. The planning commission, in its review, shall make recommendations on the granting of such modifications. 
(Code 1968, § 22-30)
State Law reference- Exceptions to subdivision regulations, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-466(B). 
Sec. 70-152. - Compliance. 
(a)	No clerk of any court shall file or record a plat of a subdivision required by this chapter to be recorded until such plat has been approved as required in this chapter; and the penalties provided herein shall apply to any failure to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(b)	No permit will be issued by any administrative officer of the town or the county for the construction of any building or other improvements requiring a permit upon any land concerned for which a plat is required by this chapter, unless and until the requirements of this chapter have been complied with. Any person aggrieved by the decision of any administrative official whose decision is required pursuant to this chapter may appeal such decision to the governing body. 
(Code 1968, § 22-31)
Sec. 70-153. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating the foregoing provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 for each lot or parcel of land so subdivided or transferred or sold. The description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from the remedies provided in this article. 
(Code 1968, § 22-32)
State Law reference- Penalty for violation of statutory provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-473(d). 
Sec. 70-154. - Relationship of chapter to private easements, contracts, etc. 
    This chapter bears no relation to any private easement, covenant, agreement or restriction, nor is the responsibility of enforcing such private easement, covenant, agreement or restriction implied herein to any public official unless required by this chapter. When this chapter calls for more restrictive standards than are required by private contracts, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Code 1968, § 22-33)
State Law reference- Recordation of plat as transfer of streets, termination of easements, rights-of-way, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.1-478. 
Sec. 70-155. - Changes of plat after approval. 
    No change, erasure or revision shall be made on any preliminary or final plat or on accompanying data sheets after approval by the commission has been endorsed in writing on the plat or sheets, unless authorization for such changes has been granted in writing by the commission. 
(Code 1968, § 22-34)
Sec. 70-156. - Amendments. 
    This chapter may be amended in whole or in part by the town council; provided, that any such amendment shall either originate with or be submitted to the planning commission for recommendation; provided, further, that no such amendment shall be adopted without a public hearing having been held in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 15.1-431. The planning commission shall have 60 days after referral by the council to make a recommendation. 
(Code 1968, § 22-35)
Sec. 70-157. - Filing of ordinances. 
    When this chapter is adopted or amended, a certified copy of the ordinance so adopting or so amending this chapter and any and all amendments thereto shall be filed in the office of the administrator and in the clerk's office of the court in which deeds are admitted to record in the county. 
(Code 1968, § 22-36)
Chapter 74 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Adoption of Code of Virginia, § 15.1-841, pertaining to municipal taxes and assessments, § 4.
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; treasurer, § 2-301 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks, and other public places, ch. 66; payment of personal property tax prerequisite to issuance of vehicle license, § 78-59; vehicles for hire, ch. 86.
State Law reference- Local taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3000 et seq.; town levies, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3005; additional tax to pay interest and retire bonds, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3006; notice and hearing prior to increase of local tax levy, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3007; collection of taxes by treasurers, etc., Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3910 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-1. - Duty of treasurer as to assessment book; assessment of real estate, personalty for taxation. 
    The town treasurer shall make and preserve a book in which the real estate of the town is assessed, and one in which the personal property of the town is assessed for taxation, and shall return the same to the council at such time as it may prescribe for its inspection and approval. The assessment of real estate and personal property for the purpose of taxation shall be the same as the assessment thereof for the purpose of state and county taxes, if assessed for taxation by the state and county. 
(Code 1968, § 23-2; Ord. of 7-1-2014(4))
Sec. 74-2. - When taxes due and payable; penalty and interest on unpaid taxes. 
    All town property taxes shall be due and payable at the office of the town treasurer, with a minimum of 50 percent of the total amount due for the year to be paid on or before June 5, and the remainder of the total amount due to be paid on December 5 of the year in which the assessment was made. A penalty of ten percent is hereby levied and shall be collected for payments not made by the June 5 deadline, and/or the December 5 deadline, respectively. If any such taxes shall remain unpaid, interest at a rate of ten percent per annum shall be charged from January 1 and/or July 1, respectively, of such biannual period following the year in which the assessment was made. 
(Code 1968, § 23-3; Ord. of 9-3-91(3), § 23-3; Ord. of 12-1-98(3))
State Law reference- Penalties, interest, etc., Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. 
Sec. 74-3. - Exemption of certain household goods and personal effects. 
(a)	For each tax year, notwithstanding any tax levying ordinance of the town, and pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3504, the following household goods and personal effects are hereby defined as separate items and shall be exempt from tangible personal property taxes: 
(1)	Bicycles.
(2)	Household and kitchen furniture, including gold and silver plates, plated ware, watches and clocks, sewing machines, refrigerators, automatic refrigerating machinery of any type, vacuum cleaners and all other household machinery, books, firearms and weapons of all kinds. 
(3)	Pianos, organs, and all other musical instruments; phonographs, record players, and records to be used therewith; and radio and television instruments and equipment. 
(4)	Oil paintings, pictures, statuary, curios, articles of virtu and works of art.
(5)	Diamonds, cameos or other precious stones and all precious metals used as ornaments or jewelry. 
(6)	Sporting and photographic equipment.
(7)	Clothing and objects of apparel.
(8)	All other tangible personal property used by an individual or a family or household incident to maintaining an abode. 
(b)	The classification set forth in subsection (a) shall apply only to such property owned and used by an individual or by a family or household incident to maintaining an abode. 
(Code 1968, § 23-5)
Sec. 74-4. - Duty of treasurer as to lists of improperly assessed, uncollected, etc., taxes; examination and correction of lists by council. 
(a)	The town treasurer, after using due diligence to collect the taxes and ascertaining which of the taxes assessed in the town cannot be collected, shall make out a list of three classes and present the same to the council at the first regular meeting in the month of July, as follows: 
(1)	A list of property improperly assessed or not ascertainable, with the amount of taxes charged on such property. 
(2)	A list of all real estate which is delinquent for the nonpayment of taxes and levies charged thereon as of the close of business on June 30 of such year. 
(3)	A list of taxes and levies, other than real estate, which he is unable to collect.
(b)	The lists mentioned in subsection (a) shall be certified by the oath of the treasurer, subscribed before a notary public or other officer qualified to administer oaths, as follows: "I, ____________, treasurer of the Town of Woodstock, Virginia, after having been duly sworn, do certify that I used due diligence to collect the foregoing taxes and that I have been unable to collect them by levy or otherwise. Signed, ____________, treasurer." 
(c)	The lists mentioned in this section shall be examined by the council, which shall correct any errors appearing therein. 
(Code 1968, § 23-4)
Sec. 74-5. - Partial exemption for improvements in certain districts. 
    Partial exemption is hereby provided from taxation of real estate upon which any structure or other improvements not less than 25 years of age has undergone substantial rehabilitation, renovation or replacement for residential, commercial or industrial use subject to such conditions as hereinafter set forth. 
    A partial exemption shall apply to rehabilitation, renovation or replacement which results in an increase in assessed property value of 30 percent or more upon completion and shall take effect upon its completion. The said exemption shall be for the increased taxes due to the re-assessment for improvements and shall be an exemption of 100 percent of such increase for five years and shall be 50 percent of such increase for the following five years. 
    The properties eligible for the aforesaid exemption shall be those located in the B-1 (Central Business District), B-2 (Highway Commercial District), and those other properties not located in B-1 or B-2 which front on Main Street (U.S. Route 11) and which front on Court Street from Water Street west to the Norfolk-Southern Railway right-of-way. 
    Application shall be made by the landowner to the town treasurer on forms provided by the town. The application shall be subject to review and approval by the town treasurer based upon information provided by the landowner, the Commissioner of Revenue of Shenandoah County and other sources, to determine if the property qualifies for the exemption and, if so, the amount of such exemption. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2002)
DIVISION 2. - REAL ESTATE TAX EXEMPTIONS FOR ELDERLY AND DISABLED 

Sec. 74-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of March 19, 2013, repealed § 74-6, entitled "Definitions" and derived from Ord. of 11-6-2007; Ord. of 3-4-2008. 
Sec. 74-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of March 19, 2013, repealed § 74-7, entitled "Authorized" and derived from Ord. of 11-6-2007; Ord. of 3-4-2008. 
Sec. 74-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of March 19, 2013, repealed § 74-8, entitled "Requirements" and derived from Ord. of 11-6-2007; Ord. of 3-4-2008. 
Sec. 74-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of March 19, 2013, repealed § 74-9, entitled "Affidavit" and derived from Ord. of 11-6-2007; Ord. of 3-4-2008. 
Sec. 74-10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of March 19, 2013, repealed § 74-10, entitled "Amount" and derived from Ord. of 11-6-2007; Ord. of 3-4-2008. 
Sec. 74-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of March 19, 2013, repealed § 74-11, entitled "Deduction from amount" and derived from Ord. of 11-6-2007; Ord. of 3-4-2008. 
Sec. 74-12. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of March 19, 2013, repealed § 74-12, entitled "Changes in ownership, income, other factors" and derived from Ord. of 11-6-2007; Ord. of 3-4-2008. 
Sec. 74-13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of March 19, 2013, repealed § 74-13, entitled "False claims" and derived from Ord. of 11-6-2007; Ord. of 3-4-2008. 
Sec. 74-14. - Exemption granted. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 58.1-3210 of the Code of Virginia 1950, as amended, certain elderly persons as well as totally disabled persons, who qualify under terms of Article 5, Chapter 146 of the Code of Shenandoah County, Virginia, as amended, may be granted exemption or deferral on a portion of their real estate property taxes. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2013)
Sec. 74-15. - Exemption or deferral authorized. 
    Qualified taxpayers who meet the requirements for exemption or deferral, and who submit a properly prepared affidavit to the county commissioner of revenue, shall be exempted or receive deferral from that amount of tax on their property as provided for by Article 5, Chapter 146 of the Code of Shenandoah County, Virginia, as amended. For the purpose of this section, any reference made in the Code of Shenandoah County, Virginia, to county treasurer shall mean town treasurer. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2013)
Secs. 74-16-74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BANK FRANCHISE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Bank franchise tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1200 et seq.; town tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1209.

Sec. 74-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bank is defined as provided in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1201. 
    Net capital means a bank's net capital computed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1205. 
(Code 1968, § 23-6)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-32. - Imposed. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, title 58.1, chapter 12 (§ 58.1-1200 et seq.), there is hereby imposed upon each bank located within the boundaries of the town a tax on net capital equalling 80 percent of the state rate of franchise tax set forth in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1204. If any bank located within the boundaries of the town also has offices located outside the corporate limits thereof, the tax shall be apportioned as provided by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1211. 
(Code 1968, § 23-7)
Sec. 74-33. - Filing of return and payment of tax. 
(a)	On or after January 1 of each year, but not later than March 1 of any such year, all banks whose principal offices are located within this town shall prepare and file with the commissioner of the revenue, with a copy to the town treasurer, a return as provided by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1207, in duplicate which shall set forth the tax on net capital computed pursuant to Code of Virginia, title 58.1, chapter 12 (§ 58.1-1200 et seq.). The commissioner of the revenue shall certify a copy of the bank's return and schedules and shall forthwith transmit such certified copy to the state department of taxation. If the principal office of a bank is located outside the corporate boundaries of the town and such bank has branch offices located within the town, in addition to the filing requirements set forth herein, any bank conducting such branch business shall file with the commissioner of the revenue or appropriate officer of the town a copy of the real estate deduction schedule, apportionment and other items which are required by Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-1207, 58.1-1211, and 58.1-1212. 
(b)	Each bank, on or before June 1 of each year, shall pay into the treasurer's office of the town all taxes imposed pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1968, § 23-8)
Sec. 74-34. - Penalty upon bank for failure to comply. 
    Any bank which fails to file a return or pay the tax required by this article or fails to comply with any other provision of this article shall be subject to a penalty of five percent of the tax due. If the commissioner of the revenue is satisfied that such failure is due to providential or other good cause, such return and payment of tax shall be accepted exclusive of such penalty, but with interest determined in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-15. 
(Code 1968, § 23-8.1)
State Law reference- Penalty, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1216. 
Secs. 74-35-74-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAX ON PURCHASES OF UTILITY SERVICES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Licensing of public utilities, § 18-163 et seq.
State Law reference- Tax on water, heat, light and power companies, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-56. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial or industrial user means the owner or tenant of property used for commercial or industrial purposes who pays for utility service for such property. 
    Local telephone service or local exchange telephone service means the basic line or access charge for primary exchange service only (plus local message units, if applicable) and will not be imposed on separate or additional charges for station and miscellaneous equipment or auxiliary service. 
    Purchaser includes every person who purchases a utility service. 
    Residential user means the owner or tenant of private residential property who pays for utility service in or for such property, or a tenant of an apartment who pays for utility service in or for such property or a tenant of an apartment building which is served by a master meter; except, that with respect to local exchange telephone service, such term shall mean any person furnished service classified as residential under tariffs filed with the state corporation commission. 
    Seller includes every person who sells or furnishes a utility service, whether a public service corporation or a private corporation or neither. 
    Utility service includes local exchange telephone service, electrical service and gas service furnished within the town. 
(Code 1968, § 23-9)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-57. - Levy and amount of tax; maximum amount of charge upon which tax computed; seller to act as collection agent for town. 
(a)	There is hereby imposed and levied, upon each purchaser of a utility service, a tax in the amount of ten percent of the charge (exclusive of any federal tax thereon) made by the seller against the purchaser with respect to each utility service, which tax in every case shall be collected by the seller from the purchaser and shall be paid by the purchaser to the seller for the use of the town at the time the purchase price or such charge shall become due and payable under the agreement between the purchaser and the seller. 
(b)	In case any monthly bill submitted by any seller for residential service shall exceed $10.00 for a residential user, there shall be no tax computed on so much of such bill as shall exceed $10.00. In the case of any apartment house or other multiple-family dwelling using gas or electric service through a master meter, the sum of $0.50 shall be multiplied by the number of dwelling units served. In case any monthly bill submitted by any seller for commercial service shall exceed $50.00, there shall be no tax computed on so much of such bill as shall exceed $100.00, there shall be no tax computed on so much of such bill as shall exceed $100.00. Bills shall be considered monthly bills if submitted 12 times per year for periods of approximately one month each. 
(Code 1968, § 23-10; Ord. of 6-4-96)
Sec. 74-58. - Duty of seller to report taxes collected and remit collections to treasurer. 
    It shall be the duty of every seller, in acting as the tax collecting medium or agency for the town, to collect from the purchaser, for the use of the town, the tax imposed and levied by this article at the time of collecting the purchase price charged. The taxes collected during each calendar month shall be reported by each seller to the town treasurer, and each seller shall remit the amount of tax shown by such report to have been collected to the town treasurer on or before the last day of the first calendar month thereafter, together with the name and address of any purchaser who has refused to pay his tax. The required reports shall be in the form prescribed by the town treasurer. 
(Code 1968, § 23-11)
Sec. 74-59. - Records to be kept by seller; inspection of records by town. 
    Each seller shall keep complete records showing all purchases in the town, which records shall show the price charged against each purchaser with respect to each purchase, the date thereof and the date of payment thereof and the amount of tax imposed under this article. Such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the town at reasonable times, and the duly authorized agents of the town shall have the right, power and authority to make transcripts thereof. 
(Code 1968, § 23-12)
Sec. 74-60. - Applicability of tax to telephone service. 
    The tax imposed and levied by this article on purchasers with respect to local exchange telephone service shall apply to all charges made for local exchange telephone service, except local messages which are paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones. 
(Code 1968, § 23-13)
Sec. 74-61. - Exemptions from tax-Governmental units. 
    The United States of America, the state and the political subdivisions, boards, commissions and authorities thereof are hereby exempted from the payment of tax imposed and levied by this article with respect to the purchase of utility services used by such governmental agencies. 
(Code 1968, § 23-14)
Sec. 74-62. - Same-Bottled gas. 
    The tax imposed and levied by this article shall not apply to the purchase of bottled gas. 
(Code 1968, § 23-15)
Sec. 74-63. - Computation of tax when billing is other than monthly. 
    In all cases where the seller collects the price for utility services other than on a monthly basis, the tax imposed and levied by this article may be computed on the aggregate amount of purchases during the period billed for; provided, that the amount of tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed, and such tax shall not exceed the sum of $0.50 for a residential user of electricity or telephone service, $0.25 for a residential user of gas or $2.50 for a commercial user or $5.00 for an industrial user, multiplied by the number of months, or portion thereof, covered by the bill. 
(Code 1968, § 23-16)
DIVISION 2. - ELECTRIC AND NATURAL GAS CONSUMERS TAX 

Sec. 74-64. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    CCF means the volume of gas at standard pressure and temperature in units of 100 cubic feet. 
    Consumer means every person who, individually or through agents, employees, officers, representatives or permittees, makes a taxable purchase of electricity or natural gas services in this jurisdiction. 
    Gas utility means a public utility authorized to furnish natural gas service in Virginia. 
    Kilowatt hours (kWh) delivered means 1000 watts of electricity delivered in a one-hour period by an electric provider to an actual consumer, except that in the case of eligible customer-generators (sometimes called cogenerators) as defined in Code of Virginia, § 56-594, it means kWh supplied from the electric grid to such customer-generators, minus the kWh generated and fed back to the electric grid by such customer-generators. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, company or other entity. 
    Pipeline distribution company means a person, other than a pipeline transmission company which transmits, by means of a pipeline, natural gas, manufactured gas or crude petroleum and the products or byproducts thereof to a purchaser for purposes of furnishing heat or light. 
    Residential consumer means the owner or tenant of property used primarily for residential purposes, including but not limited to, apartment houses and other multiple-family dwellings. 
    Service provider means a person who delivers electricity to a consumer or a gas utility or pipeline distribution company which delivers natural gas to a consumer. 
    Used primarily relates to the larger portion of the use for which electric or natural gas utility service is furnished. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000)
Sec. 74-65. - Electric utility consumer tax. 
(a)	In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, effective January 1, 2001, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of electricity delivered to consumers by a service provider, classified as determined by such provider, as follows: 
(1)	Residential consumers: Such tax shall be $1.00 plus the rate of $0.007585 on each kWh delivered monthly to residential consumers by a service provider not to exceed $1.25 monthly. 
(2)	Nonresidential consumers: such tax on nonresidential consumers shall be at the rates per month for the classes of nonresidential consumers as set forth below: 
a.	Commercial consumers: such tax shall be $1.25 plus the rate of $0.007520 on each kWh delivered monthly to commercial consumers, not to exceed $5.00 monthly. 
b.	Industrial consumers: such tax shall be $1.25 plus the rate of $0.007520 on each kWh delivered monthly to industrial consumers, not to exceed $10.00 monthly. 
(3)	The conversion of tax pursuant to this division to monthly kWh delivered shall not be effective before the first meter reading after December 31, 2000, prior to which time the tax previously imposed by this jurisdiction shall be in effort. 
(b)	Exemptions: The following consumers of electricity are exempt from the tax imposed by this section (b). 
(1)	Any public safety agency as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3813.
(2)	The United States of America, the commonwealth and the political subdivisions thereof, including this jurisdiction. 
(c)	Billing, collection and remittance of tax. The service provider shall bill the electricity consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers electricity and shall remit the same to this jurisdiction on a monthly basis. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to this jurisdiction in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, paragraphs F. and G., and Code of Virginia, § 58.1-2901. If any consumer receives and pays for electricity but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify this jurisdiction of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for electric service and the tax and remit the tax portion to this jurisdiction. 
    Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to this jurisdiction. 
(d)	Computation of bills not on monthly basis. Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this division if submitted 12 times per year of approximately one month each. Accordingly, the tax for a bimonthly bill (approximately 60 days) shall be determined as follows: (i) the kWh will be divided by 2; (ii) a monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth above; (iii) the tax determined by (ii) shall be multiplied by 2; (iv) the tax in (iii) may not exceed twice the monthly "maximum tax". 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000)
Sec. 74-66. - Local natural gas utility consumer tax. 
(a)	In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of natural gas delivered to consumers by pipeline distribution companies and gas utilities classified by "class of consumers" as such term is defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814 J., as follows: 
(1)	Residential consumers: Such tax on residential consumers of natural gas shall be $1.00 plus at the rate of $0.10 on CCF delivered monthly to residential consumers, not to exceed $1.25 per month. 
(2)	Nonresidential consumers: Such tax on nonresidential consumers shall be at the rates per month shown for each CCF delivered by a pipeline distribution company or a gas utility for the classes as set forth below: 
a.	Commercial consumers such tax shall be $1.25 plus the rate of $0.10 on each CCF delivered monthly to commercial consumers, not to exceed $5.00 monthly. 
b.	Industrial consumers such tax shall be $1.25 plus the rate of $0.10 on each CCF delivered monthly to industrial consumers, not to exceed $10.00 monthly. 
(3)	The conversion of tax pursuant to this division to monthly CCF delivered shall not be effective before the first meter reading after December 31, 2000, prior to which time the tax previously imposed by this jurisdiction shall be in effect. 
(b)	Exemptions. The following consumers of natural gas shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section (c): 
(1)	Any public safety agency as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3813.
(2)	The United States of America, the commonwealth and the political subdivisions thereof, including this jurisdiction. 
(c)	Billing, collection and remittance of tax. The service provider shall bill the natural gas consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers natural gas and shall remit the same to this jurisdiction on a monthly basis. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to this jurisdiction in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, paragraphs H. and I., and Code of Virginia, § 58.1-2901. If any consumer receives and pays for natural gas billed but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify this jurisdiction of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for electric service and the tax and remit the tax portion to this jurisdiction. 
    Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to this jurisdiction. 
(d)	Computation of bills not on monthly basis. Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this division if submitted 12 times per year of approximately one month each. Accordingly, the tax for a bimonthly bill (approximately 60 days) shall be determined as follows: (i) the CCF will be divided by 2; (ii) a monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth above; (iii) the tax determined by (ii) shall be multiplied by 2; (iv) the tax in (iii) may not exceed twice the monthly "maximum tax". 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000)
Sec. 74-67. - Penalties. 
    Any consumer of electricity or natural gas failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the tax imposed and levied under this division, and any officer, agent or employee of any service provider violating the provisions of this division shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00, or by imprisonment in jail for not more than 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such failure, refusal, neglect or violation shall constitute a separate offense. Such conviction shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection and remittance of the tax as provided in this division. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2000)
Secs. 74-68-74-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MEALS TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note-Per the town's instruction, Ord. of June 26, 2000, amended the former Art. IV, §§ 74-86-74-100, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1968, §§ 23-17-23-30, Ord. of Oct. 2, 1990, § 23-18; Ord. of June 1, 1993.
State Law reference- Municipal taxes and assessments, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-841; tax on meals authorized, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840.

Sec. 74-86. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have, for the purposes of this article, the following respective meanings except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cater means the furnishing of food, beverages, or both on the premises of another, for compensation. 
    Collector means the treasurer or designee. 
    Food means all food, beverages or both, including alcoholic beverages, purchased in or from a food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
    Food establishment means any place in or from which food or food products are prepared, packaged, sold or distributed in the town, including but not limited to, any restaurant, dining room, grill, coffee shop, cafeteria, cafe, snack bar, lunch counter, convenience store, movie theatre, delicatessen, confectionery, bakery, eating house, eatery, drugstore, ice cream/yogurt shops, lunch wagon or truck, pushcart or other mobile facility from which food is sold, public or private club, resort, bar, lounge, or other similar establishment, public or private, and shall include private property outside of and contiguous to a building or structure operated as a food establishment at which food or food products are sold for immediate consumption. 
    Meal shall mean any prepared food or drink offered or held out for sale by a food establishment for the purpose of being consumed by any person to satisfy the appetite and is ready for immediate consumption. All such food and beverage, unless otherwise specifically exempted or excluded herein shall be included, whether intended to be consumed on the seller's premises or elsewhere, whether designated as breakfast, lunch, snack, dinner, supper or by some other name, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
    Treasurer means the treasurer and any duly designated deputies, assistants, inspector or other employees. 
(Ord. of 6-26-2000)
Sec. 74-87. - Levy. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied by the town on each person a tax at the rate of five percent on the amount paid for meals purchased from any food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not. 
(Ord. of 6-26-2000)
Sec. 74-88. - Collection of tax by seller. 
    Every person receiving any payment for food with respect to which a tax is levied hereunder shall collect and remit the amount of the tax imposed by this article from the person on whom the same is levied or from the person paying for such food at the time payment for such food is made; provided, however, no blind person operating a vending stand or other business enterprise under the jurisdiction of the department for the visually handicapped and located on properly acquired and used by the United States for any military or naval purpose shall be required to collect or remit such taxes. 
    All tax collections shall be deemed to be held in trust for town. 
(Ord. of 6-26-2000)
Sec. 74-89. - Exemptions; limits on application. 
(a)	The tax imposed under this article shall not be levied on factory-prepackaged candy, gum, nuts and other items of essentially the same nature served for on or off-premise consumption. 
(b)	The tax imposed under this article shall not be levied on the following items when served exclusively for off-premise consumption: 
(1)	Donuts, ice cream, crackers, nabs, chips, cookies and factory-prepackaged items of essentially the same nature; 
(2)	Food sold in bulk. For the purposes of this provision, a bulk sale shall mean the sale of any item that would exceed the normal, customary and usual portion sold for on premises consumption (e.g. a whole cake, a gallon of ice cream); a bulk sale shall not include any food or beverage that is catered or delivered by a food establishment for off-premises consumption; 
(3)	Alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages sold in factory sealed containers;
(4)	Any food or food product purchased with food coupons issued by the United States Department of Agriculture under the Food Stamp Program or drafts issued through the Virginia Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children; 
(5)	Any food or flood product purchased for home consumption as defined in the federal Food Stamp Act of 1977, 7 U.S.C. § 2012, as amended except hot food or food products ready for immediate consumption. For the purposes of administering the tax levied hereunder, the following items whether or not purchased for immediate consumption are excluded from the said definition of food in the federal Food Stamp Act: sandwiches, salad bar items sold from a salad bar, prepackaged single-serving salads consisting primarily of an assortment of vegetables, and nonfactory sealed beverages. This subsection shall not affect provisions set forth in subsections (d)(3), (4) and (5) hereinbelow. 
(c)	A grocery store, supermarket or convenience store shall not be subject to the tax except for any portion or section therein designated as a delicatessen or designated for the sale of prepared food and beverages. 
(d)	The tax imposed hereunder shall not be levied on the following purchases of food and beverages: 
(1)	Food and beverages furnished by food establishments to employees as part of their compensation when no charge is made to the employee. 
(2)	Food and beverages sold by day care centers, public or private elementary or secondary schools or food sold by any college or university to its students or employees. 
(3)	Food and beverages for use or consumption and which are paid for directly by the commonwealth, any political subdivision of the commonwealth or the United States. 
(4)	Food and beverages furnished by a hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home, nursing home, home for the aged, infirm, handicapped, battered women, narcotic addicts or alcoholics, or other extended care facility to patients or residents thereof and the spouses and children of such persons. 
(5)	Food and beverages furnished by a public or private nonprofit charitable organization or establishment or a private establishment that contracts with the appropriate agency of the commonwealth to offer meals at concession prices to elderly, infirm, blind, handicapped or needy persons in their homes or at central locations. 
(6)	Food and beverages sold on an occasional basis, by a nonprofit educational, charitable or benevolent organization, church, or religious body as a fundraising activity, the gross proceeds of which are to be used by such organization exclusively for nonprofit education, charitable, benevolent or religious purposes. 
(7)	Food and beverages sold through vending machines.
(Ord. of 6-26-2000)
Sec. 74-90. - Gratuities and service charges. 
    Where a purchaser provides a gratuity for an employee of a seller, and the amount of the gratuity is wholly in the discretion of the purchaser, the gratuity is not subject to the tax imposed by this article, whether paid in cash to the employee or added to the bill and charged to the purchaser's account, provided in the latter case, the full amount of the gratuity is turned over to the employee by the seller. 
    An amount or percent, whether designated as a gratuity, tip or service charge, that is added to the price of the food and beverages by the seller, and required to be paid by the purchaser, as a part of the selling price of the food and beverages and is subject to the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. of 6-26-2000)
Sec. 74-91. - Report of taxes collected; remittance; preservation of records. 
    It shall be the duty of every person required by this article to pay to the town the taxes imposed by this article to made a report thereof setting forth such information as the treasurer may prescribe and require, including all purchases taxable under this article, the amount charged the purchaser for each such purchase, the date thereof, the taxes collected thereon and the amount of tax required to be collected by this article. Such reports shall be kept and preserved for a period of five years. The treasurer or his duly authorized agents shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference wit the business of such person, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article, and to make transcripts of all or any parts thereof. 
(Ord. of 6-26-2000)
Sec. 74-92. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)	Any person willfully failing or refusing to file a return as required under this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor except that any person failing to file such a return shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor if the amount of tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is $1,000.00 or less. Any person violating or failing to comply with any other provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)	Except as provided in subsection (a) above, any corporate or partnership officer, as defined in Virginia Code § 58.1-3906, or any other person required to collect, account for, or pay over the meals tax imposed under this article, who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account for of pay over such tax, or who willfully evades or attempts to evade such tax or payment thereof, shall, in addition to any other penalties imposed by law, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)	Each violation of or failure to comply with this article shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction of any such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 6-26-2000)
Secs. 74-93-74-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 

Sec. 74-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hotel means any public or private hotel, inn, apartment hotel, bed and breakfast, hostelry, tourist home or house, motel, roominghouse or other lodging place within the town offering lodging for two or more persons at any one time, and the owner and operator thereof, who, for compensation, furnishes lodging to any transients. 
    Room or space rental means the total charge made by any hotel or travel campground for lodging or space furnished any transient. If the charges made by such hotel or travel campground to transients includes any charge for services or accommodations, in addition to that of lodging, and the use of space, then such portion of the total charge as represents only room and space rental shall be distinctly set out and billed to such transient by such hotel or travel campground as a separate item. 
    Transient means any natural person who, for any period of not more than 30 consecutive days, either at his own expense or at the expense of another, obtains lodging or the use of any space in any hotel or travel campground for which lodging or use of space a charge is made. 
    Travel campground means any area or tract of land used to accommodate two or more camping parties, including tents, travel trailers or other camping outfits. 
(Ord. of 3-6-2001)
Sec. 74-102. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. Each such violation or failure and each day's continuance thereof shall constitute a separate offense. Such conviction shall not relieve any such person from the payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 3-6-2001)
Sec. 74-103. - Amount and levy. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied by the town, in addition to all other taxes, fees, and charges of every kind, now or hereafter imposed by law, a tax in the amount of five percent of the total amount paid for room or space rental to any hotel or travel campground. 
(Ord. of 3-6-2001; Ord. of 6-28-2007)
Sec. 74-104. - Collection. 
    Every person receiving any payment of room or space rental with respect to which a tax is levied under this article, shall collect the amount of tax hereby imposed from the transient on whom the same is levied or from the person paying for such room or space rental, at the time payment for such rooms or space is made, and the tax shall be paid to the town. 
(Ord. of 3-6-2001)
Sec. 74-105. - Administrative guidelines. 
    The town manager shall establish guidelines as necessary to administer the terms of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-6-2001)
Sec. 74-106. - Reports and remittances. 
    The person collecting any tax levied under this article shall make out a report upon forms, setting forth information as the town treasurer may prescribe and require, showing the amount of room or space rental charges collected and the tax required to be collected, and shall sign and deliver the same, along with a remittance of such tax, to the town treasurer. Such reports and remittances shall be made to the town treasurer on or before the 20th day of the calendar month following the month being reported. 
(Ord. of 3-6-2001)
Sec. 74-107. - Exemptions. 
    No tax shall be payable under this article on room or space rental paid to any hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home or home for the aged. No tax shall be payable under this article on individually owned single-family homes or condominium units which are rented through an agency which provides advertising, reservations, housekeeping, accounting, and/or check-in services. 
(Ord. of 3-6-2001)
Sec. 74-108. - Advertising payment or absorption of tax. 
    No person shall advertise or hold out to the public in any manner, directly or indirectly, that all or any part of a tax imposed under this article will be paid or absorbed by him or by anyone else, or that he or anyone else will relieve any purchaser of the payment of all or any part of such tax. 
(Ord. of 3-6-2001)
Sec. 74-109. - Penalty and interest for failure to remit taxes when due. 
    If any person whose duty it is to do so shall fail or refuse to remit to the town treasurer the tax required to be collected under this article, within the time and in the amount specified in this article, there shall be added to such tax by the town treasurer a penalty as set from time to time by the town council. In addition, there shall be added to such unpaid tax interest at a rate as set from time to time by the town council on the amount of tax delinquent, such interest to commence on the first day of the month following the month in which such taxes are due. For the second and subsequent years of delinquency, interest shall be imposed at the rate established pursuant to section 6621 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended, or at a rate as set from time to time by the town council, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. of 3-6-2001)
Sec. 74-110. - Procedure upon failure or refusal to collect taxes or make remittances and reports. 
    If any person whose duty it is to do so shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed under this article or to make within the time provided in this article the reports and remittances required by this article, the town treasurer shall proceed in such a manner as he may deem best to obtain the facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any person who has failed or refused to collect such tax or to make such report and remittance. He shall proceed to determine and assess against such person such tax and penalty by registered mail at his last known place of address of the amount of such tax and interest and penalty and the total amount thereof shall be payable within ten days from the date of such notice. 
(Ord. of 3-6-2001)
Sec. 74-111. - Preservation of records. 
    It shall be the duty of every person required by this article to pay to the town the taxes imposed by the article to keep and to preserve for a period of two years records showing all purchases taxable under this article, the amount charged the purchaser for each purchase, the date thereof, the taxes collected thereon and the amount of tax required to be collected by this article. The town treasurer or his duly authorized agents shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business of such person, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article and to make transcripts of all or any parts thereof. 
(Ord. of 3-6-2001)
Sec. 74-112. - Cessation of business; report and tax due immediately. 
    Whenever any person required to collect and pay to the town a tax under this article shall cease to operate and shall otherwise dispose of his business, any tax payable under the provisions of this article shall become immediately due and payable. Such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due. 
(Ord. of 3-6-2001)
ARTICLE VI. - CIGARETTE TAX 

Sec. 74-113. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section. 
    Carton shall mean any container, regardless of material used in its construction, in which ten packages of 20 cigarettes are placed. 
    Cigarette shall mean and include any roll of any size or shape for smoking, whether filtered or unfiltered, with or without a mouthpiece, made wholly or partly of cut, shredded or crimped tobacco or other plant or substitute for tobacco, whether the same is flavored, adulterated or mixed with another ingredient, if the wrapper or cover is made of any material other than leaf tobacco or homogenized leaf tobacco, regardless of whether the roll is labeled or sold as a cigarette or by any other name. 
    Dealer shall mean and include every manufacturer's representative, self wholesaler, retailer, vending machine operator, public warehouseman or other person who shall sell, receive, store, possess, distribute or transport cigarettes within or into the town. 
    Package shall mean and include any container, regardless of the material used in its construction in which separate cigarettes are placed without such cigarettes being placed into any container within the package. Packages are those containers of cigarettes from which they are consumed by their ultimate user. Ordinarily a package contains 20 cigarettes; however, "package" includes those containers in which fewer or more than 20 cigarettes are placed. 
    Person shall mean and include any individual, firm, unincorporated association, company, corporation, joint stock company, group, agency, syndicate, trust or trustee, receiver, fiduciary, partnership and conservator. The word "person" as applied to a partnership, unincorporated association or other joint venture means the partners or members thereof, and as applied to a corporation shall include all the officers and directors thereof. 
    Place of business shall mean and include any place where cigarettes are sold, placed, stored, offered for sale or displayed for sale or where cigarettes are brought or kept for the purpose of sale, consumption or distribution, including vending machines, by a dealer within the town. 
    Registered agent shall mean and include every dealer and other person who shall be required to report and collect the tax on cigarettes under the provisions of this article. 
    Retail dealer shall mean and include every person who, in the usual course of business, purchases or receives cigarettes from any source whatsoever for the purpose of sale within the town to the ultimate consumer; or any person who, in the usual course of business, owns, leases, or otherwise operates within his own place of business, one or more cigarette vending machines for the purpose of sale within the town of cigarettes to the ultimate consumer; or any person who, in any manner, buys, sells, stores, transfers, or deals in cigarettes for the purpose of sale within the town to the ultimate consumer, who is not licensed as a wholesaler, or vending machine operator. 
    Sale or sell shall mean and include every act or transaction, regardless of the method or means employed, including barter, exchange, or the use of vending machines or other mechanical devices or a criminal or tortuous act whereby either ownership or possession, or both, of any cigarettes shall be transferred within the town from a dealer as herein defined to any other person for a consideration. 
    Stamp shall mean a small gummed piece of paper or decal used to evidence provision for payment of the tax as authorized by the board required to be affixed to every package of cigarettes sold or used within the town. 
    Store or storage shall mean and include the keeping or retention of cigarettes in this town for any purpose except sale in the regular course of business. 
    Town shall mean Town of Woodstock, Virginia. 
    Use shall mean and include the exercise of any right or power over any cigarettes or packages or cigarettes incident to the ownership or possession of those cigarettes or packages of cigarettes including any transaction where possession is given or received or otherwise transferred, other than a sale. 
    User shall mean any person who exercises any right or power over any cigarettes or packages of cigarettes subject to the provisions of this article incident to the ownership or possession of those cigarettes or packages of cigarettes or any transaction where possession is given or received or otherwise transferred, other than a sale. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2002)
Sec. 74-114. - Levy and rate. 
    In addition to all other taxes of every kind now or hereinafter imposed by law, there is hereby levied and imposed by the town upon every person who sells or uses cigarettes within the town from and after the effective date of this article an excise tax equivalent to $0.25 for each package containing 20 cigarettes or less. The tax shall be paid and collected in the manner and at the time hereinafter prescribed; provided, that the tax payable for each cigarette package sold or used within the town shall be paid but once. The tax hereby levied shall not apply to free distribution of sample cigarettes in packages containing five or fewer cigarettes. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2002; Ord. of 6-28-2007; Ord. of 7-3-2012)
Sec. 74-115. - Delegation of administration. 
(a)	The town treasure is hereby delegated the authority to administer all provisions of this article. 
(b)	The town treasure is authorized to promulgate such rules and regulations, as it deems appropriate, governing: 
(1)	The display of cigarette stamps in vending machines;
(2)	The placement of tax liens against property of taxpayers hereunder;
(3)	The extending of varying discount rates;
(4)	The establishing of different classes of taxpayers or those required to collect and remit the tax: 
(5)	The requirements concerning keeping and production of records;
(6)	The administrative and jeopardy assessment of tax where reasonably justified;
(7)	The required notice to authorities of sale of taxpayer's business;
(8)	The audit requirements and authority;
(9)	The criteria for authority of distributors and others to possess untaxed cigarettes;
(10)	Any and all powers granted by the provisions of the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended, or necessarily implied therefrom. 
(c)	The town treasurer, is authorized to:
(1)	Issue a common revenue stamp;
(2)	Bring appropriate court action in its own name where necessary to enforce payment of the cigarette taxes or penalties; 
(3)	Provide cigarette tax agents and the necessary enforcement supplies and equipment needed to effectively enforce the cigarette tax ordinance. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2002)
Sec. 74-116. - Methods of collection. 
(a)	The tax imposed by this article shall be evidenced by the use of a stamp and shall be paid by each dealer or other person liable for the tax under a reporting method deemed by the town to carry out the provisions of this article. The stamps shall be affixed in such a manner that their removal will require continued application of water or stream. Each dealer or other person liable for the tax is hereby required, and it shall be his duty, to collect and pay the tax and report separately for packages of 20 cigarettes on forms prescribed for this purpose by the town: 
(1)	The quantity of town-stamped cigarettes sold or delivered to:
a.	Each registered agent appointed by the town for which no tax was collected;
b.	Each manufacturer's representative; and
c.	Each separate person and place of business within the town during the preceding calendar or fiscal month; and 
(2)	The quantity of town stamps on hand, both affixed and unaffixed on the first day and the last day of the preceding calendar or fiscal month and the quantity, of town stamps or town stamped cigarettes received during the preceding calendar or fiscal month; and 
(3)	The quantity of cigarettes on hand to which the town stamp had not been affixed on the first and last day of the preceding calendar or fiscal month and the quantity of cigarettes received during the preceding calendar or fiscal month to which the town stamp had not be affixed; and 
(4)	Such further information as the administrator for the town may require for the proper administration and enforcement of this article for the determination of the exact number of cigarettes in the possession of each dealer or user. 
(b)	Each dealer or other person liable for the tax shall file such reports with the town and pay the tax due to the town between the first and twentieth day after the close of each calendar or fiscal month, and shall furnish a copy of any cigarette tax reports submitted to the Virginia Department of Taxation for the previous month. 
(c)	When, upon examination and audit of any invoices, records, books, cancelled checks or other memoranda touching on the purchase, sale, receipt, storage or possession of tobacco products taxed herein, any dealer or other person liable for the tax is unable to furnish evidence to the town of sufficient tax payments and stamp purchases to cover cigarettes which were sold, used, stored, received, purchased or possessed by him, the prima facie presumption shall arise that such cigarettes were received, sold, used, stored, purchased or possessed by him without the proper tax having been paid. The town shall, from the results of such examination and audit based upon such direct or indirect information available, assess the tax due and unpaid and impose a penalty of ten percent and interest of ten percent per annum of the gross tax due. 
(d)	When any dealer or other person liable for the tax files a false or fraudulent report or fails to file a report or fails to perform any act or performs any act to evade payment of the tax, the town shall administratively assess the tax due and unpaid and impose a penalty of 50 percent and interest of ten percent per annum of the gross tax due. 
(e)	The dealer or other person liable for the tax shall be notified by certified mail of such deficiency and such tax, penalty and interest assessed shall be due and payable within ten days after notice of such deficiency has been issued. Every dealer or other person liable for the tax shall examine each package of cigarettes to ensure that the town stamp has been affixed thereto prior to offering them for sale. 
(f)	Any dealer or other person liable for the tax who shall receive cigarettes not bearing the town stamp shall, within one hour of receipt of such cigarettes, commence and with all reasonable diligence continue to affix the town stamp to each and every package of cigarettes until all unstamped packages of cigarettes have been stamped and before offering such cigarettes for sale. Any dealer or other person liable for the tax who has notified the town that he is engaged in interstate or intrastate business shall be permitted to set aside such part of his stock as may be legally kept for the conduct of such interstate or intrastate business (that is, cigarettes held for sale outside the jurisdiction of the town) without affixing the stamps required by this article. Any such interstate or intrastate stock shall be kept entirely separate and apart from the town-stamped stock, in such a manner as to prevent the co-mingling of the interstate or intrastate stock with the town stock. Any dealer or other person liable for the tax found to have had untaxed cigarettes which have been lost, whether by negligence, theft, or any other unaccountable loss, shall be liable for and shall pay the tax due thereon. 
(g)	It shall also be the duty of each dealer or other person liable for the tax and he is hereby required to maintain and keep for a period of three years, not including the current calendar year, records of cigarettes received, sold, stored, possessed, transferred or handled by him in any manner, whatsoever, whether the same were stamped or unstamped, to make all such records available for audit, inspection and examination and to make available at all reasonable times the means, facilities and opportunity for making such audit, inspection or examination upon demand of the town. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2002)
Sec. 74-117. - Registered agents. 
(a)	Any dealer or other person liable for the tax who shall sell, use, store, possess, distribute or transport cigarettes within or into the town shall first make application to the town to qualify as a registered agent. Such application blank, which shall be supplied upon request, shall require such information relative to the nature of the business engaged in by said applicant as the town deems necessary. Any applicant whose place of business is outside the town shall automatically, by filing his application, submit himself to the town's legal jurisdiction and appoint the town treasurer as his agent for any service of lawful process. 
    Upon receipt of the properly completed application, the town shall issue to said applicant a permit to qualify him as a registered agent to purchase, sell, use, store, possess, distribute or transport within or into the town, town-stamped cigarettes. 
(b)	After adoption of this article, dealers or other persons liable for that tax who shall sell, use, store, possess, distribute or transport tobacco products within or into the town shall be allowed 30 days to become qualified as a registered agent. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2002)
Sec. 74-118. - Notice of intention by retail dealers. 
(a)	Retail dealers who shall sell, offer for sale, store, possess, distribute, purchase, receive or transport cigarettes in or into the town shall notify the town in writing, of the supplier of such cigarettes and the name and address and the Virginia Retail Sales and Use Certificate of Registration number for each separate place of business. Possession of a Virginia State Retail Sales and Use Tax Certificate and a Virginia State Retail Tobacco License and, where applicable, a retail business license issued by the town for each separate place of business by a retail dealer shall be considered sufficient written notification to the town. 
(b)	No retail dealer, as defined herein, who shall have complied with the provisions of the article and who purchases only tax-paid town-stamped cigarettes for each separate place of business shall be required to qualify as a registered agent. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2002)
Sec. 74-119. - Sale of cigarettes in vending machines; contraband. 
(a)	Any cigarettes placed in any coin-operated vending machine shall be presumed for sale within the town. Any vending machine located within the town containing cigarettes placed so as to not allow visual inspection of the town stamp through the viewing area as provided for the vending machine manufacturer shall be in violation of this article. 
(b)	Any cigarettes, coin-operated vending machines, counterfeit stamps, or other property found in violation of this article shall be declared contraband goods and may be seized by the town. In addition to any tax due, the dealer or other person liable for the tax possessing such untaxed cigarettes shall be subject to civil and criminal penalties herein provided. 
(c)	In lieu of seizure, the town may seal such vending machines to prevent continued illegal sale or removal of such cigarettes. The removal of such seal from a vending machine by any unauthorized person shall be a violation of this article. Nothing in this article shall prevent the seizure of any vending machine at any time after it is sealed. 
(d)	All cigarette vending machines shall be plainly marked with the name, address and telephone number of the owner of said machine. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2002)
Sec. 74-120. - Illegal acts. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful and a violation of the article for any dealer or other person liable for the tax: 
(1)	To perform any act or fail to perform any act for the purpose of evading the payment of any tax imposed by this article or of any part thereof, or to fail or refuse to perform any of the duties imposed under him under the provisions of the article or to fail or refuse to obey any lawful order which may be issued under this article; or 
(2)	To falsely or fraudulently make, or cause to be made, any invoices or reports, or to falsely or fraudulently forge, alter or counterfeit any stamp, or to procure or cause to be made, forged, altered or counterfeited any such stamp, or knowingly and willfully to alter, publish, pass or tender as true any false, altered, forged or counterfeited stamp or stamps; or 
(3)	To sell, offer for sale, or authorize or approve the sale of any cigarettes upon which the town stamp has not been affixed; or 
(4)	To possess, store, use, authorize or approve the possession, storage or use of any cigarettes in quantities of more than 60 packages upon which the town stamp has not been affixed; or 
(5)	To transport, authorize or approve the transportation of any cigarettes in quantities of more than 60 packages into or within the town upon which the town stamp has not been affixed, if they are: 
a.	Not accompanied by a bill of lading or other document indicating the true name and address of the consignor or seller and the consignee or purchaser and the brands and quantity of cigarettes transported; or 
b.	Accompanied by a bill of lading or other document which is false or fraudulent in whole or part; or 
c.	Accompanied by a bill of lading or other document indicating:
1.	A consignee or purchaser in another state or the District of Columbia who is not authorized by the law of such other jurisdiction to receive or possess such tobacco products on which the taxes imposed by such other jurisdiction have not been paid unless the tax on the jurisdiction of destination has been paid and said cigarettes bear the tax stamps of the jurisdiction; or 
2.	A consignee or purchaser in the Commonwealth of Virginia but outside the taxing jurisdiction who does not possess a Virginia Sales and Use Tax Certificate, a Virginia retail tobacco license and, where applicable, or a business license and a retail tobacco license issued by the local jurisdiction of destination; or 
(6)	To reuse or refill with cigarettes any package from which cigarettes have been removed, for which the tax imposed has been theretofore paid; or 
(7)	To remove from any package any stamp with intent to use or cause the same to be used after same has already been used or to buy, sell, or offer for sale or give away any used, removed, altered or restored stamps to any person, or to reuse any stamp which had therefore been used for evidence of the payment of any tax prescribed by this article or to sell, or offer to sell, any stamp provided for herein. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2002)
Sec. 74-121. - Jeopardy assessment. 
    If the town determines that the collection of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid under this article will be jeopardized by delay, the town shall make an assessment of the tax or amount of tax required to be collected and shall mail or issue a notice of such assessment to the taxpayer together with a demand for immediate payment of the tax or of the deficiency in tax declared to be in jeopardy including penalties and interest. In the case of a current period, for which the tax is in jeopardy, the town may declare the taxable period of the taxpayer immediately terminated and shall cause notice of such finding and declaration to be mailed or issued to the taxpayer together with a demand for immediate payment of the tax based on the period declared terminated and such tax shall be immediately due and payable, whether or not the terms otherwise allowed by this article for filing a return and paying the tax has expired. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2002)
Sec. 74-122. - Erroneous assessment: notices and hearings in the event of sealing of vending machines or seizure of contraband property. 
(a)	Any person assessed by the town with a cigarette tax, penalties and interest or any person whose cigarettes, vending machines and other property have been sealed or seized under processes of this article who has been aggrieved by such assessment, seizure, or sealing may file a request for a hearing before the town for a correction of such assessment and the return of such property seized or sealed. 
(b)	Where holders of property interest in cigarettes, vending machines or other property known at time of seizure or sealing, notice of seizure or sealing shall be sent to them by certified mail within 24 hours. Where such holders of property interests are unknown at time of seizure or sealing, it shall be sufficient notice to such unknown interest holders to post such notice to a door or wall of the room or building which contained such seized or sealed property. Any such notice of seizure or sealing shall include procedures for an administrative hearing for return of such property seized or sealed as well as affirmative defenses set forth in this section which may be asserted. 
(c)	Such hearing shall be requested within ten days of the notice of such assessment, seizure, or sealing and shall set forth the reasons why said tax, penalties and interest and cigarettes, vending machines or other property should be returned or released. Within five days after receipt of such hearing request the town shall notify the petitioner by certified mail of a date and time for the informal presentation of evidence at a hearing to be held within 15 days of the date notification is mailed. Any such request for hearing shall be denied if the assessed tax, penalties and interest has not been paid as required or if the request is received more than ten days from first notice to the petitioner of such seizure or sealing. Within five days after the hearing, the town shall notify the petitioner, by registered mail, whether his request for a correction has been granted or refused. 
(d)	Appropriate relief shall be given by the town if it is proven by the preponderance of the evidence that the illegal sale or use of such seized cigarettes or vending machine or other property was not intentional on the part of the petitioner, and that said seized cigarettes were in the possession of a person other than the petitioner without the petitioner's consent at the time said cigarettes, vending machines or other property were seized or sealed or that petitioner was authorized to possess such untaxed cigarettes. If the town is satisfied that the tax was erroneously assessed, it shall refund the amount erroneously assessed together with any interest and penalties paid thereon and shall return any cigarettes, vending machines or other property seized or sealed to the petitioner. Any petitioner who is unsatisfied with the written decision of the town may within 30 days of the date of said decision, appeal such decision to the appropriate court in the jurisdiction where the seizure or sealing occurred. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2002)
Sec. 74-123. - Disposal of seized property. 
    Any seized and confiscated cigarettes, vending machines or other property used in the furtherance of any illegal evasion of the tax may be disposed of by sale or other method deemed appropriate by the town after any petitioner has exhausted all administrative appeal procedures. No credit from any sale of cigarettes, vending machines, or other property seized shall be allowed toward any tax and penalties assessed. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2002)
Sec. 74-124. - Extensions. 
    The town, upon a finding of good cause may grant an extension of time to file a tax report upon written application therefore, until the end of the calendar or fiscal month in which any tax report is due hereunder, or for a period not exceeding 30 days. In no case shall a request for an extension of time to file a tax report be granted by the town when such request is not received within the due date for filing such tax report. No interest or penalty shall be charged, assessed or collected by reason of the granting of such an extension. Where such extension is granted beyond the end of the calendar or fiscal month in which any tax report is due, hereunder, interest on the tax at a rate of ten percent per annum shall be charged. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2002)
Sec. 74-125. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class I misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2002)
Sec. 74-126. - Each violation a separate offense. 
    The sale of any quantity or the use, possession, storage or transportation of more than 60 packages of cigarettes upon which the town stamp has not been affixed shall be and constitute a separate violation. Each continuing day of violation shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2002)
Sec. 74-127. - Severability. 
    If any section, phrase, or part of this article should for any reason be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the remainder of the article, and every remaining section, clause, phrase or part thereof shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2002)
Chapter 78 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Adoption of Code of Virginia, § 15.1-891, pertaining to regulation of traffic, § 4.
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 10; name and address on vehicle of peddler, § 18-128; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; keeping inoperative vehicles, § 34-30; vegetation causing traffic hazard, § 34-42; law enforcement, ch. 38; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; using vehicles to promote prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse, § 46-23; throwing or depositing hazardous or injurious substances upon highway, § 46-24; damage to or unlawful entry in vehicle, § 46-25 et seq.; automobile graveyards, § 58-2; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; vehicles for hire, ch. 86.
State Law reference- Municipal powers as to the use of streets, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-14; limited access streets in municipalities, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-16; motor vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100 et seq.; local regulation of parking, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220 et seq.; local regulation of traffic, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Street means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way or place of whatever nature open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel in this town, including streets, alleys and publicly maintained parking lots in the town. 
(Code 1968, § 13-4)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of July 1, 2006, repealed § 78-2, which pertained to violations of chapter; penalties and derived from Code 1968, § 13-20; Ord. of July 1, 2003. 
Sec. 78-3. - Adoption of state law. 
    Pursuant to the authority of Section 46.2-1313 of the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended, all of the provisions and requirements of Title 46.2 and Article 2 (Section 18.2-266, et seq.) of Chapter 7 of Title 18.2 of the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended, except those provisions which are contained in this chapter and except for those provisions and requirements the violation of which constitutes a felony, and except those provisions and requirements which by their very nature can have no application to or within the town are hereby adopted and incorporated in this chapter by reference and made applicable within the town. Reference to "highways of the state" contained in such provisions and requirements hereby adopted shall be deemed to refer to the streets, highways, and other public ways within the town. Such provisions and requirements are hereby adopted, mutatis mutandis, and made a part of this chapter as fully as though set forth at length herein, and it shall be unlawful for any person, within the town to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any provision of [Title] 46.2 or of Article 2 of Chapter 7 of Title 18.2 of the Code of Virginia which is adopted by this section; provided, that in no event shall the penalty imposed for the violation of any provision or requirement hereby adopted exceed the penalty imposed for a similar offense under Title 46.2 or under Article 2 of Chapter 7 of Title 18.2 of the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended. 
(Code 1968, § 13-42; Ord. of 7-2-91(1), § 13-42; Ord. No. 467, 7-7-92; Ord. of 7-6-93(1); Ord. of 7-5-94; Ord. of 7-11-95; Ord. of 7-2-96(2); Ord. of 7-1-97(1); Ord. of 7-1-97(2); Ord. of 6-2-2009; Ord. of 6-1-2010; Ord. of 6-7-2011; Ord. of 6-5-2012; Ord. of 6-4-2013; Ord. of 6-3-2014; Ord. of 6-2-2015) 
Sec. 78-4. - Powers and duties of town manager-Traffic and parking generally. 
(a)	The town manager, except as otherwise provided by this chapter and except as otherwise directed from time to time by the council, is hereby authorized to: 
(1)	Regulate the operation and parking of vehicles within the corporate limits of the town by the erection or placing of proper signs or markers indicating prohibited or limited parking, angle parking, the parking of buses, trucks and other vehicles of various weights, U-turns, turning at intersections, hazardous intersections, school zones, hospital zones, loading and unloading zones, quiet zones, traffic control signals exhibiting colored lights or the words "go", "caution" or "stop" and other signs or markers indicating the place and manner of operating or parking vehicles in the town. 
(2)	Regulate the movement of pedestrians upon the streets and sidewalks of the town by the erection or placing of proper signs or markers indicating the flow of pedestrian traffic. 
(3)	Designate bus stops and erect signs prohibiting the parking of vehicles other than buses at such stops. 
(4)	Mark off traffic lanes on streets and parts of streets indicating and directing the flow of traffic. 
(b)	The town manager is hereby authorized to secure all such necessary signs, signals or markers to be erected or placed on any street or part of a street. 
(c)	The existence of such signs, signals or markers at any place within the corporate limits of the town shall be prima facie evidence that such signs, signals or markers were erected or placed by and at the direction of the town manager in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1968, § 13-7)
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Power of town to delegate authority to make parking regulations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-220. 
Sec. 78-5. - Same-Stop and yield intersections. 
(a)	The town manager, except as otherwise provided by this chapter and except as otherwise directed from time to time by the council, may designate intersections, other than intersections at which one or more of the intersecting streets has been designated as a part of the state highway system, at which vehicles shall come to a full stop or yield the right-of-way. 
(b)	The town manager is hereby authorized to secure all such necessary signs, signals or markers to be erected or placed on or at any such intersection, so that an ordinarily observant person, who may be affected by such regulation, may be aware of such regulation. 
(c)	The existence of such signs, signals or markers at any place within the corporate limits of the town shall be prima facie evidence that such signs, signals or markers were erected or placed by and at the direction of the town manager in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(d)	The town manager is hereby authorized to require that stop lines and stop signs be placed by the owners of properties in commercial districts as set forth in section 90-384(c). 
(Code 1968, § 13-8; Ord. of 2-5-91(2), § 13-8)
Sec. 78-6. - Compliance with signs, etc., erected or placed pursuant to section 78-4 or 78-5. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with the directions indicated on any sign, signal or marker erected or placed in accordance with the provisions of section 78-4 or 78-5 when such sign, signal or marker so placed or erected is visible and legible. 
(Code 1968, § 13-9)
Secs. 78-7-78-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of July 1, 2006, repealed §§ 78-7-78-9, which pertained to authority of police with reference to traffic; authority of members of fire department to direct traffic; signs prerequisite to enforcement of chapter and regulations, respectively, and derived from Code 1968, §§ 13-21, 13-27, 13-22, respectively; Ord. of July 1, 2003. 
Sec. 78-10. - Legal holidays. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following days shall be legal holidays on the respective dates as such holidays are observed, together with any other such days as shall be specified by the town council at its discretion: 
All state and federal holidays. 
(Code 1968, § 13-103.1; Ord. of 7-1-2003; Ord. of 7-1-2006; Ord. of 9-2-2014)
Sec. 78-11. - Traffic violation notices. 
(a)	Traffic violation notices shall be issued to violators of parking regulations and all other nonmoving regulations, with the exception of persons charged with parking too close to or in front of fire hydrants and fire stations and with the further exception of persons charged with parking meter violations, unless circumstances warrant other action, in which event the usual procedure of summons or arrest shall apply. 
(b)	Parking violation notices may be settled by a payment within a period of five days after issuance, of a minimum penalty of $10.00, which payment shall be in complete satisfaction of the offense. Payment shall be made to such person at the town office as from time to time shall be designated by the town manager to receive such payment. Failure to settle a parking violation notice as above provided shall subject the recipient to the penalty as set forth in section 78-81. 
(c)	The town manager shall establish a full and complete procedure for handling traffic violation notices. 
(d)	All amounts paid under this section shall be credited to and become a part of the general fund of the town. 
(Code 1968, § 13-10; Ord. of 7-1-2003; Ord. of 7-1-2006)
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30. 
Sec. 78-12. - Permits for parades and processions. 
    No parade, excepting the forces of the United States Army or Navy, the military forces of the state and the forces of the police and fire departments of the town, shall occupy or march or proceed along any street, except in accordance with a permit issued by the town manager. 
(Code 1968, § 13-11)
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; law enforcement, ch. 38; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66. 
Secs. 78-13-78-15. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of July 1, 2003, repealed §§ 78-13-78-15, which pertained to valid state license plate prerequisite to driving, etc., vehicle on street; valid inspection sticker prerequisite to driving, etc., vehicle on street; tailgates on vehicles, respectively, and derived from Code 1968, §§ 13-13, 13-14, 13-162, respectively. 
Sec. 78-16. - Operating motor vehicles so as to cause noise or provoke breach of peace. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle over the streets of the town in a manner causing unnecessary noise or in any other manner reasonably calculated to provoke a breach of the peace. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1968, § 14-34)
Sec. 78-17. - Reckless riding of skateboards, etc., prohibited. 
    Reckless use of roller skates, skateboards, toys, or other devices on wheels or runners, is prohibited. 
(Code 1968, § 14-27.1)
Sec. 78-18. - Riding bicycles, etc. on sidewalks, etc., prohibited. 
    Riding of bicycles, skateboards, rollerblades, rollerskates, toys, or other devices on wheels or runners, on sidewalks or crosswalks, including those of any church, school, recreational facility, or any business property open to the public is prohibited. Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $25.00. 
(Code 1968, § 14-27; Ord. of 6-6-95; Ord. of 6-3-97(2))
Sec. 78-19. - Riding horses, etc., on sidewalks prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully ride a horse, mule or other animal upon any sidewalk of the town. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1968, § 14-26; Ord. of 7-2-91(4), § 14-26)
Sec. 78-20. - Driving around rotary traffic islands. 
    A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of such island. 
(Ord. of 8-1-2006)
Editor's note- Formerly, Ord. of July 1, 2003, repealed § 78-20, which pertained to railroad cars obstructing street or road; standing vehicle on railroad track and derived from Code 1968, § 13-91. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.1-204. 
Secs. 78-21-78-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING AND REGISTRATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Titling and registration of motor vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-600 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 78-41-78-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOCAL VEHICLE LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Local licensing of vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752 et seq.

Sec. 78-51. - Imposition of license taxes generally. 
    There is hereby imposed an annual license tax upon the following motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers, except as otherwise provided in this article: 
(1)	Motor vehicles, trailers, and semitrailers that are normally garaged, stored or parked in the town. 
(2)	If it cannot be determined where the personal property is normally garaged, stored, or parked, or if the owner is a student attending an institution of higher education, motor vehicles and semitrailers whose owner has his domicile in the town. 
(Code 1968, § 13-34)
State Law reference- Situs for the imposition of license taxes, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752. 
Sec. 78-52. - Amounts of license taxes. 
    The license tax imposed in section 78-51 shall be in the following annual amounts: 
(1)	For motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers designed and used for the transportation of passengers, other than motorcycles .....$25.00 
(2)	For motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers not designed for living quarters .....25.00 
(3)	For trailers, semitrailers and camping-type trailers designed for living quarters .....25.00 
(4)	For motorcycles, motorbikes, mopeds and motor scooters .....18.00 
(Code 1968, § 13-35; Ord. of 3-5-91, § 13-35)
Sec. 78-53. - Exemptions. 
    The license taxes imposed in section 78-51 shall not be imposed when: 
(1)	The motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is owned by a nonresident and is used for transporting into and within the town for sale in person or by his employees, of wood, meats, poultry, fruits, flowers, vegetables, milk, butter, cream or eggs produced or grown by him, and not purchased by him for sale. 
(2)	The motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is kept by a dealer or manufacturer for sale or for sales demonstration. 
(3)	The motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is operated by a common carrier of persons or property operating between cities and towns in the state and not in intracity transportation or between cities and towns on the one hand and points and places without cities and towns on the other and not intracity transportation. 
(Code 1968, § 13-36)
State Law reference- Limitations on imposition of motor vehicle license taxes and fees, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-755. 
Sec. 78-54. - When and where license taxes payable; town automobile license tags or stickers generally. 
    The license taxes imposed in section 78-51 shall be payable at the office of the town treasurer before the operation of the motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer in question over the streets of the town, and annually thereafter, as provided in this chapter, at which time the owner thereof shall obtain a town automobile license plate or sticker. In the case of a license plate, it shall be securely fastened to the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer to which it is assigned, on the rear of trailers or semitrailers, and on either the front or rear of other motor vehicles, in a position to be clearly visible, and in a condition to be clearly legible. 
(Code 1968, § 13-37)
State Law reference- Placement of sticker or decal, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1052. 
Sec. 78-55. - Transfer of license sticker. 
    The treasurer shall charge a fee of $1.00 for the transfer or reissue of a license sticker within the license year and before any transfer or reissue is made, the treasurer shall require presentation of the receipt for the original sticker and the remains of the original sticker. 
(Code 1968, § 13-37.1)
Sec. 78-56. - License year. 
    The license year under this division shall begin on March 1 of each year and end on February 28 or 29 of the following year. 
(Code 1968, § 13-38; Ord. of 4-7-98)
State Law reference- Period of imposition of license fees, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752. 
Sec. 78-57. - Purchase of license tags by new residents. 
    New residents of the town shall have 30 days in which to purchase automobile license tags. 
(Code 1968, § 13-38.1)
Sec. 78-58. - Proration of license tax. 
    One-half of the annual license tax prescribed in this division shall be collected whenever any town automobile license tax is obtained during the period beginning on August 15 in any year, and ending on December 1 in the same license year, and one-third of such annual license tax shall be collected whenever any town automobile license tag is obtained after January 15 in any license year. 
(Code 1968, § 13-39; Ord. of 4-7-98)
State Law reference- Manner of proration of license fees, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752. 
Sec. 78-59. - Payment of personal property tax prerequisite to issuance of license. 
    No motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer shall be licensed by the town unless and until the applicant for such license shall have produced evidence satisfactory to the town that all personal property taxes upon the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer have been paid, which have been properly assessed or are assessable against the applicant by the town. 
(Code 1968, § 13-40)
Cross reference- Taxation, ch. 74. 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752. 
Sec. 78-60. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor for each offense. 
(Code 1968, § 13-41)
Sec. 78-61. - Exemption of volunteers. 
    Each active volunteer member of a volunteer fire department or volunteer rescue squad who appears as an official member of such organization on their respective departmental roster or roll, shall receive an annual license for one vehicle free of charge. 
(Ord. of 1-2-2001)
Secs. 78-62-78-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Adoption of Code of Virginia, § 15.1-884, pertaining to parking or storage of vehicles, § 4.
Cross reference- Offstreet parking, § 90-387 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-81. - Penalties for violations. 
    Except where otherwise specifically provided, any person violating the provisions of this chapter, or aiding, abetting or assisting in the violation of such provisions, shall, upon conviction, be fined as follows: 
(1)	Overtime parking .....$10.00 
(2)	On or blocking a sidewalk; blocking a public or private driveway; blocking a public or private alley or driveway; on or across a pedestrian crosswalk .....20.00 
(3)	On the roadway side of any vehicle parked at the edge or curb of street, this violation being known as double parking .....20.00 
(4)	In a restricted zone where such zones are marked with official signs, except posted parking areas .....20.00 
(5)	Commercial vehicle in residential district (Town Code) .....20.00 
(6)	On the wrong side of street (left wheel to curb) against traffic .....20.00 
(7)	Across marked lines of a parking space .....20.00 
(8)	Over or on top of curb .....20.00 
(9)	Handicap violation .....50.00 
(Code 1968, § 13-112; Ord. of 7-1-2003; Ord. of 7-1-2006)
Sec. 78-82. - Moving vehicle into prohibited area, etc. 
    No person other than a police officer shall move a vehicle into any prohibited area, as provided for in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1239, or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(Code 1968, § 13-95)
Secs. 78-83, 78-84. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of July 1, 2003, repealed §§ 78-83, 78-84, which pertained to backing up to curbs; unauthorized parking in taxicab stands, respectively, and derived from Code 1968, §§ 13-100, 13-101, respectively. 
Sec. 78-85. - Commercial vehicles-Parking in residential zones and/or any public right-of-way prohibited. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to park a commercial vehicle in any residential zone and/or any public right-of-way. 
(b)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial vehicle means: 
(1)	Any solid waste collection vehicle, tractor truck or tractor truck/semitrailer or tractor truck/trailer combination (or any part thereof), dump truck, concrete mixer truck, towing and recovery vehicle, box type truck, step van, panel truck, flat bed truck, or heavy construction equipment, whether located on private property or on a truck, trailer or semitrailer; 
(2)	Any trailer, semitrailer, or other vehicle in which food or beverages are stored or sold; 
(3)	Any motor vehicle licensed by the commonwealth for use as a common or contract carrier or as a limousine, to include school buses; 
(4)	Any other trailer used for commercial purposes; or
(c)	Any person who violates this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100.00.
(d)	This section shall not apply to parking in the course of legitimate deliveries or service calls. 
(Code 1968, § 13-19.1; Ord. of 7-1-2003; Ord. of 7-6-2004; Ord. of 7-1-2006)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-86. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of July 1, 2003, repealed § 78-86, which pertained to tractor trucks and semitrailers-starting tractor trucks in residential zones and derived from Code 1968, § 13-19.2. 
Sec. 78-87. - Parking of vendors and peddlers prohibited. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on the public streets, highways, sidewalks or public areas of the town for the purpose of vending or peddling goods or merchandise of any kind. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. 
(b)	The provisions of this section shall not apply to vending during a recognized public event having the prior approval of a town permit. 
(Ord. No. 463, 4-7-92; Ord. of 9-2-2014)
Cross reference- Peddlers generally, § 18-121 et seq.; vending and peddling prohibited on public property, § 46-27.1 
Sec. 78-88. - Stopping on streets; generally. 
(a)	No vehicle shall be stopped in such manner as to impede or render dangerous the use of the street by others, except in the case of an emergency as the result of an accident or mechanical breakdown, in which case a report shall be made to the nearest police officer as soon as practicable and the vehicle shall be removed from the roadway to the shoulder without unnecessary delay; and, if such vehicle is not promptly removed, such removal may also be ordered by a police officer at the expense of the owner if the disabled vehicle creates a traffic hazard. 
(b)	No vehicle shall be stopped except close to and parallel to the right-hand edge of the curb or roadway, except that a vehicle may be stopped close to and parallel to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway on one-way streets or may be parked at an angle where permitted by the state highway commission or chief of police with respect to streets and highways under their respective jurisdictions. 
(c)	No vehicle shall be stopped at or in the vicinity of a fire, vehicle or airplane accident or other area of emergency, in such a manner as to create a traffic hazard or interfere with the necessary procedures of police, firemen, rescue workers or others whose duty it is to deal with such emergencies. Any vehicle found unattended in the vicinity of such fire, accident or area of emergency may be removed by order of a police officer at the risk and expense, not to exceed $50.00, of the owner if such vehicle creates a traffic hazard or interferes with the necessary procedures of police, firemen, rescue workers or others whose assigned duty it is to deal with such emergencies. Vehicles being used by accredited information services, such as press, radio and television, when being used for the gathering of news, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section, except when actually obstructing the police, firemen and rescue workers dealing with such emergencies. 
(Ord. of 7-6-93)
Sec. 78-89. - Penalty for overtime parking in 15 minute and two hour parking zones. 
(a)	If any vehicle shall remain parked in a 15 minute or two hour parking zone in excess of 15 minutes or two hours, respectively, it shall be considered as parking overtime, and the parking of such vehicle overtime shall be unlawful. Each violator receiving a ticket noting such violation may, within 24 hours of the time when such ticket notice was attached to such vehicle, pay at the town treasurer's office or the police department, the sum of $10.00 for and in full satisfaction of such violation. In lieu of making such payment at the town treasurer's office or police department, the requisite sum may be deposited in the envelopes provided in one of the yellow Traf-O-Teria Courtesy Boxes located on certain posts within the period of 24 hours. The failure of such violator to make such payment to the town treasure or police department in one of these methods provided herein within 24 hours shall result in a fine of $20.00, and the police department shall notify such violator by letter that the fine is $20.00. 
(b)	The failure of such violator to make such payment of $10.00 to the town treasurer within five days of the date of such letter shall result in a summons being issued in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 46.2-941, and shall render such violator subject to the penalties provided under section 78-81. 
(c)	The owner or operator of any vehicle parked in violation of this section shall be prima facie guilty of such violation. 
(d)	The 15 minute and two-hour parking zone restrictions shall apply Monday thru Saturday, except Holidays, from 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m. 
(Ord. of 11-2-93(1); Ord. of 11-7-2000; Ord. of 7-1-2003; Ord. of 7-1-2006; Ord. of 8-2-2006) 
Sec. 78-90. - Penalties for continuous violations of two hour and 15 minute limit parking. 
    Any violation of two hour parking, and 15 minute limited parking in excess of three within any 30-day period, shall be punished by a fine of $10.00 if paid within 21 days of the mailing of a letter by the police department to the violator notifying the violator of this offense. If the sum of $10.00 is not paid within the 21-day period, the fine shall be $25.00. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2000)
Secs. 78-91-78-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EMERGENCY ROUTES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. of Nov. 7, 2000 repealed Div. 2, §§ 78-96-78-106 which pertained to parking meters and derived from Code 1968, §§ 13-102-13-111; Ord. of Nov. 2, 1993(2).

Sec. 78-96. - Emergency routes designated. 
    The following streets within the town are hereby designed emergency routes: 
(1)	Both sides of Mill Road from North Water Street to US Route 11 (North Main Street). 
(2)	Both sides of West North Street from US Route 11 to Norfolk Southern Railroad right-of-way. 
(3)	North side of West North Street from Norfolk Southern Railroad right-of-way to Summit Avenue. 
(4)	Both sides of West North Street from Summit Avenue north to US I-81 overpass.
(5)	North side of West Spring Street from US Route 11 to Summit Avenue. 
(6)	Both sides of Massanutten Heights.
(7)	Both sides of Ox Road from Park Avenue to corporate limits just south of Southridge Court. 
(8)	Both sides of Indian Spring Road from US Route 11 to South Water Street. 
(9)	Both sides of Hollingsworth Road from South Water Street to Eagle Street.
(10)	Both sides of Hollingsworth Road from Lupton Road to Lincoln Street.
(11)	Both sides of Lupton Road from Hollingsworth Road to Corporate Limits.
(12)	Both sides of East Reservoir Road from US Route 11 to entrance road to Aston Properties shopping center. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2003)
Sec. 78-97. - Parking prohibited at all times. 
    Parking is prohibited at all times on all streets designated as emergency routes in section 78-96. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2003)
Sec. 78-98. - Signs. 
    All "No Parking" signs posted pursuant to this section, shall be placed and erected by the town and shall conform to those erected for similar purpose by the department of transportation. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2003)
Sec. 78-99. - Removal and storage of vehicles in violation. 
    Upon information that a vehicle is parked, stalled, stuck or abandoned on any emergency route designated by this division, the chief of police shall authorize immediate removal and storage of such vehicle. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2003)
Sec. 78-100. - Costs of removal and storage. 
    The costs of removing and storing any vehicles towed or otherwise removed under section 78-99, shall be charged to the owner and shall be due and payable prior to any such release of the vehicle to the owner. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2003)
Sec. 78-101. - Violation. 
    Any person convicted of violating any provision of this division shall be filed not more that $50.00 for each violation. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2003)
Secs. 78-102-78-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BICYCLES 

Sec. 78-126. - Registration of bicycles. 
    Every resident of the town owning a bicycle shall, within ten days of the purchase of each bicycle, apply to the chief of police for a registration tag without cost to the owner. Such application shall contain the make, description and serial number of each bicycle. The bicycle registration tag shall at all times be securely fastened to the bicycle in a conspicuous place. 
(Code 1968, § 3.1-1)
Sec. 78-127. - Disposition of unclaimed bicycles. 
    The police department may sell at public sale or may donate to a charitable organization any bicycle which has been in the possession of the police department, unclaimed, for more than 30 days. Any bicycle found and delivered to the police department by a private person which thereafter remains unclaimed for 60 days after the final date of publication as required in this section may be given to the finder. There shall be published at least once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the town the location and description of the bicycle; and, in addition, if there is a license tag affixed to the bicycle, the record owner shall be notified directly. 
(Code 1968, § 3.1-2)
Secs. 78-128-78-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ACCIDENTS 

Sec. 78-151. - Filing of accident reports-Required; copies. 
    The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident must file with the police department a report of the accident or a copy of any report required to be filed with the state department of motor vehicles. All such reports shall be for the confidential use of the police department, except, however, any such reports, including the report of the police officer, and including such photographs taken by inspection by any person involved or injured in the accident or his attorney or any authorized representative of any insurance carrier reasonably anticipating exposure to civil liability as a consequence of the accident. Each copy of any such report and each copy of any such photograph shall be furnished to any such person, attorney or authorized representative upon the payment of a fee that the council may from time to time determine by general resolution, for each such copy. 
(Code 1968, § 13-181.1; Ord. of 6-1-2010)
Sec. 78-152. - Same-Penalty. 
    Any person convicted of violating the provisions of section 78-151 shall, if such accident results in injury to or the death of, any person or damage to property, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor; however, if the vehicle or other property struck is unattended and such damage is less than $250.00, such person shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1968, § 13-182)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-900. 
Chapter 82 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note-Pursuant to § 4 of the town charter, the following are applicable to the town: Code of Virginia, § 15.1-854 (water supplies); Code of Virginia, § 15.1-855 (sewers, drains and sewage disposal and treatment facilities); Code of Virginia, § 15.1-856 (septic tanks and sewage disposal when sewers not available); Code of Virginia, § 15.1-875 (water supplies and facilities); Code of Virginia, § 15.1-876 (sewage disposal services); Code of Virginia, § 15.1-877 (electrical energy); and Code of Virginia, § 15.1-895 (regulation of services and rates charged by person using streets, etc.).
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; constructing structure over water or sewer main or utility easement, § 14-3; licensing of public utilities, § 18-163 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; health and sanitation, ch. 34; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; trailers and trailer camps outside of town, § 42-3; planning, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; subdivisions, ch. 70; utility easements in subdivisions, § 70-120; purposes of zoning chapter, § 90-2; design criteria in F-C floodplain conservation district, § 90-338.
State Constitution reference-Consent of town required for use of public property, art. VII, § 8.
State Law reference- Municipal water supply, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-37 et seq., 15.1-332.1 et seq.; public utilities, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-292 et seq.; sewage disposal generally, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-317 et seq., 32.1-163 et seq.; State Water Control Law, Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.2 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Superintendent of public works generally; definition of "superintendent." 
(a)	There is hereby created the position of superintendent of public works. The superintendent shall be appointed by the town manager, to serve at the pleasure of the town manager. 
(b)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Superintendent means the superintendent of public works or his duly authorized representative. 
(Code 1968, § 27-1)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2; administration, ch. 2. 
Secs. 82-2-82-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SYSTEM; CHARGES FOR WATER AND SEWER SERVICE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Water supply in subdivisions, § 70-117.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 82-26. - Powers and duties of superintendent generally. 
(a)	In addition to his duties of laying down pipes, erecting fire hydrants or any other work necessary to be done in connection with the waterworks, the superintendent shall be in charge of the entire water supply system and shall have a general control of all lands, buildings, reservoirs, dams, pipelines and machinery belonging thereto, and shall be responsible for the proper operation of same. 
(b)	Generally, the superintendent shall supervise the maintenance and operation of the town water system and shall have such other duties in connection therewith as may be prescribed by the council. 
(Code 1968, § 27-2)
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30. 
Sec. 82-27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of October 8, 2014, repealed § 82-27, entitled "Map of location, etc., of mains; records as to valves, taps, etc." and derived from Code 1968, § 27-3. 
Sec. 82-28. - Right of entry of superintendent, etc. 
    Every person occupying any lot or tenement into which water is conducted under this article shall permit the superintendent or his agent, or any authorized agent of this town, to enter such lot or tenement at reasonable hours to inspect the works therein or to see if this article has been violated. 
(Code 1968, § 27-4)
Sec. 82-29. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of October 8, 2014, repealed § 82-29, entitled "Superintendent to purchase materials, etc., keep records and make monthly report" and derived from Code 1968, § 27-5. 
Sec. 82-30. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of October 8, 2014, repealed § 82-30, entitled "Book of, and procedure as to, requests for introduction of water upon premises" and derived from Code 1968, § 27-6. 
Sec. 82-31. - Duty of property owner upon issuance of permit for introduction of water to premises; limitations on introduction of water to premises. 
(a)	Whenever upon application of the property owner, as provided for in section 82-30, a permit for introduction of town water has been issued by the superintendent, the owner of the premises shall lay down the pipe conveying the water from the curb in the street into and upon the premises, and the manner of such connection shall be governed by this division. 
(b)	No water shall be introduced upon any premises except through such service pipe and through the water meter to be installed in connection therewith by the superintendent. 
(c)	There shall be a separate service pipe and meter for each extension used by a different family or tenant upon the same premises, and in no case shall water hereafter be introduced into two or more houses or tenements through one curb stop; except, that in the case of apartments or other multiple-family dwellings, the town manager, at his discretion, may authorize the installation of a master meter. 
(Code 1968, § 27-7)
Sec. 82-32. - Issuance of connection permit; procedure for making of connection by plumber. 
    Upon compliance with the applicable conditions and the payment of a charge in an amount to be fixed by the council by general resolution the town manager shall issue a written permit granting the privilege of connecting with the town water system upon the terms described by this Code and other ordinances of the town, but the introduction of water shall only be made under the direction of the superintendent and by a properly qualified plumber who shall use such pipe, fixtures and fittings as provided by this Code and other ordinances of the town. 
(Code 1968, § 27-8; Ord. of 10-8-2014)
Sec. 82-33. - Prerequisites to introduction of town water to lot; introduction of corporation stop, etc., to town pipe; laying pipe or breaking surface of street. 
    No person shall, without a written permit from the town manager, or at such time as he cannot be present or properly represented, introduce into any lot or tenement water from the town pipes, or introduce any corporation stop or other fixture into such pipes, or construct or lay down, or have constructed or laid down, any pipes or other works for the purpose of introducing water into a lot or tenement, or break up any street for the purpose of constructing or laying down any such pipes or works. As far as the breaking up of any street for the purpose of constructing or laying down any such pipes or works is concerned, the possession of a permit shall be sufficient. 
(Code 1968, § 27-9; Ord. of 10-8-2014)
Sec. 82-34. - Supply of water through water meters. 
    All water supplied by the town and sold to persons shall be supplied through water meters, which shall be installed by and remain the property of the town. 
(Code 1968, § 27-10)
Sec. 82-35. - Location of curb boxes, etc. 
    In connection with the water supply system, all curb boxes, stops and water meters shall be located at or near the property line from which water is connected. 
(Code 1968, § 27-11; Ord. of 10-8-2014)
Sec. 82-36. - Access to and use of stopcock at curb and water meter. 
    Access to the water meter can only be had by the superintendent. Any person using such water meter for any purpose whatever without the written permission of the superintendent shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1968, § 27-12; Ord. of 10-8-2014)
Sec. 82-37. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of October 8, 2014, repealed § 82-37, entitled "Stopcocks on water service lines on owner's premises" and derived from Code 1968, § 27-13. 
Sec. 82-38. - Injuring pipelines, etc.; unauthorized opening, etc., of fixtures. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, deface or destroy any of the pipelines or any part of the pipelines of the water system of the town, including the main, extending from the town to the raw water, or for any unauthorized person to open, close, injure, deface or destroy any cock, wheel, fireplug, gate, valve gate, flush gate, air valve, water meter or any other fixture connected with or pertaining to the waterworks of the town. For each such offense every person shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1968, § 27-14; Ord. of 10-8-2014)
Cross reference- Property damage generally, § 46-16. 
Sec. 82-39. - Pollution or contamination at intakes at mountain reservoirs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to bathe in, or in any way or manner do anything that will pollute or contaminate the water at the intakes at the mountain reservoirs, or to throw or deposit stones, sticks, or other foreign matter in such water, either at such intakes or in such reservoirs. For each offense every such person shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1968, § 27-15)
State Law reference- Power of council to prevent the pollution of water and injury to waterworks, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-292. 
Sec. 82-40. - Use of water in emergencies. 
    In case of prolonged drought or other emergency affecting the water supply or the water system, the town manager may declare a state of emergency and restrict or forbid the use of water from the town water system for nonessential purposes. Notice of such declaration and order shall be disseminated in such manner as he shall deem most practicable. Any person knowingly violating any restrictions imposed under such declaration and order shall be pun ished as provided in section 1-7, and water service to such person's premises may be discontinued if such action is deemed necessary by the town manager. 
(Code 1968, § 27-23)
Secs. 82-41-82-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CHARGES AND BILLS 

Sec. 82-51. - Responsibility of owner of premises for water charges, etc. 
    All water and sewer charges in whatever way or for whatever purposes laid shall be charged against and be made payable by the owner of the premises upon which they are respectively imposed. 
(Code 1968, § 27-16)
Sec. 82-52. - Water rates and deposits; users of water outside town. 
    Water shall be charged for by the town at such rates as the council may from time to time determine by general resolution. The council may also require a deposit, the amount of which shall be established by the council by general resolution, in advance on water rents and charges. Users of water outside the limits of the town may be charged higher rates than those in town, and service to users outside the limits of the town shall be subject to being restricted or discontinued at any time the council may deem such action to be necessary or expedient. 
(Code 1968, § 27-17)
Sec. 82-53. - Charges, etc., for use of sewer system. 
    Charges and deposits shall be made for the use of the town sewer system as the council may from time to time by general resolution direct. Such charges shall be billed and collected by the town treasurer in the same manner as provided for the billing and collecting water charges. Higher rates may be charged out-of-town users of the town sewer system. 
(Code 1968, § 27-18)
Sec. 82-54. - Reading of water meters. 
    The town manager shall cause all water meters to be read once a month and a record of such reading shall be promptly furnished to the town treasurer. 
(Code 1968, § 27-19; Ord. of 3-4-2008; Ord. of 10-8-2014)
Sec. 82-55. - Treasurer to send bills to water users and for sewer charges; when bill payable. 
    The town treasurer shall, as soon as possible after receiving the report of the meter readings, send a bill to each user of water from the town water system. Such bill shall also include any sewer rents and charges against such user and shall be payable immediately upon receipt by such user. 
(Code 1968, § 27-20)
Sec. 82-56. - Multiple business units or family living units on same meter. 
    Where a building with more than one business unit or multifamily living unit is served on the same premises from the same water meter, the minimum, as determined by general resolution of the town council, shall be charged for each business unit or family living unit, and the minimum allowance as determined by general resolution of the town council, shall apply to each minimum charge. 
(Code 1968, § 27-20.1; Ord. of 3-4-2008)
Sec. 82-57. - Procedure in case of failure to pay bill for water or sewer charges. 
    Should any bill for water or sewer charges not be paid by the fifteenth day of the month following the billing date, a penalty of ten percent of the amount of such bill shall be added thereto. Should any such charge for water or sewer remain unpaid after the 25th day of the month following the billing date, the town treasure shall notify the superintendent, who shall cause the water to be stopped from the premises or tenement of the user so in default. When water is cut off for nonpayment of water or sewer charges, all charges in arrears and penalties thereon, plus an additional service charge to be determined by general resolution of the town council, shall be paid to the town treasurer before the supply is turned on again. 
(Code 1968, § 27-21; Ord. of 3-4-2008)
Sec. 82-58. - Use of town water when water has been cut off for failure to pay charges. 
    Any person responsible for the payment of water or sewer charges, who shall, with knowledge that water supplied from the town water system to the premises occupied by him has been cut off for the nonpayment of such charges, use water from such system prior to the time the water is turned on the premises in question by a proper officer of the town, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1968, § 27-22)
Secs. 82-59-82-64. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WATER SHORTAGES 

Sec. 82-65. - Declaring of an emergency. 
    In order to provide for an adequate supply of potable water during conditions of drought, high usage, contamination or other emergency conditions, the town hereby adopts the following regulations and restrictions on the delivery and use of potable water. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2011; Ord. of 10-8-2014)
Sec. 82-66. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meaning ascribed to them below, except in those instances when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Assessment date: The date of the water bill on which a fine for violation of this division is imposed. 
    Establishing landscaping: Landscaping plantings or lawns existing in an area after such period of time as to accomplish an establishment and maintenance of growth. 
    New landscaping: Any landscaping or lawns made up of plants or seeds planted in or transplanted to an area within such period of time as to accomplish a reasonable establishment and maintenance of growth. This does not include aeration and seeding, dethatching and seeding, or power overseeding of established lawns. 
    Person: Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, company, business, trust, joint venture or other legal entity. 
    Swimming pool: Any structure, basin, chamber, or tank including hot tubs, containing an artificial body of water for swimming, diving or recreational bathing and having a depth of two feet or more at any point. 
    Vegetable garden: Any "non-commercial" vegetable garden planted primarily for household use; "non-commercial" includes incidental direct selling of produce from such a vegetable garden to the public. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2011)
Sec. 82-67. - Mandatory public water use restrictions. 
    The use of the public water system shall be limited as follows: 
(1)	Paved areas. Washing is prohibited except for health and safety requirements. 
(2)	Swimming pools. Filling and replenishing to maintain health and safety is permitted. All other uses are prohibited. 
(3)	Vehicle washing. Non-commercial washing of vehicles is prohibited. Commercial vehicle washing businesses are permitted to operate under normal conditions. 
(4)	Established landscaping, vegetable gardens. Watering is prohibited except for watering by buckets of up to five gallons in size per day. 
(5)	New landscaping. All watering is permitted for the first 30 days after planting. Thereafter, the restriction for established landscaping shall apply. 
(6)	Restaurants. Water shall be served to customers only upon request. 
(7)	All other businesses. Water use is limited to uses essential for business use and human hygiene. 
(8)	Additional provision. Any other restrictions deemed necessary by the town manager. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2011; Ord. of 10-8-2014)
Sec. 82-68. - When restrictions go into effect. 
(a)	The water use restrictions set forth in this division shall take effect when any one or more of the following conditions occurs: 
(1)	Watch - The stream flows fall between the 10th and 25th percentile or the river level is nine inches over the top of the raw water intake pipes. 
Drought potential if conditions persist - Increase water conservation awareness; voluntary actions by citizens. 
(2)	Warning - The stream flows fall between the 5th and 10th percentile or the river level is six inches over the top of the raw water intake pipes. 
Onset of drought is imminent - Water conservation awareness; precautionary measures voluntary but encouraged by locality. 
(3)	Emergency - The stream flows fall below the 5th percentile or the river level is three inches over the top of the raw water intake pipes. 
Mandatory response for water conservation by locality and public - Mandatory restrictions as described in section 82-67. 
(b)	Notice-Notice of these public water use restrictions shall end when the notice that triggered the restrictions is superseded by a notice indicating the reason for the restrictions no longer exists. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2011)
Sec. 82-69. - Notice. 
    Notice of these public water use restrictions shall be published in the newspaper for a period of one day per week each week during which the restrictions are in effect. The town may utilize other methods of notice to supplement the published notice. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2011)
Sec. 82-70. - Violation. 
    It shall be a violation of this division for any person to use water, or allow or cause the use of water, in violation of the provisions of this division after the first publication required by section 82-69 of this division. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2011)
Sec. 82-71. - Penalty. 
(a)	Any person who violates any provision of this division after publication of notice pursuant to section 82-69 above shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)	For the first offense, violators shall receive a written warning delivered in person or posted by a representative of the Town of Woodstock. 
(2)	For the second offense, violators shall be fined $50.00, the fine to be imposed on the violator's next water bill. 
(3)	For the third and each subsequent offense, violators shall be fined $100.00 for each offense, the fine to be imposed on the violator's next water bill. 
(4)	Each violation by a person shall be counted as a separate violation by that person, irrespective of the location at which the violation occurs. 
(b)	Persons who have been assessed a penalty shall have the right to challenge the assessment by providing a written notice to the town manager within ten days of the assessment date. The town manager shall determine whether the penalty was properly assessed and notify the complaining person in writing of his determination. 
(c)	The town manager may waive the penalty if he determines that the violation occurred due to no fault of the person. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2011; Ord. of 10-8-2014)
Secs. 82-72-82-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note-Ord. of June 3, 2008, repealed and amended the former Arts. III, IV, and enacted a new Arts. III, IV as set out herein. The former Arts. III, IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1968, §§ 27-24-27-66; Ord. of Dec. 5, 1995; Ord. of Oct. 3, 2006; Ord. of Apr. 3, 2007. Formerly, Pursuant to § 4 of the town charter, the following are applicable to the town: Code of Virginia, § 15.1-855 (sewers, drains and sewage disposal and treatment facilities); and Code of Virginia, § 15.1-876 (sewage disposal services).
Cross reference- Sanitary sewage disposal in subdivisions, § 70-115.
State Law reference- Power of council to construct sewers and drains, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-292; sewage disposal generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-317 et seq.; sewage disposal systems, bond issues, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-320 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 82-81. - Specific definitions. 
    Unless the context of usage indicates otherwise, the meaning of specific terms in this article shall be as follows: 
    Act shall mean the Federal Clean Water Act, 33. U.S.C. 1251 et seq. 
    Approval authority means the executive director or director of the department of environmental quality. 
    ASTM shall mean the American Society for Testing and Materials. 
    Authorized representative of industrial user shall mean: 
(1)	A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president, if the industrial user is a corporation; or 
(2)	A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or sole proprietorship respectively; or 
(3)	A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in subsections (1) or (2), above, if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge to the POTW originates. The authorization must be submitted to the (manager) prior to or together with any reports to be signed by the authorized representative. 
    BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen used in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building sewer shall mean the extension from a building wastewater plumbing facility to the treatment works. 
    Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard shall mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Sections 307(a) and 307(c) of the Act, which apply to specific categories of industrial users which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 - 471. 
    Combined sewer shall mean a sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or surface water. 
    Commercial user (class 3) shall mean all premises used only for commercial purposes and which is connected to the treatment works. 
    Day shall mean the 24-hour period beginning at 12:01 a.m. 
    Discharger shall mean person or persons, firm, company, industry or other similar sources of wastewater who introduce such into the POTW. 
    Easement shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
    EPA shall mean the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Establishment shall mean any industrial establishment, mill, factory, tannery, paper or pulp mill, mine, coal mine, colliery, breaker or coal processing operations, quarry, oil refinery, boat, vessel, and each and every other industry or plant or works the operation of which produces industrial wastes or other wastes or which may otherwise alter the physical, chemical or biological properties of any state waters. 
    Existing source shall mean any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act. 
    Garbage shall mean the solid animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the domestic or commercial handling, storage, dispensing, preparation, cooking, and serving of foods. 
    Grease means melted animal fat; any substance identified as grease per the Environmental Protection Agency method 14003. 
    Grease interceptor means typically a concrete structure with a 500 to 3,000 gallon capacity that is installed outside of the building, and collects waste only from the kitchen area (no sanitary waste). 
    Grease trap means any device installed inside a facility to separate grease from the wastewater. Generally grease traps are installed in kitchens under the floor or next to a sink, and are much smaller than grease interceptors. 
    Ground water shall mean any water beneath the land surface in the zone of saturation. 
    Indirect discharge shall mean the introduction of (nondomestic) pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b) (c) or (d) of the Act. 
    Industrial user or significant discharger means a source of indirect discharge, or a nondomestic discharge to a treatment works. 
    Industrial wastes shall mean liquid or other wastes resulting from any process of industry, manufacture, trade or business, or from the development of any natural resources. 
    Interference shall mean an inhibition or disruption of the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, which clearly causes, in whole or in part, a violation of any requirement of the POTW's VPDES permit, including those discharges that prevent the use or disposal of sludge by the POTW in accordance with any federal or state laws, regulations, permits or sludge management plans. 
    Manager shall mean the Town Manager of the Town of Woodstock or an authorized designee. 
    May is permissible; shall is mandatory. 
    Municipality shall mean a city, county, town, district association, authority or other public body created under the law and having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial, or other wastes. 
    Natural outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or any other body of surface or groundwater. 
    New source shall have the same meaning as provided in 40 CFR Part 403.3(k) (1990). 
    Oil means any type of various greasy, combustible substances obtained from animal, vegetable, and mineral sources: oils are liquid at ordinary temperatures and soluble in certain organic solvents, but not in water. 
    Oil water separator means typically an engineered steel tank designed to separate petroleum oil from water through the use of baffled compartments and corrugated plates. 
    Owner shall mean the commonwealth or any of its political subdivisions, including, but not limited to, sanitation district commissions and authorities, and public or private institutions, corporations, associations, firms or companies organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country, or any person or group of persons acting individually or as a group. 
    Pass-through shall mean the discharge of pollutants through a POTW into state waters in quantities or concentrations which are a cause in whole or in part of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's VPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    Person shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society, partnership, corporation, municipality, or other similar organization, agency or group. 
    pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in grams per liter of solution as determined by standard methods. 
    Pollutant shall mean any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical waste, chemical waste, industrial waste, biological materials, radio active material, heat wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial waste, and certain characteristics of the wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, odor). 
    POTW, publicly owned treatment works shall mean any sewage treatment works that is owned by a state or municipality. Sewers, pipes, or other conveyances are included in this definition only if they convey wastewater to a POTW providing treatment. 
    Pretreatment shall mean the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to discharge to the town's treatment works. 
    Pretreatment requirements shall mean any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on an industrial user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment standard shall mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act, which applies to industrial users. 
    Properly shredded garbages shall mean garbage that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under flow conditions normally prevailing in the treatment works, with no particle greater than two inch in any dimension. 
    Residential user (Class 1) shall mean all premises used only for human residency and which is connected to the treatment works. 
    Sand interceptor (grit interceptor) means typically a concrete structure installed outside the building designed to collect sand, grit, or other inorganic particles prior to admission to the public sanitary sewer. 
    Sanitary wastewater shall mean wastewater discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings, office buildings, industrial plants, or institutions. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions or industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and stormwaters as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices an structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Significant industrial user shall be defined as follows: 
(1)	Has a process wastewater* flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average work day;
(*Excludes sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater) 
(2)	Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW; 
(3)	Is subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
(4)	Has significant impact, either singularly or in combination with other significant dischargers, on the treatment works or the quality of its effluent. 
    Slug load shall mean any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standard in subsection 82-138 (4) of this article or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge. 
    Standard methods shall mean the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, Water Pollution Control Federation and American Water Works Association. 
    State shall mean the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Storm sewer shall mean a sewer for conveying storm, surface, and other waters, which is not intended to be transported to a treatment works. 
    Surface water shall mean: 
(1)	All waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; 
(2)	All interstate waters, including interstate "wetlands";
(3)	All other waters, such as inter/intrastate lakes, rivers, streams (including intermittent streams), mudflats, sandflats, "wetlands," sloughs, prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or natural ponds, the use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce including any such waters: 
a.	Which are or could be used by interstate or foreign travelers for recreational or other purposes; 
b.	From which fish or shellfish are or could be taken and sold in interstate or foreign commerce; or 
c.	Which are used or could be used for industrial purposes by industries in interstate commerce. 
(4)	All impoundments of waters otherwise defined as surface waters under this definition;
(5)	Tributaries of waters identified in subsections (1) through (6) of this definition;
(6)	A wetlands adjacent to waters other than waters that are themselves wetlands, identified in subsections (1) through (6) of this definition. 
    Suspended solids shall mean the total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water or wastewater as determined by standard methods. 
    Treatment facility shall mean only those mechanical power-driven devices necessary for the transmission and treatment of pollutants (e.g., pump stations, unit treatment processes). 
    Treatment works shall mean any devices and systems used for the storage, treatment, recycling and/or reclamation of sewage or liquid industrial waste, or other waste necessary to recycle or reuse water, including intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, individual systems, pumping, power and other equipment and their appurtenances, extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions, or alterations, and any works, including land that will be an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment, or any other method or system used for preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating, or disposing of municipal waste or industrial waste, including waste in combined sewer water and sanitary sewer systems. 
    Toxics shall mean any of the pollutants designated by federal regulations pursuant to Section 307 (a) (1) of the Act. 
    User shall mean a source of wastewater discharge into a POTW. 
    User permit shall mean a document issued by the POTW to the user that permits the connection and/or introduction of wastes into the treatment works under the provisions of this article. 
    VPDES shall mean Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit program, as administered by the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Wastewater shall mean a combination of liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industries, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, or storm water that may be present. 
    WPCF shall mean the water pollution control federation. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-82. - General definitions. 
    Unless the context of usage indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms in this article and not defined in section 82-81 above, shall be as defined in the Glossary: Water and Wastewater Control Engineering prepared by Joint Editorial Board of the American Public Health Association, American Society of Civil Engineers, American Water Works Association, and Water Pollution Control Federation, Copyright 1969. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Secs. 82-83-82-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 82-90. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the maximum possible beneficial public use of the town treatment works through regulation of sewer construction, sewer use, and wastewater discharges; to provide for equitable distribution of the costs of the treatment works; and to provide procedures for complying with the requirements contained herein. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-91. - Scope. 
(a)	The definitions of terms used in this article are found in division 1. The provisions of this article shall apply to the discharge of all wastewater to treatment works of the town. This article provides for use of the town's treatment works, regulation of sewer construction, control of the quantity and quality of wastewater discharged, wastewater pretreatment, equitable distribution of costs, assurance that existing customers' capacity will not be preempted, approval of sewer construction plans, issuance of user permits, minimum sewer connection standards and conditions, and penalties and other procedures in cases of violation of this article. 
(b)	This article shall apply to the town and to persons outside the town who are, by contract, permit or agreement with the town, users of the town treatment works. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-92. - Administration. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, the manager shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
Fees and charges. 
(1)	All fees and charges payable under the provisions of this article shall be paid to the town. Such fees and charges shall be as set forth herein or as established in the latest monthly sewer rates, sewer access fees, and monthly sewer rates as provided by general council resolution. 
(2)	All user fees, penalties and charges collected under this article (and the treatment works user charge ordinance) shall be used for the sole purpose of constructing, operating or maintaining the treatment works of the town, or the retirement of debt incurred for same. 
(3)	All fees and charges payable under the provisions of this ordinance are due and payable upon the receipt of notice of charges. Unpaid charges shall become delinquent and shall be subject to penalty and interest charges as provided for in section 82-57. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-93. - Inspections. 
(a)	The manager or their designee, or authorized state or federal officials, bearing the proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all premises where an effluent source or treatment system is located at any reasonable time for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and/or copying records of the wastewater discharge to ensure that discharge to the treatment works is in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)	The manager, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all private property through which the town holds an easement for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any of the town's treatment works lying within the easement. All entry, and any subsequent work on the easement, shall be done in final accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(c)	While performing any necessary work on private properties referred to in subsections (a) and (b) above, the (manager) shall observe all safety and occupational rules established by the owner or occupant of the property and applicable to the premises. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-94. - Vandalism. 
    No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the town's treatment works. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine in an amount not to exceed $250.00. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-95. - Separability. 
    If any provision of these regulations, or the application of any provision of these regulations to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, and the remainder of the regulations, shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-96. - Amendments of the article. 
    Public notice shall be given in accordance with applicable provisions of the Town Charter, other town ordinances, state and federal law, prior to adoption of any amendments of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Secs. 82-97-82-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - USE OF TOWN'S TREATMENT WORKS AND TREATMENT FACILITY 

Sec. 82-106. - Waste disposal. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any condition that may be considered as an unsanitary or unhygienic manner on public or private property within the town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said town, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste except where suitable treatment. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 10. 
Sec. 82-107. - Wastewater discharges. 
    It shall be unlawful under state and federal law to discharge without a VPDES permit to any natural outlet within the town or in any area under its jurisdiction. Wastewater discharges to the town's treatment works are not authorized unless permitted by the manager in accordance with provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-108. - Wastewater disposal. 
    Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-109. - Connection to treatment works required. 
    The owner of any house, building, or property which is used for commercial, industrial and/or residential purposes, abutting on any street, alley, or rights-of-way in which there is or may be located a sewer connected to the treatment works of the town, is required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly to the proper sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after notice that sewer is available within 100 feet of the property line. This section shall not apply to any person served by a privately constructed, owned, operated, and maintained sewer and treatment facility which discharges directly to a natural outlet in accordance with the provisions of this article and applicable state and federal laws. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Secs. 82-110-82-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14.

Sec. 82-116. - Connection permit. 
(a)	No person shall uncover, make any connections with, use, alter, or disturb any wastewater sewer or storm sewer without first obtaining a written permit from the manager. 
(b)	There shall be three classes of permits for connections to the town's treatment works and treatment facilities. 
Class I-Residential 
Class II-Industrial 
Class III-Commercial 
In all cases, the owner shall make application for a permit to connect to the town's treatment works on a form furnished by the town. The permit application shall be supplemented by wastewater information required to administer this article. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the town at the time the application is filed. Fees are based upon the latest sewer access fee schedule as provided by general council resolution. 
(c)	Connections to a storm sewer shall be subject to a permit. Such connections shall be subject to the provisions of this article and the approval of the manager. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-117. - Connection costs. 
    The costs and expenses incidental to the building sewer installation and connection to the town's treatment works shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-118. - Separate connections required. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard, or driveway. When this occurs, the building sewer serving the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. The town assumes no obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any single building sewer which serves two buildings. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-119. - Existing building sewers. 
    Existing building sewers may be used for connection of new buildings only when they are found, on examination and testing by the manager, to meet the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-120. - Building sewer design. 
    The size, slope, alignment, construction materials, trench excavation and backfill methods, pipe placement, jointing and testing methods used in the construction and installation of a building sewer shall conform to the building and plumbing code or other applicable requirements of the town and Shenandoah County. For town utilities reference the town's standards and specifications manual. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008; Ord. of 10-8-2014)
Sec. 82-121. - Building sewer elevation. 
    Whenever practicable, the building sewer shall be brought to a building at an elevation below the basement floor. In buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the town's treatment works, wastewater carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to a building sewer draining to the town sewer. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-122. - Surface runoff and groundwater drains. 
(a)	No person shall connect roof, foundation, areaway, parking lot, roadway, or other surface runoff or groundwater drains to any sewer which is connected to a treatment works unless such connection is authorized in writing by the manager. The connection of such drains shall conform to codes specified in subsection 82-123(a) or as specified by the manager as a condition of approval of such connection. 
(b)	Except as provided in subsection (a) above, roof, foundation, areaway, parking lot, roadway, or other surface runoff or groundwater drains shall discharge to natural outlets or storm sewers. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-123. - Conformance to applicable codes. 
(a)	The connection of a building sewer into a treatment works shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable requirements of the town, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the Commonwealth of Virginia Sewerage Regulations, Uniform Building Code of Virginia, and American Society of Testing Materials. The connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved in writing by the manager before installation. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-124. - Connection inspection. 
    The applicant for a building sewer or other drainage connection permit shall notify the manager when such sewer or drainage connection is ready for inspection prior to its connection to the town's treatment works. Such connection inspections and testing as deemed necessary by the manager shall be made by the manager or his designee. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-125. - Excavation guards and property restoration. 
    Excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the town. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-126. - Protection of capacity for existing users. 
    The manager shall not issue a permit for any class of connection to the town's treatment works or treatment facilities unless there is sufficient capacity, not legally committed to other users, in the treatment works and treatment facilities to convey and adequately treat the quantity of wastewater which the requested connection will add to the treatment works or treatment facility. The manager may permit such a connection if there are legally binding commitments to provide the needed capacity. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Secs. 82-127-82-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CONDITIONS TO USE THE TOWN'S TREATMENT WORKS 

Sec. 82-136. - Special uses of treatment works. 
    All discharges of storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or other waters not intended to be treated in the treatment facility shall be made to storm sewers or natural outlets designed for such discharges, except as authorized under subsection 82-122(a). Any connection, drain, or arrangement which will permit any such waters to enter any other sewer shall be deemed to be a violation of this section and this article. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-137. - Industrial user, general prohibition upon 
    An industrial user shall not introduce any pollutants into the town's treatment works which will pass through or interfere with the operation or performance of the treatment facilities. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-138. - Restricted discharges. 
(a)	No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any of the town's treatment works any substances, materials, waters, or wastes in such quantities or concentrations which do or are likely to: 
(1)	Create a fire or explosion hazard including, but not limited to, gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas; waste stream with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Centigrade using test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)	Cause corrosive damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of the wastewater facilities, but in no case discharges with the following properties: 
a.	Having a pH lower than 5.0 or greater than 11.0
(3)	Cause obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the operation of treatment facilities due to accumulation of solid or viscous materials; 
(4)	Constitute a rate of discharge or substantial deviation from normal rates of discharge, ("slug discharge"), sufficient to cause interference in the operation and performance of the treatment facilities; 
(5)	Contain heat in amounts which are likely to accelerate the biodegradation of wastes, causing the formation of excessive amounts of hydrogen sulfide in the treatment works or inhibit biological activity in the treatment facilities, but in no case shall the discharge of heat cause the temperature in the town wastewater sewer to exceed 65 degrees C (150 degrees F) or the temperature of the influent to the treatment facilities to exceed 40 degrees C (104 degrees F) unless the facilities can accommodate such heat and the town has obtained prior approval from the approval authority; 
(6)	Contain more than 100 milligrams per liter of nonbiodegradable oils of mineral or petroleum origin; 
(7)	Contain floatable oils, fat, or grease;
(8)	Contain noxious gases, vapors or fumes, malodorous gas or substance in quantities that may cause a public nuisance or cause acute human or safety problems; 
(9)	Contain any household garbage that has not been properly shredded.
(10)	Contain any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, paper towels or other paper products, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, or any other or viscous substances capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works. 
(11)	Contain any waters or waste containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quality to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the recurring waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(12)	Contain any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of crating a public nuisance.
(13)	Contain any discharge from septic tank trucks containing matter taken from septic tanks. 
(14)	Contain any waters containing suspended solids of a character and quantity that usual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the town's treatment works. 
(15)	Contain radioactive wastes in harmful quantities as defined by applicable state and federal regulations; 
(16)	Contain any odor or color producing substances exceeding concentration limits which may be established by the manager for purposes of meeting the town's VPDES permit. 
(17)	Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradeable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(18)	Any trucked or hauled pollutants except at designated discharge points.
(b)	If, in establishing discharge restrictions, discharge limits, or pretreatment standards pursuant to the article, the manager establishes concentration limits to be met by a user, the manager in lieu of concentration limits, may establish mass limits of comparable stringency for an individual user at the request of such user. Upon approval by the state, such limits should become pretreatment standards. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-139. - Categorical pretreatment standards. 
(a)	No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any treatment works wastewaters containing substances subject to an applicable categorical pretreatment standard promulgated by EPA in excess of the quantity prescribed in such applicable pretreatment standards except as otherwise provided in this section. Compliance with such applicable pretreatment standards shall be within three years of the date the standard is promulgated, provided, however, compliance with a categorical pretreatment standard for new sources shall be required upon commencement of discharge to the treatment works. 
(b)	The manager shall notify any industrial user affected by the provisions of this section and establish an enforceable compliance schedule for each. 
(c)	No person shall discharge trucked hazardous wastes to the town's treatment works.
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-140. - Special agreements. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing any agreement or arrangement between the town and any user of the treatment works and treatment facility whereby wastewater of unusual strength or character (only in terms of BOD and/or suspended solids) is accepted into the system and specially treated subject to additional payments or user charges as may be applicable. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-141. - Water and energy conservation. 
    The conservation of water and energy shall be encouraged by the manager. In establishing discharge restrictions upon users, the manager shall take into account already implemented or planned conservation steps revealed by the user. Upon request of the manager, each user will provide the manager with pertinent information showing that the quantities of substances or pollutants have not been and will not be increased as a result of the conservation steps. Upon such a showing to the satisfaction of the manager, he shall make adjustments to discharge restrictions, which have been based on concentrations to reflect the conservation steps. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-142. - Excessive discharge. 
    No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the town or state. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-143. - Accidental discharges. 
(a)	Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the town for review, and shall be approved by the town before construction of the facility. No user who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date of this article shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the town. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. 
(b)	Within five days following an accidental discharge; the user shall submit to the manager a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the treatment works and treatment facility, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(c)	A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall insure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Secs. 82-144-82-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGERS 

Sec. 82-206. - Information requirements. 
(a)	All industrial dischargers shall file with the town wastewater information deemed necessary by the manager for determination of compliance with this ordinance, the town's VPDES permit conditions, and state and federal law. Such information shall be provided by completion of a questionnaire designed and supplied by the manager and by supplements thereto as may be necessary. Information requested in the questionnaire and designated by the discharger as confidential is subject to the conditions of confidentiality as set out in subsection (c) 
(b)	Where a person owns, operates or occupies properties designated as an industrial discharger at more than one location, separate information submittals shall be made for each location as may be required by the manager. 
(c)	Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the town that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. 
When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) Permit, state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs, provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
Information accepted by the town as confidential, shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the town until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-207. - User permits. 
(a)	All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the treatment works shall obtain a user permit before connecting to or contributing to the treatment works. All existing significant industrial users connected to or contributing to the treatment works shall obtain a user permit within 180 days after the effective date of this article. 
(b)	Significant industrial users required to obtain a permit shall complete, and file with the town, an application in the form prescribed by the town, and accompanied by a fee of $2,500.00 plus engineering review costs. Existing significant industrial users shall apply for a permit within 30 days after the effective date of this article, and proposed new significant industrial users shall apply at least 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the treatment works. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)	Name, address, and location, (if different from address);
(2)	SIC number according to the Standards Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1987, as amended; 
(3)	Wastewater constituents and characteristics including but not limited to those mentioned in [Article V, Division 5] of this chapter as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304 (g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended; 
(4)	Time and duration of contribution;
(5)	Average daily and peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any; 
(6)	Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by their size, location and elevation; 
(7)	Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be discharged; 
(8)	The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge. A statement identifying the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional O&M and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards; 
(9)	If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. 
The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
a.	The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). 
b.	No increment referred to in subsection a shall exceed one year.
c.	Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the manager including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress; the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than one year elapse between such progress reports to the manager. 
(10)	Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production;
(11)	Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);
(12)	Number of type of employees, and hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system; 
(13)	Any other information as may be deemed by the town to be necessary to evaluate the user permit application. 
The town will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the town may issue a user permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. 
(c)	Within nine months of the promulgation of a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the user permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard if they are more restrictive than the local limits developed by the POTW within the timeframe prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted an application for a user permit as required by subsection (b), the user shall apply for a user permit within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. In addition, the user with an existing user permit shall submit to the manager, within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the information required by subsection (b)(8)(9) of this section. 
(d)	Permit conditions: User permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the town. Permits may contain the following: 
(1)	The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer; 
(2)	Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics (permits shall contain this item); 
(3)	Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization. (Permits shall contain this item); 
(4)	Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities;
(5)	Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule; 
(6)	Compliance schedules;
(7)	Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports-See section 82-209 of this division (permits shall contain this item); 
(8)	Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the town, and affording the town access thereto (permits shall contain this item); 
(9)	Requirements for notification of the town for any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the treatment works (permits shall contain this item); 
(10)	Requirements for immediate notification of slug discharges (permits shall contain this item); 
(11)	Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the town to ensure compliance with this article. 
(12)	Statement of applicable remedies.
(e)	User permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the town during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in this section are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(f)	User permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A user permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold by the user to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the town. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit in the interim prior to the issuance of the respective new permit. 
(g)	Cost associated with review of the permit by the town's engineer shall be borne by the permit applicant. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-208. - Reporting requirements for permittee. 
(a)	Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the wastewater treatment facilities, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the manager a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. In addition, the report shall contain the results of any sampling and analysis of the discharge as specified in subsection (b)(2) below. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user, and certified to by a qualified professional. 
(b)	(1)	Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of such pretreatment standard or in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the treatment works, shall submit to the manager during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the manager, a report indicating the nature and concentration, of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow reported. At the discretion of the manager and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the manager may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. 
(2)	The manager may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subparagraph (1) of this paragraph shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the manager, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the permit. All analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by EPA pursuant to Section 304 (g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by EPA. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by EPA. All samples analyzed by this method should be reported. 
(Comment: Where 40 CFR, Part 136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with sampling and analytical procedures approved by EPA.) 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-209. - Provision for monitoring. 
(a)	When required by the manager, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying class II wastewater discharges shall provide suitable access and such necessary meters and other devices in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastewater. Such access shall be in a readily and safely accessible location and shall be provided in accordance with plans approved by the manager. The access shall be provided and maintained at the owner's expense so as to be safe and accessible at reasonable times. 
(b)	The manager shall consider such factors as the volume and strength of discharge, rate of discharge, quantities of toxic materials in the discharge, treatment facility removal capabilities, and cost effectiveness in determining whether or not access and equipment for monitoring class II wastewater discharges shall be required. 
(c)	Where the manager determines access and equipment for monitoring or measuring class II wastewater discharges is not practicable, reliable, or cost effective, the manager may specify alternative methods of determining the characteristics of the wastewaters discharge which will, in the manager's judgement, provide a reasonably reliable measurement of such characteristics. 
(d)	Measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of wastewater required by this ordinance shall conform to 40 CFR, Part 136 and be performed by a qualified laboratory. When such analyses are required of a discharger, the discharger may, in lieu of using the town's laboratory, make arrangement with any qualified laboratory, including that of the discharger, to perform such analyses. 
(e)	Fees for any given measurement, test, or analysis of wastewater required by this article and performed by the town shall be the same for all classes of dischargers, regardless of the quantity or quality of the discharge and shall reflect only direct cost. Costs of analyses performed by an independent laboratory at the option of discharger shall be borne directly by the discharger. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-210. - Costs of damage. 
    If the drainage or discharge from any establishment causes a deposit, obstruction, or damage to any of the town's treatment works or treatment facility, the manager shall cause the deposit or obstruction to be promptly removed or cause the damage to be promptly repaired. The cost for such work, including materials, labor, and supervision shall be borne by the person causing such deposit, obstruction, or damage. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Secs. 82-211-82-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - PRETREATMENT 

Sec. 82-221. - Wastewaters with special characteristics. 
(a)	While the manager should initially rely upon the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards to protect wastewater facilities or receiving waters, if any wastewater which contains substances or possesses characteristics shown to have deleterious effect upon the treatment works or treatment facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or constitutes a public nuisance or hazard, is discharged or is proposed for discharge to the wastewater sewers, the manager may require any or all of the following: 
(1)	Pretreatment by the user or discharger to a condition acceptable for discharge to the treatment works; 
(2)	Control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
(3)	The development of compliance schedules to meet any applicable pretreatment requirements;
(4)	The submission of reports necessary to assure compliance with applicable pretreatment requirements; 
(5)	Carry out all inspection, surveillance, and monitoring necessary to determine compliance with applicable pretreatment requirements; 
(6)	Obtain remedies for noncompliance by any user. Such remedies may include injunctive relief, the civil penalties specified in article IX of this chapter, or appropriate criminal penalties; or 
(7)	Reject the wastewater if evidence discloses that discharge will create unreasonable hazards or have unreasonable deleterious effects on the treatment works or treatment facilities. 
(b)	When considering the above alternatives, the manager shall assure that conditions of the town's permit are met. The manager shall also take into consideration cost effectiveness, the economic impact of the alternatives, and the willful noncompliance of the discharger. If the manager allows the pretreatment or equalization of wastewater flows, the installation of the necessary facilities shall be subject to review. The manager shall review and recommend any appropriate changes to the program, within 60 days of submittal. 
(c)	Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for any wastewater, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation at the expense of the owner. 
(d)	Cost associated with a review of the pretreatment facilities by the town's engineer shall be borne by the pretreatment discharger. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-222. - Compliance with pretreatment requirements. 
    Persons required to pretreat wastewater in accordance with section 82-221 above shall provide a statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the user and certified by such representative indicating whether applicable pretreatment requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, describe the additional operation and maintenance or additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the pretreatment requirements. If additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment requirements, the user shall submit a plan (including schedules) to the manager as described in subsection 82-207(b)(9). The plan (including schedules) shall be consistent with applicable conditions of the town's permit or other local, state or federal laws. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-223. - Monitoring requirements. 
    Discharges of wastewater to the town's treatment works from the facilities of any user shall be monitored in accordance with the provisions of the user's permit. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-224. - Maintenance of preliminary treatment facilities. 
    Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided by an owner for any waters or wastes, such facilities shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-225. - Flow-measuring, etc., structure when building sewer carries industrial waste. 
    When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable flow-measuring, testing and control structure in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-226. - Effect of federal law. 
    In the event that the federal government promulgates a regulation for a given new or existing user in a specific industrial subcategory that establishes pretreatment standards or establishes that such user is exempt from pretreatment standards, such federal regulations shall immediately supersede subsection 82-221(a) of this article if they are more stringent. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-227. - Certification. 
    All reports and permit applications must be signed by the industrial user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional O&M and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Secs. 82-228-82-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - WASTEWATER SERVICE, CHARGES AND INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY 

Sec. 82-236. - Wastewater service charges. 
    Charges and fees for the use of the public treatment works and treatment facility shall be based upon the actual use of such system, or contractual obligations for a level of use in excess of current actual use. Debit-set from the Virginia Department of Taxation may be used to collect the amount due as permitted by law. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-237. - Industrial cost recovery. 
    Users of the town's treatment works and treatment facilities will also be assessed industrial cost recovery charges as required by law. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-238. - Determination of system use. 
(a)	The use of the town's treatment works and treatment facilities shall be based upon actual measurement and analysis of each user's wastewater discharge, in accordance with provisions of section 82-209 to the extent such measurement and analysis is considered by the manager to be feasible and cost-effective. 
(b)	Where measurement and analysis is considered not feasible, determination of each user's use of the treatment works and treatment facilities shall be based upon the quantity of water used whether purchased from a public water utility or obtained from a private source, or an alternative means as provided by subsection 82-237(c) below. 
(c)	The manager, when determining actual use of the town's treatment works and treatment facilities based on water use, shall consider consumptive, evaporative, or other use of water which results in a significant difference between a discharger's water use and wastewater discharge. Where appropriate, such consumptive water use may be metered to aid in determining actual use of the treatment works and treatment facilities. The meters used to measure such water uses shall be of a type and installed in a manner approved by the manager. 
(The actual average water use by each residential or commercial user (Class I) and (Class II) during the three months of (January, February, and March) shall be used as the measure of each respective residential or commercial user's actual use of the sewer system throughout the year.) 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Secs. 82-239-82-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 82-246. - Harmful contributions. 
    The town may suspend the water/sewer service and/or a user permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the town, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of humans, to the environment, causes interference to the treatment facilities or causes the town to violate any condition of its VIDES permit. 
    Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the user permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the town shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the water/sewer connection and/or the seeking of legal and equitable relief in the circuit court, to prevent or minimize damage to the wastewater treatment facilities or endangerment to any individuals. The town shall reinstate the user permit and/or the water/sewer service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the town within 15 days of the date of occurrence. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008; Ord. of 9-2-2009)
Sec. 82-247. - Revocation of permit. 
    Any user who violates the following conditions of this article, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having their permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of division 9 of this article for: 
(1)	Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge; 
(2)	Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)	Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or, 
(4)	Violation of conditions of the permit.
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-248. - Notification of violation. 
    Whenever the town finds that any user has violated or is violating this article, user permit, or any prohibition or limitation of requirements contained herein, the town may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the town by the user. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-249. - Show cause hearing. 
(a)	The town may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Such hearings shall be preceded by a notice being served on the user specifying the time and place of the hearing, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. 
(b)	The manager may conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any officer, employee or engineer of the town to: 
(1)	Issue in the name of the manager notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings; 
(2)	Take the evidence;
(3)	Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the manager for action thereon. 
(c)	At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the transcript costs. 
(d)	After the manager has reviewed the evidence, he may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances have been installed and existing treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-250. - Legal action. 
    If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the town's treatment works contrary to the provisions of this article, applicable federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the town or if any industrial user refuses access to the manager or his designee for purposes of inspection, the town attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the circuit court. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-251. - Penalties. 
(a)	Any person or user that violates the provisions of this article or a user/discharge permit hereunder shall be subject to a penalty of $1,000.00 per day and/or shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor for each day the violation continues. 
(b)	Each day, or portion thereof, a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-252. - Falsifying information. 
    Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or user permit, or who falsifies any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall upon conviction, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Secs. 82-253-82-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTOR AND GENERALLY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30.

Sec. 82-261. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors generally. 
    Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in accordance with Virginia Department of Health and Virginia Building Inspection regulations, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease, oil or wax in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, and other harmful ingredients. Interceptors shall be required for all food preparation establishments with the exception of private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the town and the International Plumbing Code and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. 
(1)	The town, or its authorized agent, reserves the right to inspect the grease traps and to sample effluent on a continual basis to insure proper operation and maintenance. When it has been determined by the town, or its authorized agent, that any user is discharging grease into he sewer system, a fine of $100.00 for traps under 500 gallons will be incurred and a fine of $200.00 for traps over 501 gallons will be incurred. If maintenance work is necessary, a sewer surcharge shall be added to the utility bill for that user. The sewer surcharge shall be equal to the amount of the maintenance costs incurred by the town in eliminating the grease deposits from the sewer system, but in any event shall not be less than $250.00. The sewer surcharge fee will be doubled from the prior surcharge fee with each violation. 
(2)	Prior to the initial assessment of the sewer surcharge, the owner or operator of said establishment shall then be granted 30 days in which to permanently correct and abate the condition causing the grease to be discharged into the sewer system. The town must approve the abatement action undertaken by the cited organization. Unless the discharge of grease is then permanently eliminated and other conditions cited on the grease trap inspection form are corrected, the initial sewer surcharge shall be assessed ten days thereafter. No user shall be entitled to more than one such notice and grace period in which to correct the condition. The change in management or ownership shall not give an existing establishment an additional grace period in which to correct the condition. 
(3)	Thereafter, any further discharge of grease into the sewer system by the user which, in the determination of the town, creates a condition requiring maintenance to eliminate the grease deposit shall result in an assessment of a sewer surcharge without further notice or grace. Sewer surcharges shall continue to be assessed until the grease discharge condition has been permanently corrected to the satisfaction of the town. 
(4)	An organization or establishment may request a waiver of the requirements outlined in section 82-261. The request must be submitted to the town in writing with supporting documentation and shall be reviewed by town officials. Within 30 days of the formal submittal, town officials will send a letter certified, outlining the decision to grant or deny the request for waiver. 
(5)	Appeal. Any person or organization objecting to a violation letter and fine outlined in subsection (1) of this section shall have the right to appeal to the town manager. Notice of intention to exercise such right to appeal shall be filed in writing with the program administrator within the time specified for compliance in the administrator's notice of violation. Failure to file such notice within such time limit shall be deemed a waiver of the right to appeal. The program administrator shall set a date for a hearing on the objections raised by the appellant to the program administrator's notice of violation within 30 days of receipt of such notice. The appellant shall be afforded the opportunity to present evidence. The town manager shall review the notice of violation, with due regard for the reasonableness of the same and the degree of hazard to the integrity of the sanitary sewer system and wastewater treatment facility. Based upon the degree of hazard to the integrity of the sanitary sewer system and wastewater treatment facility and the evidence presented by the appellant, the town manager may affirm, vacate, or modify the notice of violation provided that no such decision shall permit the continuance of sewage discharge which does not conform to the standards of this article. If the town manager affirms the notice of violation, the abatement action stands. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-262. - Maintenance of grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
    Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at the owner's expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Secs. 82-263-82-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION 

Sec. 82-271. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Air gap separation means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying pure water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the rim of the receptacle. 
    Auxiliary water system means any water system on or available to the premises, other than the waterworks. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's waterworks; or water from a source such as wells, lakes or streams; or process fluids; or used water. They may be polluted or contaminated or objectionable, or constitute a water source or system over which the water purveyor does not have control. 
    Backflow means the flow of contaminants, pollutants, process fluids, used water, untreated waters, chemicals, gases or nonpotable waters into any part of a waterworks. 
    Backflow prevention device means any approved device, method or type of construction intended to prevent backflow into a waterworks. 
    Consumer means the owner or person in control of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a waterworks. 
    Consumer water system means any water system located on the consumer's premises, supplied by or in any manner connected to a waterworks. 
    Contamination means any introduction into pure water of microorganisms, wastes, wastewater, undesirable chemicals or grease. 
    Cross connection means any connection or structural arrangement, direct or indirect, to the waterworks, whereby backflow can occur. 
    Degree of hazard is a term derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to health and the adverse effect upon the waterworks. 
    Double gate-double checkvalve assembly means an approved assembly composed of two single, independently acting checkvalves, including tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and petcocks and test gauges for testing the watertightness of each check valve. 
    Health hazard means any condition, device or practice in a waterworks or its operation that creates, or may create, a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer. 
    Inspector means the superintendent of public works or other individual designated by the council. 
    Interchangeable connection means an arrangement or device that will allow alternate but not simultaneous use of two sources of water. 
    Pollution means the presence of any foreign substance (chemical, physical, radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute an unnecessary risk or impair the usefulness of the water. 
    Pollution hazard means a condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or degrading material may enter the waterworks. This includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)	Polluted or contaminated waters.
(2)	Process waters.
(3)	Used waters originating from the waterworks which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality. 
(4)	Cooling waters.
(5)	Contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams or irrigation systems.
(6)	Chemicals in solution or suspension.
(7)	Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes. 
    Pure water or potable water means water fit for human consumption and use which is sanitary and normally free of minerals, organic substances and toxic agents in excess of reasonable amounts for domestic usage in the area served an normally adequate in supply for the minimum health requirement of the persons served. 
    Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device means a device containing a minimum of the two independently acting checkvalves, together with an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two checkvalves. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either checkvalve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the checkvalves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks. These devices must be of the approved type. 
    Service connection means the terminal end of a service line from the waterworks. If a meter is installed at the end of the service, the "service connection" means the downstream end of the meter. 
    System hazard means a condition posing actual or potential damage to the physical properties of the waterworks or a consumer's water system. 
    Used water means any water supplied by the town form the waterworks to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection. 
    Water purveyor means a person who supplies water to any person within the town or its jurisdiction from or by means of any waterworks. 
    Waterworks means a system that serves piped water for drinking or domestic use to: 
(1)	The public;
(2)	At least 15 connections; or
(3)	An average of 25 individuals;
for at least 60 days out of the year. The term "waterworks" shall include all structures, equipment and appurtenances used in the storage, collection, purification, treatment and distribution of pure water except the piping and fixtures inside the building where such water is delivered, as set forth in Code of Virginia, § 32.1-167. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30. 
Sec. 82-272. - Adoption of state regulations by reference. 
    The council hereby adopts by reference section 6.00, Cross Connection and Backflow Prevention Control in Waterworks, of the regulations of the commonwealth. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-273. - Inspections. 
(a)	The inspector shall inspect property served by the waterworks where cross connection with the waterworks is deemed by such inspector to be reasonable cause for a potential backflow or cross connection hazard. Frequency of inspections and reinspections, based on potential health hazards involved, shall be established by the town in the cross connection control and backflow prevention program. 
(b)	The inspector shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time property served by a connection to the waterworks of the town for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems for cross connections. Upon request, the owner or occupant of property served shall furnish to the inspection agency pertinent information regarding the piping system on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-274. - Discontinuance of water service. 
    The town may deny or discontinue the water service to a consumer if the required back-flow prevention device is not installed. If it is found that the device has been removed or bypassed or if a cross connection exists on the premises, or if the pressure in the waterworks is lowered below ten psi gauge, the town shall take positive action to insure that the waterworks is adequately protected at all times. Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the deficiencies have been corrected or eliminated in accordance with state waterworks regulations and to the satisfaction of the town. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-275. - Protection of potable water supplies from contamination. 
    The potable water made available on the properties served by the waterworks shall be protected from possible contamination or pollution by enforcement of this article and the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled as "water unsafe for drinking" in a conspicuous manner. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-276. - Penalty. 
    Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article, or any written order of the inspector in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. Each day upon which a violation of the provisions of this article shall occur shall be deemed a separate and additional violation for the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Sec. 82-277. - Liability to town of person violating articles. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of these articles shall become liable to the town for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the town by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2008)
Secs. 82-278-82-290. - Reserved. 
Chapter 86 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18; licensing of transporting baggage and passengers over streets and not on fixed schedules, § 18-87; streets, sidewalks, and other public places, ch. 66; taxation, ch. 74; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78; zoning, ch. 90.
State Law reference- Local regulation of for-hire passenger vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-310; motor vehicle liability insurance policies, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-472 et seq.; registration fees for passenger vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-694; license plates for taxicabs and other vehicles for hire, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-711; vehicles for hire excluded from certain motor vehicle carrier requirements, when insurance filed, Code of Virginia, § 56-274; taxicabs generally, Code of Virginia, § 56-291.1 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 86-1-86-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 86-26-86-35. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of October 2, 2012(1), repealed § 86-26, entitled "Taxicab commission; created; composition" and derived from Code 1968, § 23.1-1. 
DIVISION 2. - DRIVER'S PERMIT 

Sec. 86-36. - Required. 
    No person shall drive a taxicab within the town unless he or she shall have obtained a taxicab driver's license for that purpose, as provided in this division. 
(Code 1968, § 23.1-2; Ord. of 10-2-2012(1))
Sec. 86-37. - Application. 
    Any person desiring a taxicab driver's license, as required in section 86-36, shall file an application therefor with the chief of police. Such application shall be made in writing under oath. 
(Code 1968, § 23.1-3; Ord. of 10-2-2012(1))
Sec. 86-38. - Fingerprinting and photographing of applicants. 
    Any applicant shall submit to fingerprinting and provide personal descriptive information and any other necessary paperwork to be forwarded along with the fingerprints through the Virginia State Police Central Criminal Records Exchange to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the purpose of obtaining state and national criminal history record information regarding such applicant. In accordance with Sections 15.2-1503.1 and 19.2-389 of the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended, and in the interest of public welfare and safety, it is necessary to determine if the past criminal conduct of the applicant would be compatible with the duties of the driver of a taxicab. The applicant shall also provide two black and white photographs, two inches by two inches in size. 
(Code 1968, § 23.1-4; Ord. of 10-2-2012(1))
Sec. 86-39. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of October 2, 2012(1), repealed § 86-39, entitled "Medical examination of applicants" and derived from Code 1968, § 23.1-5. 
Sec. 86-40. - Issuance; signed by town manager; fee. 
    A taxicab driver's license, upon issuance, shall be signed by the town manager, or his or her agent, and a fee of $25.00 shall be paid by the applicant upon issuance and upon renewal, in accordance with Section 46.2-2063 of the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended. 
(Code 1968, § 23.1-6; Ord. of 10-2-2012(1))
Sec. 86-41. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of October 2, 2012(1), repealed § 86-41, entitled "Valid upon signature of applicant" and derived from Code 1968, § 23.1-7. 
Sec. 86-42. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of October 2, 2012(1), repealed § 86-42, entitled "Appeals from findings of chief of police" and derived from Code 1968, § 23.1-8. 
Sec. 86-43. - Expiration date. 
    Taxicab drivers' licenses issued under this division shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. 
(Code 1968, § 23.1-9; Ord. of 10-2-2012(1))
Sec. 86-44. - Posting in vehicle. 
    The driver of a taxicab shall at all times have the taxicab driver's license, with his or her picture pasted thereon, as issued under this division, posted in the vehicle being driven by him or her in such a manner that it will be in full view of passengers. 
(Code 1968, § 23.1-10; Ord. of 10-2-2012(1))
Sec. 86-45. - Condition; replacement when illegible. 
    Taxicab driver's licenses issued and posted under the provisions of this division, and the photograph attached thereto, shall be kept in good condition. The chief of police shall require the holder of a taxicab driver's license to replace such license and the photograph attached thereto when, in his or her opinion, the taxicab driver's license has become dirty, disfigured or mutilated so that it cannot be read, or the holder of the license cannot be identified by his or her photograph. 
(Code 1968, § 23.1-11; Ord. of 10-2-2012(1))
Sec. 86-46. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of October 2, 2012(1), repealed § 86-46, entitled "Invalidation upon conviction of certain crimes" and derived from Code 1968, § 23.1-12. 
Sec. 86-47. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of October 2, 2012(1), repealed § 86-47, entitled "Revocation or suspension" and derived from Code 1968, § 23.1-13. 
Sec. 86-48. - Employment of driver not holding valid permit prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any taxicab to permit such taxicab to be driven by any person who does not have a valid and effective taxicab driver's license issued pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1968, § 23.1-14; Ord. of 10-2-2012(1))
Chapter 90 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; parks and recreation, ch. 50; planning, ch. 54; secondhand goods, ch. 58; subdivisions, ch. 70; review of preliminary subdivision plat, § 70-39; required information on preliminary plat, § 70-78; blocks in subdivisions, § 70-113; vehicles for hire, ch. 86.
State Law reference- Notice of planning or zoning matters, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-33.1; zoning, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-486 et seq.; regulations to be uniform, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-488; conflict with statutes, local ordinances or regulations, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-498.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 90-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Accessory use or structure means a subordinate use or structure customarily incidental to and located upon the same lot occupied by the main use or building. 
    Administrator means the official charged with the enforcement of this chapter. He may be an appointed or elected official who is by formal resolution designated to the position by the governing body. He may serve with or without compensation as determined by the governing body. 
    Agriculture means the tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, horticulture, forestry and gardening, including the keeping of animals and fowl. 
    Alley means a public right-of-way which affords only a secondary means of vehicular access to the side or rear of property. 
    All-weather surface means crushed rock, gravel or similar surface. 
    Alteration means any change in the total floor area, use, adaptability or external appearance of any existing structure. 
    Amendment means a change in this chapter or the zoning map granted by the town council after review and comment by the town planning commission and appropriate public hearings. 
    Apartment house. See "dwelling, multifamily dwelling." 
    Architect, registered, means a licensed professional architect, registered in the state by the state board for architects, professional engineers, land surveyors and landscape architects as an "architect." 
    Automobile parking lot, commercial, means a lot or portion thereof, other than an automobile sales lot, held out or used for the storage or parking of motor vehicles for a consideration, where service or repair facilities are not permitted. Such parking lot shall not be considered an accessory use, nor shall it be used for the storage of dismantled or wrecked motor vehicles, parts thereof or junk. 
    Automobile sales lot means a lot arranged, designed or used for the storage and display for sale of any new or used motor vehicle capable of independent operation or any type of travel trailer and recreation vehicle, provided the travel trailer and recreation vehicle is unoccupied, and where repair work is done wholly enclosed within a building. 
    Automobile service station means any place of business with pumps and underground storage tanks, having as its purpose the servicing, at retail, of motor vehicles with fuels and lubricants, and including minor repairs and inspections incidental thereto, but not including a general repair shop, paint or body shop, machine shop, vulcanizing shop or any operation requiring the removal or installation of radiator, engine, cylinder head, crankcase, transmission, differential, fenders, doors, bumpers, grills, glass or other body parts, or any body repairing or painting. All repairs shall be conducted within a fully enclosed building. 
    Basement means a story having part but not more than one-half of its height below the average grade. A basement shall be counted as a story for the purpose of height regulation. (See "cellar.") 
    Bed and breakfast means a home occupation use of a single-family dwelling consisting of rooms maintained for the purpose of providing overnight sleeping accommodations and breakfast for paying guests, and subject to the provisions of section 90-377. 
    Boardinghouse means a building where, for compensation, lodging and meals are provided for up to 13 persons inclusive. A boardinghouse is to be distinguished from a hotel. No provisions shall be made for cooking in individual rooms or suites. For the purposes of this chapter, a boardinghouse is a lodginghouse. 
    Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, for the housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
    Building, height of, means the vertical distance from the grade plane to the average height of the highest roof surface. In the case of sloped roofs, the average height of the roof is to be used as the upper point, rather than the eave line or ridge line. 
    Building inspector means an official designated by the town to be responsible for certifying building inspections. 
    Building, main, means the principal building on a lot or the building housing the principal use on the lot. 
    Bulk means the size of buildings, measured in terms of volume and height. 
    Carport means any space outside a building and contiguous thereto, wholly or partly covered by a roof and used for the shelter of parked motor vehicles. A carport is to have no enclosure, other than the side of the building to which the carport is contiguous, that is more than 18 inches in height, exclusive of screens. 
    Carwash means a structure, or portion thereof, containing facilities for washing motor vehicles, using production line, automated or semiautomated methods for washing, whether or not employing a chain conveyor, blower, steam cleaning or similar mechanical devices. In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, carwashes shall only be permitted by special permits in a B-2 (highway commercial) district. 
    Cellar means the part of a building having more than one-half of its height below the average grade. A cellar shall not be deemed a story in calculation of building height. 
    Certificate of use and occupancy means a written statement, based on an inspection and signed by the zoning administrator, setting forth that a building, structure, sign or land complies with this chapter or that a building, structure, sign or land may be lawfully employed for specific uses, or both, as set forth therein. 
    Circuit court means the circuit court of the county. 
    Clinic, medical/dental, means an establishment operated and conducted by a group of physicians or dentists practicing medicine or dentistry together, where patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for examination and treatment. 
    Commercial center means a grouping of commercial enterprises offering a range of retail goods, services and offices with an aggregate of 10,000 square feet or more gross floor area which has two or more of the following characteristics: (a) is designed as a single commercial group, whether or not located on the same lot; (b) is under one common ownership or management, or has one common arrangement for the maintenance of the grounds; (c) is connected by party walls, partitions, covered canopies, or other structural members to form one continuous structure; (d) shares a common parking area; (e) otherwise presents the appearance of one continuous commercial area. 
    Common open space means an open tract or parcel of land owned in undivided interest, not devoted to structures but directly related and adjunct to a development, as provided in this chapter. 
    Comprehensive plan means the official document adopted by the town council, known as the Woodstock Comprehensive Plan. 
    Coverage means the percent of total lot areas that may be occupied by buildings and structures. 
    District means a division of territory within the town within which certain uniform regulations and requirements apply under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Drive-in restaurant means any place or premises used for the sale, dispensing or serving of food, refreshments or beverages in automobiles, including those establishments where customers may serve themselves and may eat or drink the food, refreshments or beverages in motor vehicles on the premises; a refreshment stand; or a fast food or primarily a carryout establishment. 
    Dwelling means any structure which is designed for residential purposes, except hotels, boardinghouses, lodginghouses, tourist cabins, motels, mobile homes, trailers and tourist homes. 
(1)	Single-family detached dwelling means a building arranged, designed or intended for occupancy exclusively by one family, such building being surrounded by open space on all four sides within the same lot. 
(2)	Two-family dwelling means a building arranged, designed and intended for occupancy by two families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking therein, one unit being above the other or alongside (having one wall in common), or two dwelling units on the same floor in one building. 
(3)	Two-family (duplex) dwelling means a semidetached dwelling and being one of two buildings, arranged or designed as dwellings located alongside the other on abutting walls without openings and with each building having a separate lot with minimum dimensions as required by district regulations in this chapter. 
(4)	Multifamily dwelling means a structure arranged or designed to be occupied by more than two families, living independently of each other and doing their own cooking and having their own sanitary facilities. 
a.	Townhouse means a building consisting of dwelling units arranged, designed, intended for and occupied exclusively by one family, such building consisting of one of a group of not less than three nor more than eight attached dwelling units with a semidetached dwelling unit on each end thereof being included within the aforesaid minimum and maximum numbers; each dwelling unit shall be separated by an unpierced partition and contain at least two and not more than three stories. 
b.	Apartment house means a building used or intended to be used as a dwelling by more than two families, living independently of each other and doing their cooking therein. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "apartment" shall not be construed to mean a garden apartment. Apartments are permitted by right in R-3 and B-1 districts and in accordance with other provisions of this chapter. 
c.	Garden apartment or condominium means a multifamily structure, not exceeding three stories in height, containing not less than three nor more than eight separate dwelling units, on a minimum parcel of two acres, having yards in common and which may also have other joint facilities and services in common. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "garden apartment" shall not be construed to mean an apartment house. Garden apartments and condominiums shall only be permitted as developments by a special permit in R-3 districts and must also meet other provisions of this chapter. This shall not include interval ownership or time-sharing arrangements. 
(5)	Courtyard home means a single-family detached dwelling, on its own lot, located in a grouping of at least four such units, intended to be used as a residence for small families who do not desire the maintenance associated with large lots. Courtyard home developments shall include provisions for an owners association or organization to provide maintenance and ownership of common areas and open space areas. 
    Easement means a grant by a property owner of the use of his land by another person for a specific purpose. The initial property owner in the agreement may be compensated for the use of his property. 
    Engineer, registered, means a licensed professional engineer, registered in the state by the state board for architects, professional engineers, land surveyors and landscape architects as an "engineer." 
    Family means one or more persons occupying premises and living in a single dwelling unit, as distinguished from an unrelated group occupying a boardinghouse, lodginghouse, tourist home, motel or hotel. 
    Fence means a freestanding structure of metal, masonry, composition, wood or any combination thereof resting on or partially buried in the ground and rising above ground level, and used for confinement, screening or partition purposes. 
    Financial institution means any building wherein the primary occupation is concerned with such state-regulated businesses as banking, savings and loans, loan companies and investment companies. 
    Fine art studio means, when used in connection with "use" and "occupancy", a use or occupancy by persons generally engaged in the fine arts of painting, sculpture, collage, decollage, assemblage, installation, music, dance, theatre, film, photography, ceramic art and conceptual art; where fine art products are created, displayed and sold on or off site. For fine art studios requiring a special use permit, signage will be addressed as part of the special use permit process. 
    Floodplain means sections of land which are subject to periodic flooding and inundation, as defined or approved by the Department of Housing and Urban Development and/or the Army Corps of Engineers and the town comprehensive plan. 
    Frontage means the minimum width of a lot, measured from one side lot line to the other along a line on which no point shall be farther away from the street upon which the lot fronts than the building setback line as defined and required herein. 
    Garage, private, means an accessory building designed or used for the storage of private automobiles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which the garage is an accessory. For the purposes of this chapter, private garages or carports attached to the main building or within five feet of the main structure shall be considered part of the principal structure. 
    Garage, public, means a building or portion thereof, other than a private garage, designed or used for servicing, repairing (including bodywork), equipment, renting, selling or storing motor vehicles. 
    Garden apartment. See "dwelling, multifamily dwelling." 
    Gasoline service station. See "automobile service station." 
    Governing body means the town council. 
    Hard surface means concrete, blacktop and macadam, or a similar surface meeting the specifications of the state department of transportation. 
    Health official means the legally designated health authority of the state board of health for the county, or his authorized representative. 
    Home occupation means an accessory use conducted within a dwelling unit by residents of that unit which is clearly incidental and secondary to the principal residential dwelling use. 
    Hospital means an institution rendering medical, surgical, obstetrical or convalescent care, including nursing homes, homes for the aged and sanitoriums, but in all cases excluding institutions primarily for mental or feebleminded patients, epileptics, alcoholics or drug addicts. (Certain nursing homes and homes for the aged may be "home occupations" if they comply with the definition herein.) 
    Hotel means a building designed or occupied as the temporary abiding place for 14 or more persons who are, for compensation, lodged, with or without meals, and in which provision is not generally made for cooking in individual rooms or suites. 
    Institutional use means that the primary activity on a parcel includes medical, educational or governmental activities (including government parks and recreational activities and facilities); an establishment whose purpose is of a civic, educational, charitable, religious or philanthropic nature. 
    Kennel means a place to house, board, breed, handle or otherwise keep or care for dogs for sale or in return for compensation. 
    Lodginghouse. See "boardinghouse." 
    Lot means a parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a main structure and accessory structures, together with such yards, open spaces, lot width and lot areas as are required by this chapter, either shown on a plat of record or considered as a unit of property and described by metes and bounds. 
    Lot area means an area of land which is determined by the limits of the property lines bounding that area and expressed in square feet or acres. Any portion of a lot included in a street right-of-way shall not be included in calculating lot area. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot at the point of intersection of and abutting two or more intersecting streets. Of the two sides of a corner lot fronting on streets, the front shall be deemed to be the shortest. 
    Lot coverage means the maximum area of a lot which may be covered by all buildings and other impervious material, unless otherwise specified. 
    Lot, depth of, means the average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot, double frontage (through lot), means an interior lot having frontage on two streets. 
    Lot, interior, means any lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot line means any line dividing one lot from another. 
    Lot of record means a lot, a plat or description of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the county. 
    Lot, width of, means the horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured at the setback line. 
    Manufacture or manufacturing means the processing and/or converting of raw, unfinished materials or products into articles or substances of different character, or for use for a different purpose. 
    Marquee means a roof-like structure or awning projecting over an entrance, as to a theater. 
    Mobile home means a vehicular, portable dwelling structure, designed as a permanent residence, fully equipped with living quarters, including sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or showerbath and kitchen facilities with plumbing and electrical connections, major appliances and furniture, other equipment and appurtenances, manufactured as a double, expandable or nonexpandable unit in accordance with U.S.A.-A119.1 Standard for Mobile Homes 1972 currently in use or as may be amended by the U.S.A. Committee on Mobile Homes and Travel Trailers. It shall be further defined as a dwelling designed for transportation, after fabrication, on streets and highways on its own wheels, on a flatbed or other trailer or on detachable wheels, and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete and ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembling operation, location on jacks or permanent foundations, connection to utilities and the like. Such unit shall be designed for removal to and installation or erection on other sites without substantial construction (other than a foundation), renovation, reconstruction or demolition. The design and type of a mobile home shall be clearly identified by the manufacturer by a visible identifiable seal or plate of a permanent nature, as a mobile home. Its requirements for transit from site to site shall be in accordance with the Motor Vehicle Code of Virginia (Code of Virginia, title 46.2). A mobile home may include two or more units, separately towable, which, when joined together, shall have the characteristics as described above. For the purposes of this chapter, a mobile home shall not be deemed a single-family detached dwelling, nor shall such mobile home definition apply to travel trailers used for recreational camping purposes. 
    Modular means a factory-fabricated transportable building, designed to be used by itself or to be incorporated with similar units at a building site into a modular structure. The term is intended to apply to major assemblies and does not include prefabricated panels, trusses, plumbing trees and other prefabricated subelements incorporated into a structure at the site. This type of unit is included in the definition of "detached dwelling," but not "mobile home," for the purposes of this chapter. 
    Motel means a building or group of buildings containing individual rooms or apartment accommodations primarily for transients, each of which is provided with a separate exterior entrance and a parking space, and offered principally for rental and use by motor vehicle travelers. The term "motel" includes, but is not limited to, auto courts, motorcourts, motor inns, motor lodges or roadside hotels. 
    Nonconforming activity (use) means the otherwise legal use of a building, structure or tract of land that does not conform to the use regulations of this chapter for the district in which it is located either at the effective date of this chapter or as a result of subsequent amendments to this chapter. 
    Nonconforming lot means an otherwise legally platted lot that does not conform to the minimum area or width requirements of this chapter for the district in which it is located at the effective date of this chapter or as a result of subsequent amendments to this chapter. 
    Nonconforming structure means an otherwise legal building or structure that does not conform with the lot area, yard, height, lot coverage or other area regulations of this chapter, or that is designed or intended for a use that does not conform to the use regulations of this chapter for the district in which it is located, either at the effective date of this chapter or as a result of subsequent amendments to this chapter. 
    Official zoning map means the legally adopted zoning map of the town. 
    Off-street parking area means space provided for vehicular parking outside the street right-of-way. 
    Open space, usable landscaped, means that space on the same lot and contiguous to the principal building, except as herein noted, which is landscaped with shrubs, planted with grass or developed and maintained for recreation purposes, excluding that portion of the lot which is utilized for off-street parking purposes. 
    Parking, commercial, means an area, other than accessory off-street parking areas as required by the provisions of this chapter, where, for a charge or permit, motor vehicles may be stored for the purpose of temporary, daily or overnight off-street parking. 
    Parking lot means an off-street all-weather surfaced area designed solely for the parking of motor vehicles, including driveways, passageways and maneuvering space appurtenant thereto. 
    Parking space means an area not less than ten feet wide by 20 feet long for each automobile or motor vehicle. Such space shall be exclusive of necessary drives, aisles, entrances or exits and shall be fully accessible for the storage or parking of vehicles. 
    Planning commission means the town planning commission. 
    Portable storage container means a portable, weather-resistant receptacle designed and used for the temporary storage or shipment of household goods, wares, building materials, or merchandise. This term shall not include garbage cans or other receptacles whose sole use is for the collection of rubbish or debris (i.e. open or closed commercial dumpsters, roll-off containers, etc.). 
    Professional office means a structure designed for use by a person in offering a service which requires specialized knowledge gained by intensive academic preparation, such as medicine, law, engineering, dentistry and other like endeavors, and requiring licensing and regulation by the state. 
    Public water or sewer system means a water or sewer system owned and operated by the town and under the jurisdiction of the state health department. 
    Restaurant means any establishment, however designated, at which food or beverages are sold for consumption on the premises. However, a snack bar or refreshment stand at a public or nonprofit community swimming pool, playground, playfield or park, operated solely by and for the agency or group operating the recreational facility and for the convenience of patrons of the facility, shall not be deemed to be a "restaurant." 
    Retail stores and shops means buildings used for display or sale of merchandise at retail or for the rendering of personal services, including, but not limited to, the following: barbershop, beauty parlor, drugstore, newsstand, foodstore, candy shop, milk dispensary, dry goods and notions store, household appliance store, furniture store, florist, optician, music and radio store and tailor shop; but specifically excluding coal, wood and lumberyards. 
    Roominghouse (lodginghouse) means a building other than a hotel where lodging is provided for three or more persons for compensation pursuant to previous arrangements, but not open to the public or transients. 
    Setback means the minimum distance by which any building or structure must be separated from the front lot line or road right-of-way line. 
    Sign means any display of any letters, words, numerals, figures, devices, emblems, pictures or any parts or combinations thereof, by any means whereby the same are made visible for the purpose of making anything known, whether such display is made on, attached to or as a part of a structure, surface or any other thing, including, but not limited to, the ground or any rock, tree or other natural object, which display is visible beyond the boundaries of the parcel of land on which the same is made. 
(1)	Business sign means a sign which directs attention to a product, commodity or service available on the premises. 
(2)	Home occupation sign means a sign not exceeding two square feet in area directing attention to a product, commodity or service available on the premises, but which product, commodity or service is clearly a secondary use of the dwelling. 
(3)	General advertising sign means a sign which directs attention to a product, commodity or service not necessarily available on the premises. 
(4)	Location sign means a sign which directs attention to the approximate location of an establishment from which the advertised product may be obtained. 
    Sign structure means the supports, uprights, bracing and framework of any structure, whether single-faced, double-faced, v-type or otherwise, exhibiting a sign. 
    Sign, temporary, means a sign applying to a seasonal or other brief activity, such as, but not limited to, summer camps, horse shows, auctions or sales of land. 
    Special use permit means a permit issued for a use permitted in a particular district by the town council to occupy or use land and/or a building or structure erected thereon for a specific purpose not permitted by right, but permitted in accordance with standards or conditions established in this chapter. 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor above it, the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it. A basement, but not a cellar, shall be deemed to be a story. Each level of a split level building, excluding cellars, shall be considered a half story. 
    Story, half, means a space under a sloping roof, which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds of the floor area is finished for use. 
    Street means a public or private right-of-way, excluding driveways, intended for use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation, which provides a means of access to abutting property. The word "street" includes "thoroughfare," "avenue," "boulevard," "court," "drive," "expressway," "highway," "service street" (alleys), "land" and "road," or similar terms. 
    Street centerline means a line established on a centerline of a street by the state, county, town or other official or agency having jurisdiction thereof. 
    Street line means the dividing line between a street or road right-of-way and the adjacent property. 
    Street outer line. See "street line." 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground. This includes, among other things, dwellings, buildings, signs, etc. 
    Surveyor, professional, means a licensed professional surveyor, registered in the commonwealth by the state board for architects, professional engineers, land surveyors and landscape architects as a "surveyor." This term shall also include land surveyors. 
    Theater, indoor, means a building designed and/or used primarily for the commercial exhibition of motion pictures to the general public or used for performance of plays, acts or dramas by actors and/or actresses. 
    Tourist home means a dwelling where only lodging is provided for compensation for up to 13 persons inclusive (in contrast to boardinghouses and hotels), and open to transients. 
    Townhouse means a building consisting of dwelling units arranged, designed, intended for and occupied exclusively by one family, such building consisting of one of a group of not less than three nor more than eight attached dwelling units with a semidetached dwelling unit on each end thereof being included within the aforesaid minimum and maximum numbers; each dwelling unit shall be separated by an unpierced partition and contain at least two and not more than three stories. 
    Travel trailer means a vehicular, portable structure designed in accordance with the United States standards for travel trailers (A119.2) currently in use, or as may be amended by the U.S.A. Committee on Mobile Homes and Travel Trailers. Its primary functions shall be the provision of temporary dwelling or sleeping quarters during travel, recreation or vacation uses. Its design and type shall be clearly identified by the manufacturer by visible identifiable seal or plate of permanent nature, as a travel trailer. Its specifications for transporting over the streets and highways shall be in accordance with the Motor Vehicle Code of Virginia (Code of Virginia, title 46.2). The maximum width is eight feet. The maximum length is 35 feet. No travel trailer shall be used for other temporary dwelling or sleeping quarters to exceed 30 days. For the purposes of this chapter, a travel trailer shall not be construed as a single-family detached dwelling, nor shall such definition apply to mobile homes as defined in this section. 
    Usable open space means an unenclosed portion of the area of a lot which is not devoted to driveways, parking spaces or principal structures, including common buildings such as utility sheds, shelters, pavilions or recreational structures centrally located, accessible to occupants of the building. 
    Use means the purpose or activity for which a lot is occupied or maintained, including any manner of performance of such activity with respect to the performance standards of this chapter. 
    Variance means a relaxation of the terms of this chapter where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As used in this chapter, a variance is authorized only for height, area and size of structures or size of yards and open spaces. Establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning district or adjoining zoning districts, or solely for the economic benefit of the landowner. 
    Wayside stand means any structure designed for the display and sale of agricultural products, with no space for customers within the structure itself, subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
    Wind turbine means a device that converts kinetic wind energy into rotational energy that drives an electric generator. A wind turbine typically consists of a tower, nacelle body, and a rotor with two or more blades. 
    Yard means an open space of a generally uniform width or depth on the same land with a building or group of buildings, which open space lies between the building or group of buildings and the nearest lot line and is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. 
    Yard, front, means an unoccupied space, open to the sky, between an adjacent right-of-way and the building setback line, which shall be drawn at such distance as may be specified herein for any district, and extending for the full width of the lot. 
    Yard, rear, means an unoccupied space, open to the sky, between the rear lot line and a line drawn parallel thereto at such distance therefrom as may be specified herein for any district, and extending for the full width of the lot. 
    Yard, side, means an unoccupied space, open to the sky, between the side lot line and a line drawn parallel thereto at such distance therefrom as may be specified herein for any district, and extending for the full length of the lot. 
    Zoning administrator. See "administrator." 
    Zoning board means the board of zoning appeals of the town. 
    Zoning permit means a certificate issued by the zoning administrator for authorizing the uses of land and/or structures as required by this chapter. 
(Code 1968, § 29-1; Ord. of 4-2-91(2); Ord. of 9-3-96(1); Ord. of 12-1-98(4); Ord. of 3-2-2004; Ord. of 1-4-2005; Ord. of 5-2-2006; Ord. of 6-6-2006; Ord. of 8-1-2006; Ord. of 8-2-2006; Ord. of 11-1-2011; Ord. of 5-1-2012; Ord. of 9-3-2013) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2; animals, ch. 10; parks and recreation, ch. 50. 
State Law reference- Zoning administrator, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-491(d); motor vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100 et seq. 
Sec. 90-2. - Authority for enactment and purposes of chapter. 
(a)	By act of the general assembly as provided in Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-486 through 15.1-498, the governing body of any municipality may, by ordinance, classify the territory under its jurisdiction or any substantial portion thereof into districts of such number, shape and size as it may deem best suited to carry out the purposes of such state law, and in each district it may regulate, restrict, permit, prohibit, and determine the following: 
(1)	The use of land, buildings, structures and other premises for agricultural, business, industrial, residential, floodplain and other specific uses. 
(2)	The size, height, area, bulk, location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, maintenance, razing, or removal of structures. 
(3)	The areas and dimensions of land, water, and air space to be occupied by buildings, structures and uses, and of courts, yards, and other open spaces to be left unoccupied by uses and structures, including variations in the sizes of lots based on whether a public or community water supply or sewer system is available and used. 
(4)	The excavation or mining of soil or other natural resources.
(b)	This chapter shall be for the general purpose of promoting the health, safety or general welfare of the public and of further accomplishing the objectives of Code of Virginia, § 15.1-427. To these ends, this chapter has been designed to give reasonable consideration to each of the following purposes, where applicable: 
(1)	To provide for adequate light, air, convenience of access, and safety from fire, flood and other dangers. 
(2)	To reduce or prevent congestion in the public streets.
(3)	To facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive and harmonious community.
(4)	To facilitate the provision of adequate police and fire protection, disaster evacuation, civil defense, transportation, water, sewerage, flood protection, schools, parks, forests, playgrounds, recreational facilities, airports and other public requirements. 
(5)	To protect against destruction of or encroachment upon historic areas.
(6)	To protect against one or more of the following: overcrowding of land, undue density of population in relation to the community facilities existing or available, obstruction of light and air, danger and congestion in travel and transportation, or loss of life, health, or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers. 
(7)	To encourage economic development activities that provide desirable employment and enlarge the tax base. 
(8)	To provide for the preservation of agricultural and forestal lands and other lands of significance for the protection of the natural environment. 
(9)	To protect approach slopes and other safety areas of licensed airports, including United States government and military air facilities. 
(10)	To promote affordable housing.
This chapter may also include reasonable provisions, not inconsistent with applicable state water quality standards, to protect surface water and groundwater as defined in Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.85(8). 
(Code 1968, § 29-2)
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; law enforcement, ch. 38; parks and recreation, ch. 50; utilities, ch. 82. 
State Law reference- Purpose of zoning ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-489. 
Secs. 90-3-90-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ZONING MAP AND ZONING DISTRICTS GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-36. - Compliance with article. 
    Except as provided in this article, no building, structure, land or parts thereof shall be used or occupied, erected, constructed or assembled, moved, enlarged or structurally altered, unless in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1968, § 29-3)
Sec. 90-37. - Official zoning map-Adopted; identification; location and availability to public. 
(a)	The town is hereby divided into zones or districts, as shown on the official zoning map, which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and 
declared to be part of this chapter, together with all future notations, references and amendments. 
(b)	The official zoning map shall be identified by the signatures of the governing body and attested to by the secretary of that body, together with the date of the adoption of this chapter (June 2, 1987). 
(c)	The official zoning map shall be located in a public place, as designated by the governing body, and shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas in the town, regardless of unofficial copies which may have been made or published from time to time. The official zoning map shall be available to the public at its immediate request. 
(Code 1968, § 29-4)
Sec. 90-38. - Same-Amendments. 
(a)	If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Code of Virginia, changes are made in district boundaries or other matters portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the governing body. 
(b)	No changes of any nature shall be made in the official zoning map or matters shown thereon, except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this chapter or any state law, if applicable. All changes shall be noted on the official zoning map by date, with a brief description of the nature of the change. 
(c)	Conditional zoning. 
(1)	Proffer of conditions-An applicant for rezoning (amendment of the zoning map) may, as a part of the rezoning application, voluntarily proffer, in writing, reasonable conditions to become a part of the requested zoning on the property, pursuant to the provisions of § 15.2-2298, Code of Virginia. All such proffered conditions shall be in addition to the regulations for the zoning district as set forth in the ordinance, except that an approved proffer modifies the regulations. 
(2)	Criteria-Any proffer shall meet the following criteria:
i.	The rezoning itself gives rise to the need for the conditions;
ii.	The conditions have a reasonable relation to the rezoning;
iii.	All conditions are in conformity with the town comprehensive plan; and
iv.	In the event proffered conditions include the dedication of real property or payment of cash, the property shall not transfer and the payment of cash shall not be made until the facilities for which the property is dedicated or cash is tendered are included in the town capital improvement program, provided that nothing herein shall prevent a locality from accepting proffered conditions which are not normally included in a capital improvement program. If proffered conditions include the dedication of real property or the payment of cash, the proffered conditions shall provide for the disposition of the property or cash payment in the event the property or cash payment is not used for the purpose for which proffered. 
(3)	Amendment of proffer by applicant-An applicant may amend a proffer at any time prior to the public hearing before the town council, but not thereafter. 
(4)	Effect of proffered conditions/subsequent ordinance amendments.
i.	Upon the approval of a rezoning with proffered conditions, the conditions approved shall be a part of the rezoning on the property and nonseverable therefrom. The conditions shall continue in effect until a subsequent amendment changes the zoning on the property covered by the conditions; however, the conditions shall continue if the subsequent amendment is part of a comprehensive implementation of a new or substantially revised zoning ordinance. 
ii.	Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event proffered conditions include a requirement for the dedication of real property of substantial value, or substantial cash payment for or construction of substantial public improvements, the need for which is not generated solely by the rezoning itself, then no amendment to the zoning map for the property subject to such conditions, nor the conditions themselves, nor any amendments to the text of the zoning ordinance with respect to the zoning district applicable thereto initiated by the town council, which eliminate, or materially restrict, reduce, or modify the uses, the floor area ratio, of the density of use permitted in the zoning district applicable to the property, shall be effective with respect to the property unless there has been mistake, fraud, or a change in circumstances substantially affecting the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(5)	Zoning map notation: Conditional zoning index-Each rezoning shall be designed on the zoning map by an appropriate symbol designed by the zoning administrator. In addition, the zoning administrator shall keep and maintain a conditional zoning index, which shall be available for public inspection and which shall provide ready access to the ordinance creating the conditions in addition to the regulations provided for in the particular zoning district. 
(6)	Enforcement and guarantees. 
i.	The zoning administrator is vested with all necessary authority on behalf of the town council to administer and enforce conditions attached to a rezoning, including (i) the ordering in writing of the remedy of any noncompliance with the conditions; (ii) the bringing of legal action to insure compliance with the conditions, including injunction, abatement, or other appropriate action or proceeding; and (iii) requiring a guarantee, satisfactory to the town council, in an amount sufficient for and conditioned upon the construction of any physical improvements required by the conditions, or a contract for the construction of the improvements and the contractor's guarantee, in like amount and so conditioned, which guarantee shall be reduced or released by the governing body, or agent thereof, upon the submission of satisfactory evidence that construction of the improvements has been completed in whole or in part. 
ii.	Failure to meet all conditions shall constitute cause to deny the issuance of any of the required use, occupancy, or building permits, as may be appropriate. 
(7)	Review of zoning administrator decisions-Any person who is aggrieved by a decision of the zoning administrator made pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (6), above, may petition the town council for review of the decision of the zoning administrator. All petitions for review shall be filed with the zoning administrator and with the clerk of the council within 30 days from the date of the decision for which review is sought and shall specify the grounds upon which the petitioner is aggrieved. 
(Code 1968, § 29-5; Ord. of 6-17-2004)
Sec. 90-39. - Same-Replacement. 
(a)	If the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the governing body must, by resolution, adopt a new official zoning map, which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new official zoning map shall be identified by the signatures of the governing body and attested by the secretary of that body and shall bear the following words: "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map of Woodstock, Virginia supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted ____________/____________/____________." 
(b)	Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendments thereof. 
(Code 1968, § 29-6)
Sec. 90-40. - Districts established and enumerated. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the town is hereby divided into classes or districts, which shall be designated as follows: 
R-1 low density residential. 
R-2 medium density residential. 
R-3 high density residential. 
B-1 central business. 
B-2 highway commercial. 
I-1 industrial. 
I-2 heavy industrial. 
F-C floodplain conservation. 
(Code 1968, § 29-7)
Sec. 90-41. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)	Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, railroad rights-of-way, streams, rivers, existing lot lines or municipal boundary lines shall be construed to follow such features indicated. Where a district boundary line does not follow such a line, its position may be shown on the official zoning map by a specific dimension expressing its distance in feet from a street right-of-way line or other boundary line as indicated and running parallel to such line. 
(2)	Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or if uncertainty exists as to the true location of a district boundary line in a particular instance, the zoning administrator shall request the board of zoning appeals to render its determination with respect thereto. 
(Code 1968, § 29-8)
Secs. 90-42-90-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning regulations to be uniform throughout each district, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-488; matters to be considered in drawing and applying zoning ordinances and districts, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-490.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 90-66-90-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 90-86. - Statement of intent. 
    The R-1 low density residential district is composed of certain quiet, single-family residential areas plus certain open areas where similar residential development appears likely to occur. The regulations for this district are designed to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of the district, to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life where there are children and to prohibit all activities of a commercial nature. To these ends, development is limited to relatively low concentration, and permitted uses are limited basically to single-unit dwellings providing homes for the residents, plus certain additional uses, such as schools, parks and certain public facilities that serve the residents of the district. 
(Code 1968, § 29-9)
Sec. 90-87. - Permitted uses. 
    Structures to be erected or land to be used in the R-1 district shall be for one of the following uses; provided, that only one main building and its accessory buildings may be erected on any lot or parcel of land in this district: 
(1)	Single-family detached dwellings.
(2)	Police, fire and rescue squad stations.
(3)	Public utilities, such as poles, lines, distribution transformers, meters, water and sewer lines, booster or relay stations and transformer substations. 
(Code 1968, § 29-10)
Sec. 90-88. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following accessory uses, to be located on the same lot with the principal use, shall be permitted in the R-1 low density residential district: 
(1)	Home occupations, pursuant to section 90-377. 
(2)	Private garages or private parking areas, pursuant to section 90-462. 
(3)	Signs, pursuant to section 90-383. 
(4)	Other customary accessory uses and buildings, provided they are clearly incidental to the principal use, pursuant to section 90-378. 
(Code 1968, § 29-11)
Sec. 90-89. - Minimum lot size. 
    The following minimum lot size standards shall apply in the R-1 low density residential district: 
Minimum Area 
per Dwelling 
Unit   
(square feet)  
Lots with public water and public sewer .....17,500   
Lots with public sewer only .....20,000   
Lots with public water only .....30,000   
Lots with on-lot water and sewer .....40,000   
(Code 1968, § 29-13)
Sec. 90-90. - Setback. 
    No structures in the R-1 low density residential district shall be located closer than 35 feet to any street right-of-way which is 50 feet or greater in width, or closer than 60 feet to the centerline of any street right-of-way less than 50 feet in width. 
(Code 1968, § 29-14)
Sec. 90-91. - Minimum lot width-Generally. 
    The minimum width of any lot in the R-1 low density residential district at the setback line shall not be less than 100 feet; except, that any corner lot will not be less than 120 feet at the setback line. 
(Code 1968, § 29-15)
Sec. 90-92. - Same-Lots fronting on culs-de-sac in R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts. 
    The minimum width of any lot in the R-1, R-2 or R-3 district that fronts on a cul-de-sac, as defined in section 70-1, shall not be more than a 40-percent reduction at the setback line as set forth in section 90-91. 
(Code 1968, § 29-15.1)
Sec. 90-93. - Yards. 
    The following yard regulations shall apply in the R-1 low density residential district: 
(1)	Side yards. The minimum side yard shall be ten feet, and the total minimum of the two required side yards shall be 25 feet. 
(2)	Rear yard. The minimum rear yard shall be 35 feet. 
In this district, parking is not permitted in the yard areas (see section 90-387, subsection (f)). 
(Code 1968, § 29-16)
Sec. 90-94. - Maximum building coverage and height. 
    In the R-1 low density residential district, maximum building coverage shall be 25 percent, and maximum height from average grade shall be 35 feet or 21/2 stories. 
(Code 1968, § 29-17; Ord. of 4-4-95(1))
Sec. 90-95. - Sidewalk requirements. 
    In the R-1 low density residential district, five-foot sidewalks will be required on both sides of the street on new street construction. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2000; Ord. of 2-7-2006)
Secs. 90-96-90-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 90-111. - Statement of intent. 
    The R-2 district is intended as a residential area with medium population density. The regulations of this district are designed to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of the district and to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life where there are children. To these ends, development is limited to a medium concentration, and permitted uses are limited basically to providing homes for the residents plus certain additional uses, such as schools, parks, churches and certain public facilities that serve the residents of the district. This type of district is located near the more developed areas of the town. 
(Code 1968, § 29-18)
Sec. 90-112. - Permitted uses. 
    Structures to be erected or land to be used in the R-2 medium density residential district shall be for one of the following uses; provided, that only one main building and its accessory buildings may be erected on any lot or parcel of land in this district: 
(1)	Single-family detached dwellings.
(2)	Two-family dwellings.
(3)	Police, fire and rescue squad stations.
(4)	Public utilities, such as poles, lines, distribution transformers, meters, water and sewer lines, booster or relay stations and transformer substations. 
(5)	Courtyard homes.
(Code 1968, § 29-19; Ord. of 1-4-2005)
Sec. 90-113. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following accessory uses, to be located on the same lot with the principal use, shall be permitted in the R-2 medium density residential district: 
(1)	Home occupations, pursuant to section 90-377. 
(2)	Private garages or private parking areas, pursuant to section 90-387. 
(3)	Signs, pursuant to section 90-383. 
(4)	Other customary accessory uses and buildings, provided they are clearly incidental to the principal use, pursuant to section 90-378. 
(Code 1968, § 29-20)
Sec. 90-114. - Uses permitted by special permit. 
    The following uses shall be permitted by special permit in the R-2 medium density residential district: 
(1)	Hospitals, orphanages and convalescent homes for the care of the sick, aged or crippled, meeting all federal, state and county requirements, and pursuant to section 90-390, subsection (3), but excluding institutions for the insane, feebleminded or drug or liquor patients. 
(2)	Churches; schools.
(3)	Bed and breakfast establishments.
(4)	Two-family (duplex) dwellings, each unit of which may be sold separately.
(5)	Wind turbines on parcels with institutional uses per section 90-1, Institutional use. 
(Code 1968, § 29-21; Ord. of 4-2-91(13), § 29-21; Ord. of 5-1-2012)
Sec. 90-115. - Minimum lot size. 
(a)	Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), the following minimum lot size standards shall apply in the R-2 medium residential district: 
Minimum Area 
per Dwelling 
Unit   
(square feet)  
Lots with public water and public sewer .....12,000   
Lots with public sewer only .....15,000   
Lots with public water only .....30,000   
The minimum lot size for two-family dwellings and single-family semidetached dwellings shall be 20,000 square feet, provided the lots are served by public water and public sewer. 
(b)	The minimum lot size of each unit of a two-family (duplex) unit shall be 6,000 square feet. 
(c)	The minimum lot size of each unit of a courtyard home shall be 6,000 square feet.
(Code 1968, § 29-22; Ord. of 4-2-91(11), § 29-22; Ord. of 1-4-2005)
Sec. 90-116. - Setback. 
    No structures in the R-2 medium density residential district shall be located closer than 30 feet to any street right-of-way which is 50 feet or greater in width, or closer than 55 feet to the centerline of any street right-of-way less than 50 feet in width. 
(Code 1968, § 29-23)
Sec. 90-117. - Minimum lot width. 
(a)	Except as provided in subsection (b) and (c), the minimum width of any lot in the R-2 medium density residential district at the setback line should be not less than 90 feet. 
(b)	Lots of each unit of two-family (duplex) units shall have a minimum width of 45 feet at the setback line except that corner lots shall have a minimum width of 55 feet at the setback line. 
(c)	Lots of each unit of a courtyard home shall have a minimum width of 45 feet at the setback line except that corner lots shall have a minimum width of 55 feet at the setback line. 
(Code 1968, § 29-24; Ord. of 4-2-91(10), § 29-24; Ord. of 1-4-2005)
Sec. 90-118. - Yards. 
(a)	Except as provided in subsection (b) and (c), the following yard regulations shall apply in the R-2 medium density residential district: 
(1)	Side yards. The minimum side yard shall be ten feet, and the total minimum width of the two required side yards shall be 25 feet. 
(2)	Rear yard. The minimum rear yard shall be 35 feet. 
In this district, parking is permitted in the yard areas. 
(b)	Lots of each unit of two-family (duplex) units shall have a minimum side yard of eight feet and minimum rear yard of 35 feet except corner lots which shall have a minimum side yard of 20 feet. 
(c)	Lots of each courtyard home unit may have a minimum side yard of zero feet on one side of the lot only. The minimum side yard for the side of the lot opposite the zero feet side yard shall be ten feet. Dwellings shall not be configured to allow the zero feet side yards of adjoining lots to be on the common line between the lots. Lots of each courtyard home unit shall have a minimum rear yard of 35 feet except corner lots which shall have a minimum side yard of 20 feet. 
(Code 1968, § 29-25; Ord. of 4-2-91(9), § 29-25; Ord. of 1-4-2005)
Sec. 90-119. - Parking for lots of each unit of two-family (duplex) and courtyard home units. 
    Parking shall be allowed in the front, side and rear yards. At least two parking spaces are required for each of such units. 
(Ord. of 4-2-91(8), § 29-25.1; Ord. of 1-4-2005)
Sec. 90-120. - Maximum building coverage and height. 
    In the R-2 medium density residential district, maximum building coverage shall be 40 percent, and maximum height from average grade shall be 35 feet or 21/2 stories. 
(Code 1968, § 29-26; Ord. of 4-4-95(1))
Sec. 90-121. - Sidewalk requirements. 
    In the R-2 medium density residential district, five-foot sidewalks will be required on both sides of the street on new street construction. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2000; Ord. of 2-7-2006)
Secs. 90-122-90-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - R-3 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 90-151. - Statement of intent. 
    The R-3 high density residential district is intended to provide the highest population density in the town. The regulations for this district are designed to maintain those predominant characteristics of the high density district and to promote and encourage a suitable environment for dwellings, insofar as it is compatible with the intensity of the land use. Various types of housing units are permitted. Other related residential uses may be allowed as long as the character of the district is not substantially altered. 
(Code 1968, § 29-27)
Sec. 90-152. - Permitted uses. 
    Structures to be erected or land to be used in the R-3 high density residential district shall be for one of the following uses; provided, that only one main building and its accessory buildings may be erected on any lot or parcel of land in this district: 
(1)	Single-family detached dwellings.
(2)	Two-family dwellings.
(3)	Multifamily dwellings, not including townhouses or garden apartments.
(4)	Boarding and lodging houses.
(5)	Police, fire and rescue squad stations and other public uses.
(6)	Public utilities, such as poles, lines, distribution transformers, meters, water and sewer lines, booster or relay stations and transformer substations. 
(7)	Courtyard homes.
(Code 1968, § 29-28; Ord. of 1-4-2005)
Sec. 90-153. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following accessory uses, to be located on the same lot with the permitted principal use, shall be permitted in the R-3 high density residential district: 
(1)	Home occupations, pursuant to section 90-377. 
(2)	Private garages or private parking areas pursuant to section 90-387. 
(3)	Signs, pursuant to section 90-383. 
(4)	Customary accessory uses and buildings, provided they are clearly incidental to the principal use, pursuant to section 90-378. 
(Code 1968, § 29-29)
Sec. 90-154. - Uses permitted by special permit. 
    The following uses shall be permitted by special permit in the R-3 high density residential district: 
(1)	Townhouses, pursuant to section 90-380. 
(2)	Garden apartments, pursuant to section 90-379. 
(3)	Hospitals, orphanages and convalescent homes for the care of the sick, aged or crippled, meeting all federal, state and county requirements, and pursuant to section 90-390, subsection (3) and section 90-387, but excluding institutions for the insane, feebleminded or drug or liquor patients. 
(4)	Churches; schools.
(5)	Bed and breakfast establishments.
(6)	Two-family (duplex) dwellings, each unit of which may be sold separately.
(7)	Professional offices (only within the town historic district).
(8)	Fine art studios (only within the town historic district).
(Code 1968, § 29-30; Ord. of 4-2-91(7), § 29-30; Ord. of 9-3-2013)
Sec. 90-155. - Minimum lot sizes. 
(a)	Except as provided in subsection (b) and (c), the following minimum lot size standards shall apply in the R-3 high density residential district: 
Minimum Area 
per Dwelling 
Unit   
(square feet)  Lots with public water and public sewer generally .....10,000  Two-family dwellings and single-family semidetached dwellings, if lots served by public water and sewer ..... 15,000  Every unit over two .....2,000 additional 
(b)	The minimum lot size of each unit of two-family (duplex) units shall be 6,000 square feet. 
(c)	The minimum lot size of each unit of a courtyard home shall be 6,000 square feet.
(Code 1968, § 29-31; Ord. of 4-2-91(6), § 29-31; Ord. of 1-4-2005)
Sec. 90-156. - Setback. 
    No structure in the R-3 high density residential district shall be located closer than 30 feet to any street right-of-way which is 50 feet or greater in width, or closer than 50 feet to the centerline of any street right-of-way less than 50 feet in width. 
(Code 1968, § 29-32)
Sec. 90-157. - Minimum lot width. 
(a)	Except as provided in subsection (b) and (c), the minimum width of any lot in the R-3 high density residential district at the setback line shall not be less than 75 feet. 
(b)	Lots of each unit of two-family (duplex) units shall have a minimum width of 371/2 feet at the setback line except that corner lots shall have a minimum width of 471/2 feet at the setback line. 
(c)	Lots of each unit of a courtyard home shall have a minimum width of 371/2 feet at the setback line except that corner lots shall have a minimum width of 471/2 feet at the setback line. 
(Code 1968, § 29-33; Ord. of 4-2-91(5), § 29-33; Ord. of 1-4-2005)
Sec. 90-158. - Yards. 
(a)	Except as provided in subsection (b) and (c), the following yard regulations shall apply in the R-3 high density residential district: 
(1)	Side yards. The minimum side yard shall be six feet, and the total minimum width of the two required side yards shall be 15 feet. 
(2)	Rear yard. The minimum rear yard shall be 35 feet. 
In this district, parking is permitted in the yard areas (see section 90-387, subsection (f)). 
(b)	Lots of each unit of two-family (duplex) units shall have a minimum side yard of eight feet and a minimum rear yard of 35 feet except corner lots which shall have a minimum side yard of 20 feet. 
(c)	Lots of each courtyard home unit may have a minimum side yard of zero feet on one side of the lot only. The minimum side yard for the side of the lot opposite the zero feet side yard shall be ten feet. Dwellings shall not be configured to allow the zero feet side yards of adjoining lots to be on the common line between the lots. Lots of each courtyard home unit shall have a minimum rear yard of 35 feet except corner lots which shall have a minimum side yard of 20 feet. 
(Code 1968, § 29-34; Ord. of 4-2-91(4), § 29-34; Ord. of 1-4-2005)
Sec. 90-159. - Parking for lots of each unit of two-family (duplex) and courtyard home units. 
    Parking shall be allowed in the front, side and rear yards. At least two parking spaces are required for each of such units. 
(Ord. of 4-2-91(3), § 29-34.1; Ord. of 1-4-2005)
Sec. 90-160. - Maximum building coverage and height. 
    In the R-3 high density residential district, maximum building coverage shall be 40 percent, and maximum building height from average grade shall be 35 feet or 21/2 stories, unless otherwise provided for within article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 1968, § 29-35; Ord. of 4-4-95(1); Ord. of 5-2-2006)
Sec. 90-160.1. - Sidewalk requirements. 
    In the R-3 high density residential district, five-foot sidewalks will be required on both sides of the street on new street construction. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2000; Ord. of 2-7-2006)
DIVISION 4A. - MC-1 MEDICAL-HOSPITAL CENTER DISTRICT 

Sec. 90-161. - Statement of intent. 
    The MC-1 medical-hospital center district is intended to permit the development, location and growth of a general hospital to serve as a nucleus of a master planned medical center complex, and to permit the location around the general hospital of closely related medical uses, such as medical offices, diagnostic laboratories, pharmaceutical centers, special patient care units, and housing units and other uses in support of the hospital. In addition, other areas located away from the central medical center may be zoned MC-1 provided that the minimum district size is met and that the character of the surrounding area is not substantially altered. 
(Ord. of 5-2-95(1))
Sec. 90-162. - Permitted uses. 
    Structures to be erected or land to be used in the MC-1 medical-hospital center district may be used for one or more of the following uses: 
(1)	General hospitals and specialty hospitals or centers, including but not limited to pediatrics, obstetrics, comprehensive medical rehabilitation, hospices, psychiatric, and other specialty hospitals serving the medical profession. 
(2)	Emergency care and critical facility.
(3)	Nonemergency care facility.
(4)	Medical and dental offices and clinics (including health department).
(5)	Professional and business offices (closely related to health care).
(6)	Diagnostic laboratories and services serving the medical or dental profession.
(7)	Dialysis center.
(8)	Out-patient treatment centers including day surgery centers.
(9)	Medical training facilities.
(10)	Pharmaceutical centers.
(11)	Housing, including:
a.	Dormitories for medical and dental interns, nurses, and allied health personnel;
b.	Housing for the elderly and physically handicapped;
c.	Adult homes;
d.	Nursing homes and rest homes;
e.	Retirement housing.
(12)	Helipad and heliport to service the main hospital structure.
(13)	Accessory uses to include automatic bank teller machines, hospital laundry, hospital service buildings, warehousing, maintenance and materials management buildings for medical center use. 
(14)	Day nursery and day care center.
(15)	Durable medical equipment facilities, services, and sales; intended for retail sales and wholesale distribution, repair and servicing and storage of medical, dental, optical and surgical supplies and medical related merchandise (inclusive of home oxygen services), provided that there shall be no outdoor storage or display. 
(16)	Recreational facilities (indoor and outdoor), health clubs and sports medicine clinics intended for the use of doctors, hospital staff, in-patient and out-patients to the district and families and guests and the public-at-large. 
(17)	Restaurants or cafeterias located within the confines of the main hospital, a specialty hospital, housing building or office building, serving primarily persons or families of persons using the services or conducting business within the facilities of the district. No outdoor signage will be permitted for this use. 
(18)	Conference facilities, primarily related to health care services.
(19)	Personal service and retail establishments (inclusive of banks and branch banks) serving the district when located either within the main hospital structure or in an physically contiguous structure to the main hospital. 
(20)	Public utilities such as poles, lines, distribution transformers, meters, water and sewer lines, pump stations, booster or relay stations, transformer stations, cable television facilities, telephone facilities, natural gas utility facilities. Appurtenances to these systems must be effectively screened. 
(21)	On-site, freestanding utility system substations (such as heating and cooling plants, pump stations, and related electromechanical systems), provided that such shall be sited no closer than 100 feet from any R district. 
(Ord. of 5-2-95(1))
Sec. 90-163. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    [The following permitted accessory uses shall apply to the MC-1 medical-hospital center district:] 
(1)	Off-street parking and loading areas, pursuant to the provisions of section 90-387. 
(2)	Parking garages.
(3)	Signs pursuant to section 90-384. 
(4)	Customary accessory uses and buildings provided such are clearly incidental to the principal use, pursuant to section 90-378. 
(Ord. of 5-2-95(1))
Sec. 90-164. - Minimum district size. 
    The minimum district size shall be two acres. 
(Ord. of 5-2-95(1))
Sec. 90-165. - Minimum lot width. 
    The minimum lot width in the MC-1 medical-hospital center district shall be 75 feet. 
(Ord. of 5-2-95(1))
Sec. 90-166. - Maximum building coverage and height. 
    In the MC-1 medical-hospital center district, maximum combined building coverage and paved parking area shall be 80 percent and the maximum building height from average grade shall be 45 feet. 
(Ord. of 5-2-95(1); Ord. of 5-2-2006)
Sec. 90-167. - Yard requirements. 
    The following yard requirements shall apply to the MC-1 medical-hospital center district: 
(1)	Front yard setback. The minimum front yard setback shall be 40 feet. 
(2)	Side yards. There shall be a side yard with a minimum of 15 feet on each side of the lot, except where the yard is adjacent to a residential district the minimum side yard shall be 25 feet. For buildings in excess of 35 feet in height, the side yard shall be 20 feet, except where the yard is adjacent to a residential district the minimum side yard shall be 30 feet. 
(3)	Rear yards. Minimum rear yards shall be 20 feet, except where the yard is adjacent to a residential district the minimum rear yard shall be 30 feet. 
(Ord. of 5-2-95(1))
Sec. 90-168. - Principal structures. 
    In the medical-hospital center district, more than one main building may be permitted on a parcel or lot provided that setback and yard requirements are met as if the property were to be subdivided. 
(Ord. of 5-2-95(1))
Sec. 90-169. - Application. 
    Rezoning applications to the district shall be established as an amendment to the official zoning map of the town, provided that any established or approved land uses within an existing district prior to the date of the adoption of this division shall be exempt from these regulations. 
    In addition to the requirements for rezonings, the following shall be required: 
(1)	A master plan depicting the generalized location, heights, density, coverage and arrangement of all known and proposed land uses to be located within the district, as well as open spaces and the approximate location of proposed and existing utility systems for sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water and stormwater management, provided that where specific future land uses within the district have not been determined there shall be no requirement to establish specific building locations, building uses and building heights. 
(2)	A phasing plan of development.
(Ord. of 5-2-95(1))
Sec. 90-170. - Buffer area. 
    All property lines in the medical-hospital center district abutting a residential district shall be appropriately screened, fenced, walled or enclosed with a suitable enclosure of a minimum height of four feet, unless natural vegetation of wooded areas are used as buffer strips. All buffer strips must be at least four feet in height. 
(Ord. of 5-2-95(1))
Sec. 90-171. - Waivers. 
    Uses requiring waivers of height, width, setback, area, yard, minimum district size, parking or loading regulations may be granted in such instances where the town council deems such waiver would be in furtherance of the site planning objectives and overall intent of the district. 
(Ord. of 5-2-95(1))
Secs. 90-172-90-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - B-1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 90-186. - Statement of intent. 
    The B-1 central business district is intended to encompass the major downtown retail and service center and to provide for the orderly expansion of the central business district and for the conduct of business to which the public requires direct and frequent access. It is not characterized either by constant heavy trucking, other than stocking and delivery of light retail goods, or by any other nuisance factors other than occasioned by incidental light and noise of congregations of people and passenger vehicles. Commercial district B-1 should provide a framework for a strong nucleus of business where all the amenities and services of downtown can be provided. A site plan may be required by the zoning administrator. 
(Code 1968, § 29-36)
Sec. 90-187. - Permitted uses. 
    Structures to be erected or land to be used in the B-1 central business district may be used for one or more of the following uses; provided, that only one main building and its accessory buildings may be erected on any lot or parcel of land in this district: 
(1)	Multifamily dwellings.
(2)	Drugstores.
(3)	Retail foodstores.
(4)	Wearing apparel shops.
(5)	Auto parts stores, but not servicing.
(6)	Barber and beauty shops.
(7)	Hotels, motels, tourist homes, boardinghouses and roominghouses.
(8)	Department stores.
(9)	Furniture stores or home appliance stores.
(10)	Hardware stores.
(11)	Florist shops.
(12)	Laundries, laundromats and dry cleaners.
(13)	Radio and television broadcasting stations, studios and offices.
(14)	Indoor theaters.
(15)	Bakeries.
(16)	Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations.
(17)	Undertaking establishments and funeral homes.
(18)	Billiard parlors and poolrooms.
(19)	Business and professional offices.
(20)	Financial institutions.
(21)	Newspaper and other printing establishments.
(22)	Restaurants, taverns, bars and inns, or other places serving food.
(23)	Churches, schools, police, fire and rescue stations and other public uses.
(24)	Public utilities, such as poles, lines, distribution transformers, meters, water and sewer lines, booster or relay stations and transformer substations. 
(Code 1968, § 29-37; Ord. of 12-2-2003)
Sec. 90-188. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following accessory uses, to be located on the same lot with the permitted principal use, shall be permitted in the B-1 central business district: 
(1)	Off-street parking areas, pursuant to the provisions of section 90-387. 
(2)	Signs, pursuant to section 90-384. 
(3)	Customary accessory uses and buildings, provided such are clearly incidental to the principal use, pursuant to section 90-378. 
(Code 1968, § 29-38)
Sec. 90-189. - Uses permitted by special permit. 
    The following use shall be permitted by special permit in the B-1 central business district: 
Commercial parking facilities, pursuant to section 90-391. 
(Code 1968, § 29-39; Ord. of 8-1-89, § 29-39)
Sec. 90-190. - Minimum lot size. 
    There shall be no minimum lot size in the B-1 central business district, except where a residential use is to be established or expanded; then there shall be a minimum area of 6,000 square feet, plus an additional 1,500 square feet for each dwelling unit above two. 
(Code 1968, § 29-40)
Sec. 90-191. - Setback. 
    There shall be no setback regulations in the B-1 central business district; except, that any residential use in this district shall be located 20 feet from any street line; however, no residential use shall be required to set back more than the average of the two buildings on either side of such use. 
(Code 1968, § 29-41)
Sec. 90-192. - Minimum lot width. 
    There shall be no frontage regulations in the B-1 central business district. 
(Code 1968, § 29-42)
Sec. 90-193. - Yards. 
    The following yard regulations shall apply in the B-1 central business district: 
(1)	Side yards. There shall be no side yard regulations; except, that where a side yard is adjacent to a residential district, the minimum side yard shall be 20 feet, or should the use being started be residential, each side yard shall be a minimum of six feet. 
(2)	Rear yard. There shall be no rear yard regulations; except, that where a rear yard is adjacent to a residential district, the minimum rear yard shall be 20 feet, or should the use being started be residential, each rear yard shall be a minimum of 25 feet. 
(Code 1968, § 29-43)
Sec. 90-194. - Maximum building coverage and height. 
    In the B-1 central business district, maximum building coverage, not including and paved area, shall be 80 percent, and maximum building height from average grade shall be 45 feet. 
(Code 1968, § 29-44; Ord. of 5-2-2006)
Sec. 90-195. - Buffer area. 
    All property lines in the B-1 central business district abutting a residential district shall be appropriately screened, fenced, walled or enclosed with a suitable enclosure of a minimum height of four feet, unless natural vegetation or wooded areas are used as buffer strips. All buffer strips must be at least four feet in height. 
(Code 1968, § 29-45)
Sec. 90-196. - Sidewalk requirements. 
    In the B-1 central business district, five-foot sidewalks will be required if a grass strip is to be provided or six-foot sidewalks will be required if no grass strip is to be provided, on both sides of the street on new street construction. 
(Ord. of 2-7-2006)
Secs. 90-197-90-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - B-2 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 90-221. - Statement of intent. 
    The B-2 highway commercial district is intended to provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a wide variety of commercial and miscellaneous service activities, generally serving a wide area and located particularly along certain existing major thoroughfares where a general mixture of commercial and service activity now exists, but which uses are not characterized by extensive warehousing, frequent heavy trucking activity, open storage of materials or the nuisance factors of dust, odor and noise associated with manufacturing. A site plan may be required by the zoning administrator. 
(Code 1968, § 29-46)
Sec. 90-222. - Permitted uses. 
    Only one main building and its accessory buildings may be erected on any lot or parcel of land in the B-2 highway commercial district and may be used only for one or more of the following uses: 
(1)	Motels, tourist homes and boardinghouses.
(2)	Restaurants, taverns, inns, bars, cafes or other places serving food and beverages.
(3)	Nursing homes; rest and convalescent homes.
(4)	Business and professional offices.
(5)	Furniture stores.
(6)	Bowling alleys; skating rinks.
(7)	Fraternal organizations.
(8)	Lumber and building supplies, with storage under cover and screened.
(9)	Plumbing and electrical supply, with storage under cover and screened.
(10)	Undertaking establishments and funeral homes.
(11)	Animal hospitals.
(12)	Pet shops, but excluding boarding kennels.
(13)	Radio or television broadcasting stations, studios or offices.
(14)	Financial institutions and branches.
(15)	Automobile sales and service; provided, that servicing is conducted in buildings.
(16)	Farm machinery sales and service; provided, that servicing is conducted in buildings.
(17)	Farm supplies, with storage under cover.
(18)	Commercial greenhouses; nurseries.
(19)	Churches, schools, police, fire and rescue squad stations and other public uses.
(20)	Public utilities, such as poles, lines, distribution transformers, meters, water and sewer lines, booster or relay stations and transformer substations. 
(21)	Any use permitted in the B-1 central business district, except those uses provided in subsection 90-187(1). 
(22)	Businesses for the rental of equipment of all sizes and designs and rental of supplies or any other items, except that no equipment or other items for rental shall be stored outside, not under cover, unless such equipment or other items for rental are appropriately screened, fenced, walled, or enclosed with a suitable enclosure of a minimum of four feet. 
(Code 1968, § 29-47; Ord. of 8-2-2006)
Sec. 90-223. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following accessory uses, to be located on the same lot with the permitted principal use, shall be permitted in the B-2 highway commercial district: 
(1)	Off-street parking areas, pursuant to the provisions of section 90-387. 
(2)	Signs, pursuant to sections 90-384 and 90-385. 
(3)	Customary accessory uses and buildings, provided they are clearly incidental to the principal use, pursuant to section 90-378. 
(Code 1968, § 29-48)
Sec. 90-224. - Uses permitted by special permit. 
    The following uses shall be permitted by special permit in the B-2 highway commercial district: 
(1)	Retail establishments exceeding 50,000 square feet.
(2)	Carwashes, pursuant to section 90-390, subsection (2). 
(3)	Wayside stands for display and sale of farm products, pursuant to section 90-390, subsection (5). 
(4)	Dancehalls, pursuant to section 90-391. 
(5)	Drive-in restaurants, pursuant to section 90-391. 
(6)	Apartments.
(7)	Gasoline service stations, pursuant to section 90-390, subsection (1). 
(Code 1968, § 29-49; Ord. of 8-1-89, § 29-49; Ord. of 8-1-2006)
Sec. 90-225. - Minimum lot size. 
    There shall be a minimum lot size of 10,000 square feet in the B-2 highway commercial district. 
(Code 1968, § 29-50)
Sec. 90-226. - Setback. 
    The minimum setback in the B-2 highway commercial district shall be 40 feet from any street right-of-way which is 50 feet or greater in width, or 55 feet from the centerline of any street right-of-way less than 50 feet in width. 
(Code 1968, § 29-51)
Sec. 90-227. - Minimum lot width. 
    The minimum width of any lot in the B-2 highway commercial district at the setback line shall not be less than 75 feet. 
(Code 1968, § 29-52)
Sec. 90-228. - Yards. 
    The following yard regulations shall apply in the B-2 highway commercial district: 
(1)	Side yards. Each side yard shall be a minimum of 15 feet. 
(2)	Rear yard. The rear yard shall be a minimum of 20 feet. 
In this district, parking is permitted in the yard areas (see section 90-387(b)). 
(Code 1968, § 29-53)
Sec. 90-229. - Maximum building coverage and height. 
    In the B-2 highway commercial district, maximum combined building and paved area shall be 80 percent, and maximum building height from average grade shall be 45 feet. 
(Code 1968, § 29-54; Ord. of 5-2-2006)
Sec. 90-230. - Buffer area. 
    All property lines in the B-2 highway commercial district abutting a residential district shall be appropriately screened, fenced, walled or enclosed with a suitable enclosure of a minimum height of four feet, unless natural vegetation of wooded areas are used as buffer strips. All buffer strips must be at least four feet in height. 
(Code 1968, § 29-55)
Sec. 90-231. - Sidewalk requirements. 
    In the B-2 highway commercial district, five-foot sidewalks will be required if a grass strip is to be provided or six-foot sidewalks will be required if no grass strip is to be provided, on both sides of the street on new street construction. 
(Ord. of 2-7-2006)
Secs. 90-232-90-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - I-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 90-251. - Statement of intent. 
    The primary purpose of the I-1 district is to permit certain industries to locate in an area which will not detract from residential or commercial desirability. The limitations on or provisions relating to height of building, flammable liquids or explosives, controlling emission of fumes, odors or noise, landscaping and the number of persons employed are imposed to protect and foster residential desirability, where possible, while permitting industries to locate near a labor supply. These uses should be concentrated near available facilities. A site plan is required for all uses. 
(Code 1968, § 29-56)
Sec. 90-252. - Permitted uses. 
    Structures to be erected or land to be used in the I-1 industrial district may be for one or more of the following uses; provided, that only one main building and its accessory buildings may be erected on any lot or parcel of land in this district: 
(1)	Assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radios and phonographs; manufacture of small parts, such as coils, condensers, transformers and crystal holders. 
(2)	Automobile assembly lines, painting, upholstering, repairing, rebuilding, reconditioning, body and fender work, truck repairing or overhauling, tire treading or recapping or battery manufacture. 
(3)	Blacksmith shops; welding or machine shops.
(4)	Pharmaceutical or medical laboratories.
(5)	Manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of such products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, dairy products, poultry and poultry products, drugs, perfumes, pharmaceuticals, perfumed toilet soap, toiletries, food and seafood products. 
(6)	Manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles of merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: bond, cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastic, precious or semiprecious stones or metals, shell, straw, textiles, tobacco, wood, yarn, paint and fiberglass. 
(7)	Manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products, using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or gas. 
(8)	Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties and rubber and metal stamps.
(9)	Building material sales yards; plumbing and electrical supplies storage.
(10)	Coal and wood yards; lumberyards; feed and seed stores.
(11)	Contractors' equipment storage yards or plants, or rental of equipment commonly used by contractors. 
(12)	Cabinet, furniture and upholstery shops.
(13)	Stone monument works.
(14)	Boatbuilding.
(15)	Wholesale businesses; storage warehouses.
(16)	Veterinary hospitals and boarding kennels.
(17)	Packing plants.
(18)	Any use permitted in the B-2 highway commercial district.
(19)	Business for the rental of equipment of all sizes and designs and rental of supplies or any other items, except that no equipment or other items for rental shall be stored outside, not under cover, unless such equipment or other items for rental be appropriately screened, fenced, walled, or enclosed with a suitable enclosure of a minimum of four feet. 
(20)	Retail establishments exceeding 50,000 square feet, per the provisions of Section 90-381, of the Code of the Town of Woodstock, Virginia. 
(Code 1968, § 29-57; Ord. of 10-2-2012(3))
Sec. 90-253. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following accessory uses, to be located on the same lot with the permitted principal use, shall be permitted in the I-1 industrial district: 
(1)	Off-street parking and loading areas, pursuant to sections 90-387 and 90-389. 
(2)	Signs, pursuant to sections 90-385 and 90-386. 
(3)	Customary accessory uses and buildings, provided such are clearly incidental to the principal use, pursuant to section 90-378. 
(Code 1968, § 29-58)
Sec. 90-254. - Minimum lot size. 
    The minimum lot size in the I-1 industrial district shall be 20,000 square feet. 
(Code 1968, § 29-60)
Sec. 90-255. - Setback. 
    In the I-1 industrial district, no structure shall be located closer than 50 feet to any street right-of-way which is 50 feet or greater in width, or closer than 75 feet to the outer line of any street right-of-way less than 50 feet in width. 
(Code 1968, § 29-61)
Sec. 90-256. - Minimum lot width. 
    The minimum width of any lot in the I-1 industrial district at the setback line shall not be less than 75 feet. 
(Code 1968, § 29-62)
Sec. 90-257. - Yards. 
    The following yard regulations shall apply in the I-1 industrial district: 
(1)	Side yards. Each side yard shall be a minimum of 20 feet. 
(2)	Rear yard. The rear yard shall be a minimum of 20 feet. 
In this district, parking is permitted in the yard areas (see section 90-387). 
(Code 1968, § 29-63)
Sec. 90-258. - Maximum building coverage and height. 
    In the I-1 industrial district, maximum building coverage, including any paved areas, shall be 80 percent, and maximum building height from average grade shall be 60 feet. 
(Code 1968, § 29-64; Ord. of 5-2-2006)
Sec. 90-259. - Buffer area. 
    All property lines in the I-1 industrial district abutting a residential district shall be appropriately screened, fenced, walled or enclosed with a suitable enclosure of a minimum height of four feet, unless natural vegetation or wooded areas are used as buffer strips. All buffer strips must be at least four feet in height. 
(Code 1968, § 29-65)
Sec. 90-260. - Performance standards. 
    In the I-1 industrial district, performance standards shall be adhered to in accordance with the state air pollution control law (Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1300 et seq.) and the Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Code 1968, § 29-66)
Secs. 90-261-90-275. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of October 2, 2012(3), repealed § 90-261, entitled "Uses permitted by special permit" and derived from Ord. of 8-1-2006. 
DIVISION 8. - I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 90-276. - Statement of intent. 
    The primary purpose of the I-2 heavy industrial district is to establish an area where the principal use of the land is for heavy commercial and industrial operations which may create some nuisance, and which are not properly associated with nor particularly compatible with residential, institutional and neighborhood commercial service establishments. 
(Code 1968, § 29-66.1)
Sec. 90-277. - Permitted uses. 
    Any use permitted in the I-1 light industrial district shall be permitted in the I-2 heavy industrial district, except those uses provided in section 90-252(18). 
(Code 1968, § 29-66.2)
Sec. 90-278. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    The following accessory uses, to be located on the same lot with the permitted principal use, shall be permitted in the I-2 industrial district: 
(1)	Off-street parking and loading areas, pursuant to sections 90-387 and 90-389. 
(2)	Signs, pursuant to sections 90-385 and 90-386. 
(3)	Customary accessory uses and buildings, provided such are clearly incidental to the principal use, pursuant to section 90-378. 
(Code 1968, § 29-66.3)
Sec. 90-279. - Minimum lot size. 
    The minimum lot size in the I-2 industrial district shall be one acre. 
(Code 1968, § 29-66.5)
Sec. 90-280. - Setback. 
    In the I-2 industrial district, no structure shall be located closer than 50 feet to any street right-of-way which is 50 feet or greater in width, or closer than 75 feet to the outer line of any street right-of-way less than 50 feet in width. 
(Code 1968, § 29-66.6)
Sec. 90-281. - Minimum lot width. 
    The minimum width of any lot in the I-2 industrial district at the setback line shall not be less than 150 feet. 
(Code 1968, § 29-66.7)
Sec. 90-282. - Yards. 
    The following yard regulations shall apply in the I-2 industrial district: 
(1)	Side yards. Each side yard shall be a minimum of 25 feet. 
(2)	Rear yard. The rear yard shall be a minimum of 50 feet. 
In this district, parking is permitted in the yard areas (see section 90-387). 
(Code 1968, § 29-66.8)
Sec. 90-283. - Maximum building coverage and height. 
    In the I-2 industrial district, maximum building coverage, including any paved areas, shall be 75 percent, and maximum building height from average grade shall be 60 feet. 
(Code 1968, § 29-66.9)
Sec. 90-284. - Buffer area. 
    All property lines in the I-2 industrial district abutting a residential district shall be appropriately screened, fenced, walled or enclosed with a suitable enclosure of a minimum height of six feet, unless natural vegetation or wooded areas are used as buffer strips. All buffer strips must be at least four feet in height. 
(Code 1968, § 29-66.10)
Sec. 90-285. - Performance standards. 
    In the I-2 industrial district, performance standards shall be adhered to in accordance with the state air pollution control law (Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1300 et seq.) and the Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Code 1968, § 29-66.11)
Sec. 90-286. - Uses permitted by special permit. 
    The following uses shall be permitted by special permit in the I-2 heavy industrial district: 
(1)	Retail establishments exceeding 50,000 square feet.
(Ord. of 8-1-2006)
Secs. 90-287-90-295. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Building code, § 14-31 et seq.; erosion and sediment control, § 26-26 et seq.; general subdivision and review procedures, § 70-36; general design standards for subdivisions, § 70-111; floodplain regulations in subdivisions, § 70-122.

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 90-296. - Definitions. 
    Base flood/100-year flood means a flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one percent chance of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year). 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the Federal Emergency Management Agency designated 100-year water surface elevation. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Board of zoning appeals means the board appointed to review appeals made by individuals with regard to decisions of the zoning administrator in the interpretation of this division. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)	Built on a single chassis;
(2)	Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(3)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (1) any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structures continued designation as a "historic structure". 
(Ord. No. 446, art. II, 1-7-92; Ord. of 7-1-2003, art. II)
Sec. 90-297. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of these provisions is to prevent the loss of life and property, the creation of health and safety hazards, the disruption of commerce and governmental services, the extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection and relief, and the impairment of the tax base by: 
(1)	Regulating uses, activities, and development which, alone or in combination with other existing or future uses, activities, and development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights, velocities, and frequencies. 
(2)	Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities, and development from locating within districts subject to flooding. 
(3)	Requiring all those uses, activities, and developments that do occur in flood-prone districts to be protected and/or flood-proofed against flooding and flood damage. 
(4)	Protecting individuals from buying land and structures which are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 1.1, 1-7-92; Ord. of 7-1-2003, § 1.1)
Sec. 90-298. - Applicability. 
    These provisions shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the town and identified as being in the 100-year floodplain by the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 1.2, 1-7-92; Ord. of 7-1-2003, § 1.2)
Sec. 90-299. - Compliance and liability. 
(a)	No land shall hereafter be developed and no structure shall be located, relocated, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, or structurally altered except in full compliance with the terms and provisions of this division and any other applicable ordinances and regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this division. 
(b)	The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this division is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This division does not imply that districts outside the floodplain district, or that land uses permitted within such district will be free from flooding or flood damages. 
(c)	This division shall not create liability on the part of the town or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this division or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 1.3, 1-7-92; Ord. of 7-1-2003, § 1.3)
Sec. 90-300. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This division supersedes any ordinance currently in effect in flood-prone districts. However, any underlying ordinance shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that its provisions are more restrictive than this division. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 1.4, 1-7-92; Ord. of 7-1-2003, § 1.3)
Sec. 90-301. - Variances; factors to be considered. 
    In passing upon applications for variances, the board of zoning appeals shall satisfy all relevant factors and procedures specified in other sections of the zoning ordinance and consider the following additional factors: 
(1)	The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments. No variance shall be granted for any proposed use, development, or activity within any floodway district that will cause any increase in the 100-year flood elevation. 
(2)	The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or downstream to the injury of others. 
(3)	The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions. 
(4)	The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners. 
(5)	The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community.
(6)	The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
(7)	The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use. 
(8)	The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future. 
(9)	The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area. 
(10)	The safety of access by ordinary and emergency vehicles to the property in time of flood. 
(11)	The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site. 
(12)	The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(13)	Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this division.
    The board of zoning appeals may refer any application and accompanying documentation pertaining to any request for a variance to any engineer or other qualified person or agency for technical assistance in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, and the adequacy of the plans for flood protection and other related matters. 
    Variances shall be issued only after the board of zoning appeals has determined that the granting of such will not result in (a) unacceptable or prohibited increases in flood heights, (b) additional threats to public safety, (c) extraordinary public expense; and will not (d) create nuisances, (e) cause fraud or victimization of the public, or (f) conflict with local laws or ordinances. 
    Variances shall be issued only after the board of zoning appeals has determined that variance will be the minimum required to provide relief from any hardship to the applicant. 
    The board of zoning appeals shall notify the applicant for a variance, in writing, that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the one hundred 100-year flood elevation (a) increases the risks to life and property and (b) will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance. 
    A record shall be maintained of the above notification as well as all variance actions, including justification for the issuance of the variances. Any variances which are issued shall be noted in the annual or biennial report submitted to the federal insurance administrator. 
(Ord. No. 446, art. V, 1-7-92; Ord. of 7-1-2003, art. V)
Sec. 90-302. - Existing structures in floodplain districts. 
    A structure or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed before the enactment of these provisions, but which is not in conformity with these provisions, may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
(1)	Existing structures in the floodway district shall not be expanded or enlarged unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed expansion would not result in any increase in the 100-year flood elevation. 
(2)	Any modifications, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use located in any floodplain area to an extent or amount of less than 50 percent of its market value, elevation and/or flood-proofing should be considered to the greatest extent possible. 
(3)	The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use, regardless of its locations in a floodplain area, to an extent or amount of 50 percent or more of its market value shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 446, art. VI, 1-7-92; Ord. of 7-1-2003, art. VI)
Cross reference- Building code, § 14-31 et seq. 
Secs. 90-303-90-320. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- At the city's instruction, § 90-303 was deleted, these provisions pertained to penalties and derived from Ord. No. 446, § 1.6, adopted Jan. 7, 1992. 
Subdivision II. - Establishment of Zoning Districts 

Sec. 90-321. - Description of district. 
(a)	Basis of districts. The various floodplain districts shall include areas subject to inundation by waters of the 100-year flood. The basis for the delineation of these districts shall be the flood insurance study (FIS) for the Town of Woodstock, Virginia, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance Administration, dated July 16, 2003, as amended. 
(1)	The floodway district is delineated, for purposes of this division, using the criterion that certain areas within the floodplain must be capable of carrying the waters of the 100-year flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point. The areas included in this district are specifically defined in Table 3 of the above-referenced flood insurance study and shown on the accompanying flood boundary and floodway map or flood insurance rate map. 
(2)	The flood-fringe district shall be that area of the 100-year floodplain not included in the floodway district. The basis for the outermost boundary of the district shall be the 100-year flood elevations contained in the flood profiles of the above-referenced flood insurance study and as shown on the accompanying flood boundary and floodway map or flood insurance rate map. 
(3)	The approximated floodplain district shall be that floodplain area for which no detailed flood profiles or elevations are provided, but where a 100-year floodplain boundary has been approximated. Such areas are shown as Zone A on the maps accompanying the flood insurance study. For these areas, the 100-year flood elevations and floodway information from federal, state, and other acceptable sources shall be used, when available. Where the specific 100-year flood elevation cannot be determined for this area using other sources of data, such as the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers Floodplain Information Reports, U. S. Geological Survey Flood-Prone Quadrangles, etc., then the applicant for the proposed use, development and/or activity shall determine this elevation in accordance with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently-accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the town. 
(b)	Overlay concept. 
(1)	The floodplain districts described above shall be overlays to the existing underlying districts as shown on the official zoning ordinance map, and as such, the provisions for the floodplain districts shall serve as a supplement to the underlying district provisions. 
(2)	Any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the floodplain districts and those of any underlying district, the more restrictive provisions and/or those pertaining to the floodplain districts shall apply. 
(3)	In the event any provision concerning a floodplain district is declared inapplicable as a result of any legislative or administrative actions or judicial decision, the basic underlying provisions shall remain applicable. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 3.1, 1-7-92; Ord. of 7-1-2003, § 3.1)
Sec. 90-322. - Official zoning map. 
    The boundaries of the floodplain districts are established as shown on the flood boundary and floodway map and/or flood insurance rate map which is declared to be a part of this division and which shall be kept on file at the town offices. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 3.2, 1-7-92; Ord. of 7-1-2003, § 3.2)
Sec. 90-323. - District boundary changes. 
    The delineation of any of the floodplain districts may be revised by the town council of the Town of Woodstock, Virginia, where natural or manmade changes have occurred and/or where more detailed studies have been conducted or undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other qualified agency, or an individual documents the need for such change. However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 3.3, 1-7-92; Ord. of 7-1-2003, § 3.3)
Sec. 90-324. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Initial interpretations of the boundaries of the floodplain districts shall be made by the zoning officer. Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of any of the districts, the board of zoning appeals shall make the necessary determination. The person questioning or contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to the board and to submit his own technical evidence if he so desires. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 3.4, 1-7-92; Ord. of 7-1-2003, § 3.4)
Secs. 90-325-90-335. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - District Provisions 

Sec. 90-336. - General provisions. 
(a)	Permit requirement. All uses, activities, and development occurring within any floodplain district shall be undertaken only upon the issuance of a zoning permit. Such development shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with the provisions of the division and with all other applicable codes and ordinances, such as the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and the Town of Woodstock, Virginia, Subdivision Regulations. Prior to the issuance of any such permit, the zoning officer shall require all applications to include compliance with all applicable state and federal laws. Under no circumstances shall any use, activity, and/or development adversely affect the capacity of the channels or floodway of any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system. 
(b)	Alteration or relocation of watercourse. Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any channels or of any watercourse, stream, etc., within this jurisdiction a permit shall be obtained from the U.S. Corps of Engineers, the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality, and the Virginia Marine Resources Commission (a joint permit application is available from any of these organizations). Furthermore, notification of the proposal shall be given by the applicant to all affected adjacent jurisdictions, the department of conservation and recreation (division of soil and water conservation) and the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(c)	Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system shall insure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties. 
(d)	Site plans and permit applications. All applications for development in the floodplain district and all building permits issued for the floodplain shall incorporate the following information: 
(1)	For structures to be elevated, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement).
(2	For structures to be floodproofed (nonresidential only), the elevation to which the structure will be floodproofed. 
(3)	The elevation of the 100-year flood.
(4)	Topographic information showing existing and proposed ground elevations.
(e)	Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites either: 
(1)	Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or 
(2)	Meet the permit requirements for placement and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes as contained in the Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
    A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 4.1, 1-7-92; Ord. of 7-1-2003, § 4.1)
Cross reference- Subdivisions, ch. 70. 
Sec. 90-337. - Floodway district. 
    In the floodway district no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in the 100-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 4.2, 1-7-92; Ord. of 7-1-2003, § 4.2)
Sec. 90-338. - Permitted uses in the floodway district. 
    The following uses and activities are permitted provided that they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying area and are not prohibited by any other ordinance and provided that they do not require structures, fill, or storage of materials and equipment: 
(1)	Agricultural uses, such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting. 
(2)	Public and private recreational uses and activities, such as parks, day camps, picnic grounds, golf courses, boat launching and swimming areas, horseback. 
(3)	Riding and hiking trails, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, trap and skeet game ranges, and hunting and fishing areas. 
(4)	Accessory residential uses, such as yard areas, gardens, play areas, and pervious loading areas. 
(5)	Accessory industrial and commercial uses, such as yard areas, pervious parking and loading areas, airport landing strips, etc. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 4.3, 1-7-92; Ord. of 7-1-2003, § 4.3)
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 82. 
Sec. 90-339. - Flood-fringe and approximated floodplain districts. 
    In the flood-fringe and approximated floodplain districts, the development and/or use of land shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations of the underlying area provided that all such uses, activities, and/or development shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the floodproofing and related provisions contained in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and all other applicable codes and ordinances. 
    Within the approximated floodplain district, all new subdivision proposals and other purposed developments (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, include within such proposals base flood elevation data. The applicant shall also delineate a floodway area based on the requirement that all existing and future development not increase the 100-year flood elevation more than one foot at any one point. The engineering principle-equal reduction of conveyance-shall be used to make the determination of increased flood heights. 
    Within the floodway area delineated by the applicant, the provisions of section 90-337 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 4.4, 1-7-92; Ord. of 7-1-2003, § 4.4)
Secs. 90-340-90-347. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- At the city's instruction, § 90-340 was deleted, these provisions pertained to uses permitted by special permit and derived from Ord. No. 446, § 4.5, adopted Jan. 7, 1992. 
DIVISION 10. - TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT (TND) DISTRICT[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note-

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 90-348. - Purpose and intent. 
    The TND district provides the regulatory framework upon which the town may consider zoning district amendment applications for traditional neighborhood developments (TND) or other mixed-use forms of land use. TND district zoning map amendments shall be initiated by the applicant. Regulated by an applicant's code of development (see section 90-355 herein below), the TND district may be applied to locations in the (1) two urban development areas (UDAs) and (2) other established locations in Town of Woodstock with adequate public facilities or where adequate public facilities either exist or can be provided by the applicant. The TND district should be employed where the town has determined that a more flexible approach to zoning is needed to implement its comprehensive plan. 
    The principles, goals and strategies for traditional neighborhood development in the comprehensive plan shall guide the review and approval of a TND district. The zoning map amendment process establishes the plans, regulations, guidelines and conditions for an applicant's TND project. This approach is intended to better define the mix, scale, character, form and intensity of any given development proposal than that which could be otherwise governed by the application of the town's other zoning districts. The TND district encourages design flexibility to avoid the one size fits all configuration of conventional zoning districts and places an emphasis on the physical form of the built environment. Creating a mix of uses with flexible and creative approaches to organizing streets, places, buildings, and density is a principal TND objective. Each TND project shall have a mix of uses that reflect its geographical location, parcel size, terrain features, environmental challenges, marketability, and architectural design character. The TND district recognizes that certain waivers and modifications to other sections of the town's zoning ordinance as well as its subdivision ordinance and site development standards may be required for effective TND implementation. 
    The TND master plan and development code shall demonstrate a strong physical interrelationship among its internal neighborhoods, individual buildings, civic spaces, infrastructure, and landscaping that creates a sense of place and community. Individual buildings should be defined by varying scale and architectural stylings, while commercial and residential buildings should also employ complementary massing, colors, materials and proportions. Vertically integrated uses (e.g. the placement of residential or other uses above office and retail uses) are encouraged in the mixed-use components of a TND project. The TND district promotes higher densities with buildings fronting public streets. The zoning process will establish both minimum and maximum development densities for uses within a proposed project while providing flexibility to the applicant in mixing and matching densities. 
    Three primary TND sub-districts-Village center, transitional, and residential sub-districts-are structured to differentiate the geographical location of internal land uses, mix of uses, densities and other design parameters within the TND project. A fourth sub-district-Economic development-allows for specialized and conditional accommodation of certain large-scale retail, office parks, manufacturing, warehousing, and other employment uses that are not commonly located within traditional neighborhood developments. The zoning amendment application for a TND district may propose one or more of these sub-districts within the planned development. While it may not be required by the town in every instance, each application for a TND district zoning map amendment should incorporate two or more sub-districts. However, based on the existing land uses, infrastructure capacity, and marketplace characteristics common to each of the designated urban development areas, the town shall have approval of the final number and mix of sub-districts to be included in the TND zoning map amendment application. 
    Zoning map amendment applications shall address the purpose and intent of traditional neighborhood development and, further, the application should demonstrate compatibility with the following TND principles: 
(1)	Appropriate location and TND densities: Establish viable areas for residential and commercial land uses at a compact scale, with densities appropriate for TND growth, that are located either within or close to existing developed areas and community facilities. 
(2)	Mix of uses: Establish a blended mix of residential and non-residential land uses within the UDA that reflect TND planning objectives, enhance the quality of life of those who live there, and best serve the town's demographic demands. 
(3)	Variety of housing: Create a variety of housing types to meet the range of projected family income distributions of both existing residents and future residential growth. 
(4)	TND lot types and geometry: Encourage better spatial organization through the reduction of front and side yard building setbacks and smaller lot sizes. 
(5)	Pedestrian and vehicle compatibility: Incorporate a network of pedestrian-friendly road and street designs. 
(6)	Design standards and criteria for TND streets: Reduce subdivision street widths and turning radii at street intersections, and provide contemporary standards for street landscaping, pedestrian improvements, and pavement design. 
(7)	Neighborhood connectivity: Establish interconnectivity between streets and pedestrian networks within the TND project. 
(8)	Local and regional transportation connectivity: Promote the interconnection of new local streets with existing local streets and regional thoroughfares. 
(9)	Environmental preservation: Ensure the preservation of natural areas and open space in conjunction with the TND master planning process. 
(10)	Adequate public infrastructure: Demonstrate (a) the availability and adequacy of public water and sewer systems and other requisite public infrastructure, or (b) the ability to concurrently provide for these systems and infrastructure. 
(11)	Phasing of development: Plan for the phasing of TND development within the UDA that is consistent with anticipated population and employment growth as well as public facilities and infrastructure capacity. 
    Zoning map amendments for a TND district shall be initiated by the property owner(s) or its bona fide agent. In geographical areas other than the two designated urban development areas, the town may require that a TND zoning map amendment application be either preceded or accompanied by an amendment to the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2012(1), § [A.])
Sec. 90-349. - TND sub-districts. 
(a)	Village center sub-district: The village center sub-district is intended to be the primary location and activity center for non-residential uses within the TND district. The village center shall be sized for a mix of uses that establishes its location as a dominant destination point for civic life within the TND project. However, the village center should not be designed and sized to compete with or cannibalize commercial and employment uses in the town's existing downtown core area. 
With a focus on a compact "main street" form of development, the village center may accommodate a range of retail, services, restaurant, office, lodging, institutional, and civic uses that are scaled to the neighborhood demands of the TND project and nearby properties. The village center sub-district is not intended as appropriate for the location of big box commercial, industrial, or other large-footprint commercial buildings that may be better suited for the economic development sub-district. 
More compact residential dwellings (multifamily, townhouse, and live-work) as well as mixed commercial/residential land uses are recommended for the village center, incorporating a mix of lot groups 1 and 3 dwelling types. It should be master planned as a pedestrian-friendly, mixed-use area with a grid-styled street system that provides vehicular and pedestrian interconnectivity with the adjoining residential and transitional neighborhoods. Building frontages should define the public streetscape, with on-street parking, utilities, and landscaping located within the public right of way. 
The amount and location of commercial uses in the village center sub-district should complement Woodstock's existing commercial base. Thus, in planning for TND projects in the town, TND residential and transitional uses may better serve the Woodstock's goals than creating additional commercial centers. Therefore, subject to review and approval of the town council, a village center sub-district may not be required in each TND district application. TND development proposals for the village center sub-district shall be reviewed for consistency with the adopted traditional neighborhood development goals for the UDA, the objectives for Downtown Woodstock, and other relevant policies of the comprehensive plan. 
(b)	Transitional sub-district: This sub-district is intended to accommodate a transitional mix of lower intensity of uses in areas that separate the village center sub-district from the lower density residential sub-district. A mix of lot groups 1, 2, and 3 should be provided. Light commercial uses and shops are permitted in the sub-district but should be complementary to those in both the village center and Downtown Woodstock. A variety of residential uses and lot types are permitted in this sub-district along with community centers, churches, live-work residential, restaurants, and neighborhood-scaled shops. 
Transitional sub-district uses should be within walking-distance proximity to the community's village center. As with the village center sub-district, a mix of reduced lots sizes, frontages, setbacks and building formats should be scaled to complement neighborhood streetscapes. Public right of way improvements should include sidewalks, landscaping, streetlights and on-street parking. To preserve the capacity of on-street parking, public street access to front loaded parking pads and garages is discouraged in residential neighborhoods while off-street parking should be relegated to the rear of individual residential lots. Single-family and attached residential off-street parking and garages should be accessed by alleys, where feasible. 
Subject to approval of the town council, a transitional sub-district may not be a required component of every TND district application. Development proposals for the transitional sub-district shall be reviewed for consistency with the adopted traditional neighborhood development goals, objectives for Downtown Woodstock, and the overall policies of the comprehensive plan. 
(c)	Residential sub-district: This sub-district is intended to accommodate lower density residential uses than those found in the village center and transitional areas. Neighborhoods of mixed housing types, sizes, and lot types are strongly recommended, with guidelines for the mix established with each TND district application. A mix of lot groups 1 and 2 should accommodate the majority of the residential dwellings, with the option for a smaller percentage of lot group 3 residences to be interspersed at lower densities. Also, the applicant may propose other residential lot types to be included with the code of development. 
To optimally serve the marketplace, the residential sub-district should feature blocks that accommodate a mix of lot sizes, frontages, setbacks, and housing types that are complemented by attractive streetscapes. Playgrounds, greens, and parks should be internally located within and central to sub-district neighborhoods. 
Interconnected neighborhood street patterns with pedestrian improvements are a priority, and culs-de-sac should be avoided except in cases where severe terrain limitations restrict their use. Community streets should be designed to VDOT standards and dedicated for public use. Rear alleys that access off-street parking for individual lots are encouraged but not required. Where public street access to private, off-street parking is provided, frontage driveways should be shared between adjoining lots, and private garages should be located to the rear of the principal structure. 
Subject to approval by the town council, a residential sub-district may not be required component of every TND district application. Development proposals for the residential sub-district shall be reviewed for consistency with the adopted traditional neighborhood development goals and policies of the comprehensive plan. 
(d)	Economic development sub-district: This sub-district recognizes that certain uses of a higher density and community impact may be appropriate for inclusion in a TND district zoning application. Rather than require the applicant to request a separate zoning district amendment for these uses, the economic development sub-district provides the flexibility for the town to conditionally approve certain large-scale commercial and industrial uses of a scale, orientation, and impact not typically found in either Downtown Woodstock or new traditional neighborhood developments, but which, otherwise, can be shaped to fulfill the town's economic development objectives. 
Big box, power center, industrial, or large-footprint non-retail employment uses that complement the balance and marketplace attractiveness of the TND district may be approved by special permit. However, the town, at its sole discretion, may determine that the economic development sub-district is not appropriate for inclusion in a given TND district application. Development proposals for the economic development sub-district shall be reviewed for consistency with both the UDA traditional neighborhood development goals, the objectives for Downtown Woodstock, and the overall economic development policies of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2012(1), § [B.])
Subdivision II. - Development Standards 

Sec. 90-350. - TND district area requirements. 
(a)	TND district size: There is no minimum or maximum TND district size stipulated by ordinance. The town council, at its sole discretion, shall establish the appropriate size for the TND district upon review of an applicant's zoning map amendment package. The proposed size and configuration of the TND district shall be described by a current boundary plat prepared by the applicant that establishes the metes and bounds and acreage for the property or properties subject to the zoning map amendment application. 
(b)	TND sub-district size: The size and configuration of the village center, transitional, residential, and economic development sub-districts interior to the TND district shall be depicted on an exhibit accompanying the TND master plan that establishes the approximate boundary and acreage for the properties to be configured as sub-districts. 
(c)	Requests for modification to the size and location of an approved TND district shall require a separate zoning map amendment application. 
(d)	Modifications to the size and location of internal sub-districts within an approved TND district may be administratively approved by the planning director. The planning director shall determine whether a modification is deemed "minor". 
(e)	Other modifications to the size and location of internal sub-districts within an approved TND district shall require an amendment to the original zoning map amendment. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2012(1), § [C.])
Sec. 90-351. - Permitted land uses, special permit uses, and land use categories. 
(a)	Permitted uses to be included in the TND district shall be defined by the applicant's code of development, provided that the town, at its sole discretion, may establish certain prohibited or restricted uses. 
(b)	The town council, at its discretion, may impose additional limitations and restrictions as may be related to residential density and unit yield, ground floor area footprint, total building floor area, and lot types for individual uses and establishments within the sub-district in which the use is to be located. 
(c)	The code of development shall identify permitted uses and special permit uses within each sub-district. The permitted uses shall be defined in terms of the category and specific uses as outlined in Table 1 hereinafter. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2012(1), § [D.])
Sec. 90-352. - Development density and yields. 
(a)	The TND district regulates both minimum and maximum development densities. The total minimum and maximum development yields for individual land uses within a TND district project and its individual sub-districts shall be established by proffer to the town upon consideration of the applicant's code of development and other requirements of the zoning application. Density regulations shall apply to both new development and redevelopment uses. 
(b)	Minimum density: Development densities for the land uses proposed for each sub-district shall achieve a minimum density of at least the levels for the individual land uses as indicated in Table 2 hereinafter or as shall otherwise be established by the code of development. 
(c)	Maximum density: Development densities for the land uses proposed for each sub-district shall not exceed the levels for the individual land uses as indicated in Table 2 hereinafter or as shall otherwise be established by the code of development. 
(d)	The applicant shall demonstrate in the code of development the appropriateness of the level of minimum and maximum densities proposed for each land use. 
(e)	Upon request of the applicant, the town council, at its sole discretion, may reduce the minimum required density for individual uses within the TND district or within any of the TND sub-districts contained therein, provided that the revised minimum density shall be established for each land use or lot within the sub-district and incorporated into the code of development. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to demonstrate the justification for the reduction in density. 
(f)	Upon request of the applicant, the town council, at its sole discretion, may increase the maximum required density for individual uses within the TND district or within any of the TND sub-districts contained therein, provided that the revised maximum density shall be established for each land use or lot within the sub-district and incorporated into the code of development. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to demonstrate the justification for the increase in density. 
(g)	The allowable range of land use yields within the sub-districts shall be calculated based on the qualifying area (or net acreage of the individual sub-district). The calculation of minimum and maximum yield for individual uses to be located in the sub-districts shall be based on the application of the minimum and maximum density for each use (see Tables 2 and 3 herein) to an adjusted qualifying area that reduces the gross area of the TND by the total of the non-qualifying land components within the sub-district. 
The Qualify Area (or Net Acreage) = Gross Acreage - Non-Qualifying Area (or acreage of the sum of the non-qualifying land components.) 
The land components that comprise the non-qualifying land area include: 
(1)	Existing rights of way and easements,
(2)	Existing land uses,
(3)	Areas deemed unbuildable due to geological, soils, or other environmental deficiencies,
(4)	Wetlands and floodplains (FEMA 100-year floodplain),
(5)	Existing ponds, stormwater management facilities and water features that are not defined by wetlands or floodplains, and 
(6)	Terrain with slopes in excess of 30 percent.
See Appendix A: TND density calculation worksheet and sample calculation of density and yield. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2012(1), § [E.])
Sec. 90-353. - Lot and yard types-Size, lot dimensions, and height regulations. 
(a)	Lot types: Table 3: Lot Types and Lot Development Standards provides a matrix of lot types permitted in the TND district. 
(1)	Lots for small-detached residential dwellings:
a.	Cottage lot.
b.	Village lot.
(2)	Lots for medium detached residential dwellings:
a.	Neighborhood lot #1.
b.	Neighborhood lot #2.
(3)	Lots for attached and multifamily residential dwellings:
a.	Townhouse lot #1.
b.	Townhouse lot #2.
c.	Multifamily lot.
(4)	Lots for commercial and live-work commercial buildings:
a.	Commercial lot.
b.	Live-work lot.
(5)	Lots for economic development and special permit buildings: established by code of development. 
(b)	Lot development standards: Table 3 establishes the regulations and guidelines for the size and dimensions of individual lot types as permitted within the individual TND sub-districts. Table 4: TND District Residential Lot Mix Work Sheet establishes the mix of lot types within each sub-district. Appendix B provides illustrations of representative lot types and building configurations. 
(1)	Lot dimensions.
(2)	Lot area.
(3)	Yard and setback regulations.
(4)	Lot coverage.
(5)	Lot frontage percentage.
(c)	Supplemental notes for lot types and lot development standards: In (1)-(9) below, the notes refer to footnotes (1)-(9) as cited in Table 3. 
(1)	This table is regulatory except where noted by asterisk (*) as guidelines. Guidelines for variations to the indicated dimensions and percentages shall be approved by the planning director. 
(2)	For corner lots, lot width and side yards shall be increased by five feet in addition to the prescribed dimensions. 
(3)	For attached dwellings, town homes and multifamily buildings, the indicated side yard regulations apply only to end units. 
(4)	Rear setback applies to principal structure only. Garages and/or accessory units may have a zero setback when an alley is present. 
(5)	Lot frontage percentage represents the ratio between the building width and corresponding width of the lot on which the building is located. 
(6)	Lot coverage ratio guideline applies to maximum percentage of building coverage. Lot areas for townhouses and multifamily units exclude areas for required off-street parking. Ratio for townhouses applied to internal units; end unit ratios not governed. 
(7)	The code of development shall include a lot mix matrix for maximum and minimum distribution of lot types that are permitted within any given sub-district. (See Appendix A for illustrative example and application work sheet.) 
(8)	The lot dimensions, lot area, yard and setback regulations, and lot frontage regulations shall be established with the code of development. 
(9)	The applicant shall submit a supplement to the lot types and lot development standards matrix to identify, define, and regulate additional land uses and lot types that are to be incorporated into the code of development. 
(d)	Building heights for individual uses:
Building heights shall be identified and established by the code of development for each land use or combination of land uses within each of the sub-districts (village center, transition, residential, economic development) of the TND district and, further, shall be subject to the following minimum and maximum height limits. (See Table 5). 
(e)	Upon request of the applicant, the town council, at its sole discretion, may either increase or decrease the regulations for building heights, yards, and lots for individual uses within the TND district and its sub-districts, provided that the revised regulations shall be established for each land use or lot within the sub-district and incorporated into the code of development. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to demonstrate the justification for the adjustments to these regulations. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2012(1), § [F.])
Sec. 90-354. - Civic space, parks, open space, and recreation areas. 
(a)	TND district projects with a gross area of 15 acres or greater shall provide usable and centrally located civic space, parks, common open space, or recreation areas that are accessible to residents, visitors, and workers within the TND district. Civic space, public parks, common open space, or recreation areas shall be strategically located and designed to provide recreational opportunities for the neighborhood as well as relate to the physiographic character and accessibility to the entire TND. 
(b)	For TND district projects with a gross area of 15 acres or greater, these areas shall be sized, located, and improved to a level that satisfies the needs of the residents of the project, provided that a minimum of 15 percent of the total qualifying area of the TND shall be allocated to these areas. (See subsection 90-352(g) for definition of qualifying area.) The application plan and code of development shall establish the type, mix, arrangement, and quality of the planned on-site improvements for civic space, parks, common open space, recreation areas, buffer areas, and protected natural areas. 
(c)	For TND district projects with a gross area of 15 acres or greater, the location, mix, type, quality and phasing of civic space, parks, common open space, recreation areas, buffer areas, and protected natural areas shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan or other criteria established by the town. These areas shall be delineated on the application plan and may include greens, squares, plazas, community centers, clubhouses, trails, pocket parks, or community gardens. 
(d)	For TND district projects with a gross area of 15 acres or greater, the areas of property designated for civic space, parks, common open space, recreation areas, buffer areas, and protected natural areas shall be (a) subject to approval of the planning commission, and (b) permanently set aside for the sole benefit, use, and enjoyment of occupants of the TND district through covenant, deed restriction, or similar legal instrument; or, if agreed to by the planning commission, the civic space, parks, common open space, recreation areas, buffer areas, or protected natural areas may be conveyed to a governmental agency for the use of the general public. 
(e)	Land within the TND that is designated to remain private for any of these areas and improvements shall be owned and maintained by a property owners' association or homeowners association. 
(f)	Upon request of the applicant, the planning commission, at its sole discretion, (a) may decrease or eliminate certain requirements for open space and recreation land and improvements in a TND district project, provided that the revised regulations shall be established and conditioned by the code of development, or (b) elect for the applicant to contribute to a pro-rata share fund, provided that the town has established and adopted a parks and recreation master plan and pro-rata sharing funding policy. 
(g)	The town's parks and recreation master plan shall address the specific regional needs, specific improvements, and funding policy for the development of civic space, parks, open space, and recreation areas that inure to the benefit of all citizens within the TND district. The amount of the pro-rata share contribution shall be updated and recalculated on an annual basis by the town. 
(h)	For projects that are less than 15 acres in gross area, the applicant shall contribute to a pro-rata share fund as may be established by the town in its parks and recreation master plan. In the absence of an adopted parks and recreation master plan and pro-rata share funding policy, there shall be no contribution requirement on an applicant for projects less than 15 acres. 
(i)	The amount of the pro-rata share contribution shall be updated and recalculated on an annual basis by the town. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2012(1), [G.])
Subdivision III. - Submissions and Review 

Sec. 90-355. - Code of development-Application requirements. 
(a)	TND master plan: The master plan establishes the size, location, and configuration for the TND district, its sub-districts, and other internal planning areas (parks, open space, dedicated areas, etc.). It provides a graphic representation of the project's transportation network and key components of development of the property, including but not limited to the requirements of sections 90-350-90-353 hereinabove and the following: 
(1)	Existing conditions plan depicting existing land uses, existing road and utilities, dedicated rights-of-way and easements, transportation alignments or infrastructure locations designated by an official map, historic and cultural features, tree coverage, and sensitive environmental areas of the property, including 100-year floodplain, wetlands, slopes greater than 30 percent, unbuildable areas, and other features as may be required by the planning director. 
(2)	Certified boundary plat, deed description, tax map reference and zoning district designation of the property (or properties) subject to the TND district zoning application, zoning district designations and ownership of adjoining properties, and topographic mapping (minimum 1 inch = 100 feet horizontal scale and 2 feet contour intervals, or at a scale and interval as otherwise approved by the planning director). 
(3)	Graphic plan exhibit depicting the internal layout and organization of sub-districts; to include the number, size, location, and boundary for each of the sub-districts (to be prepared at a minimum 1 inch = 100 feet horizontal scale or at a scale as otherwise approved by the planning director). 
(4)	Graphic plan depicting the proposed open spaces, buffer areas, public parks, environmental preservation areas, and recreation areas. 
(5)	Overlay plan exhibit depicting the projected development phasing plan.
(6)	Illustrative master plan exhibit depicting the general location of planned mix of uses and lot types for uses to be allocated within each sub-district (to be prepared at a minimum 1 inch = 100 feet horizontal scale or at a scale as otherwise approved by the planning director). 
(b)	Development code: A narrative report and graphic exhibits that codifies the key components of the project proposed for the TND district and establishes the land use regulations, criteria, and guidelines for each TND sub-district, to address the following: 
(1)	The applicant shall prepare a statement of compatibility of the proposed project with the town's TND zoning district and comprehensive plan land use policies, including justification for the number of the proposed sub-districts to be included in the zoning amendment application. 
(2)	Lot types and lot development standards matrix (Table 4), to incorporate supplemental standards as may be required by additional proposed land uses and lot types. 
(3)	Table of proposed by-right land uses, special permit uses, and specific land use exclusions applicable to each sub-district, 
(4)	Graphic representation of proposed generalized building forms, types and densities,
(5)	Residential lot mix work sheet (Table 4), to address proposed mix of residential lot types within each sub-district, to include documentation for proposed lot variations and special conditions. 
(6)	Narrative and graphic exhibits to support justification, qualifications, and conditions related to special permit uses. 
(7)	Statement of minimum and maximum density, to include submission of density calculation worksheet for the sub-districts (see Appendix A). 
(8)	Parking impact study to assess parking area and loading requirements, including locational guidelines within each sub-district and for the overall project. 
(9)	Documentation and plan demonstrating compliance with VDOT state secondary street acceptance requirements. 
(10)	A signage plan is required for the entire TND district which establishes a uniform sign theme with graphic representation of the design character, style, number, size, height, and number of signs to be permitted within the individual sub-districts. Signs shall share a common style, as to size, shape, and material. With the exception of the economic development sub-district, all TND district signs shall be either wall signs or cantilever signs. No billboards shall be allowed within the TND. Cantilever signs shall be mounted perpendicular to the building face and shall not exceed ten square feet. Where signs otherwise vary in requirements with the existing town sign ordinance, the applicant shall provide justification for the proposed variation. Signs that are to be specifically exempted shall be defined. Upon approval of the zoning amendment application, the signage plan will regulate all signs within the TND district in lieu of the town's sign ordinance. 
(11)	A projection of planned project's infrastructure demands on public water and sewer and an assessment of the adequacy of existing public infrastructure and facilities for the proposed project. 
(c)	Street classification plan: A regulating street classification plan shall graphically address and depict the street system, street types, and streetscape design criteria for the types of vehicular and pedestrian access improvements within the project: 
(1)	Regulating plan for the alignment and classification of the project's street system, identifying interior and frontage streets, and including designation of street types, block lengths and geometry, alley locations, and pedestrian improvements within each sub-district. 
(2)	Graphic standards to illustrate plan and street cross sectional views, including right-of-way or easements specifications, for individual streets types (including alleys and pedestrian improvements). 
(3)	Design guidelines for public hardscape, landscaping, street lighting, and placement of utility, storm drainage, and related infrastructure, including easement requirements and regulations. 
(d)	Building form and landscape design guidelines: Documentation and graphics to describe the proposed characteristics of building design and landscape architectural improvements for each sub-district within the TND project: 
(1)	Graphic representation of proposed architectural themes.
(2)	Building form and styles, to address building scale, architectural proportions, and heights for uses within each sub-district. 
(3)	Landscape design guidelines to depict proposed landscape treatment of streets, neighborhoods, civic spaces, open areas, parking areas, and other activity centers within the project. 
(e)	Schematic infrastructure plans: The schematic infrastructure plans shall provide sufficient documentation and graphic support to ensure the feasibility and functionality of the master plan to the satisfaction of the town to address the following: 
(1)	Storm drainage, stormwater management facilities, and best management practices.
(2)	Sanitary sewer.
(3)	Domestic water.
(4)	Site grading (proposed finished grades at minimum five feet contour intervals); to depict the extent of land disturbing activities that (1) will impact slopes that are greater than 30 percent and (2) require clear-cutting of existing tree cover. 
(5)	Easement specifications and requirements for each public utility and facility, to include coordination requirements and agreements that may be needed by and between utility providers, VDOT, and the town. 
(f)	Traffic impact analysis: 
(1)	The town and applicant shall determine whether or not the subject TND district project shall require a traffic impact statement to be prepared consistent with VDOT 527 regulations. 
(2)	If a 527 traffic impact analysis is required, the applicant shall prepare and submit a pre-scope of work meeting form to the town on or before the date of formal submission of the zoning district amendment application. The pre-scope form shall be processed, reviewed by and between the town, VDOT and the applicant in accord with adopted regulations and procedures. 
(3)	If a 527 traffic impact analysis is not required, the applicant shall meet with the planning director to determine the required scope for a traffic analysis for the TND project the planning director shall approve the elements to be addressed in the study scope. The traffic analysis shall be submitted with the zoning amendment application. Minimum requirements may include the following: 
a.	Existing traffic counts (a.m. and p.m. peak hours) at intersections to be identified by the town. 
b.	Trip generation estimates for the planned land uses within the proposed development, employing ITE methodologies. 
c.	Trip distribution and assignments to the existing road network of traffic projected for the development at full-buildout. 
d.	Estimates of background traffic growth on impacted streets and highways.
e.	Analysis of future conditions, to include level of service calculations for impacted intersections. 
f.	Signal warrants analysis.
g.	Statement of recommended transportation improvements to provide adequate levels of service for the traffic generated by the proposed project. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2012(1), § [H.])
Sec. 90-356. - Additional application requirements and agreements. 
(a)	The applicant shall submit a statement of zoning proffers and conditions.
(b)	The applicant shall identify and establish standards for TND utility and infrastructure design and easement requirements. The applicant shall also identify and establish procedures to pursue any required waivers and modification of existing town zoning, subdivision, and design standards related thereto, as applicable to implement the proposed project. 
(c)	The applicant shall establish criteria and agreements for internal street ownership (public or private) and maintenance responsibility. 
(d)	The applicant shall establish agreements for public ownership, management, and maintenance of properties within the project to be dedicated to public use, where applicable, and establish rules for common property ownership and maintenance, if applicable. 
(e)	The applicant shall provide an assessment of cash and in-kind improvements that may qualify for proffers associated with the specific project. 
(f)	The applicant shall submit a fiscal impact statement with the zoning map amendment application that assesses the impact of the proposed project on the town's capital facilities and infrastructure. The fiscal impact assessment shall evaluate the relative cost-benefits of the project and shall provide projections for both the tax revenues and governmental expenditures for public services, infrastructure and facilities. 
(g)	The applicant, in conjunction with the town, shall establish design criteria and use conditions for each land use subject to special use permit approval. 
(h)	The applicant shall provide written request and documentation in support of any amendment, waiver or modification to town codes, ordinances, and development standards relevant to the TND application. 
(i)	If all or any portion of the property is to have land or improvements that are to be dedicated to a property owner(s) association, the applicant shall identify the property or improvements subject to dedication and shall submit draft articles of incorporation, by laws, and related operating documents for town review. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2012(1), § [I.])
Sec. 90-357. - TND application and review process. 
(a)	Pre-application meeting: The applicant shall schedule a meeting with the planning director for an introductory work session to discuss the key elements and impacts of the proposed project. The planning director and other town agency representatives shall provide guidance on (a) application requirements, (b) timeframe for processing of the zoning map amendment application, (c) comprehensive plan considerations, (d) identification issues related to public infrastructure and facilities, and (e) other matters as may be uniquely related to the applicant's property. 
At this meeting, the applicant shall present a sketch plan that depicts the following: (a) general boundary and location of property subject to rezoning application, (b) land area to be contained within the TND district, (c) graphic representation of the arrangement of interior sub-districts, (d) planned mix of land uses and densities, and (e) general approach to addressing transportation, infrastructure and community facilities. 
(b)	TND application package submission meeting: The applicant shall schedule a meeting with the planning director to submit and initially review the contents of the TND district zoning map amendment package for completeness. Within five working days of the completion of the meeting, the planning director shall notify the applicant in writing if the application package meets the town's expectations for completeness. 
If the application package does not meet expectations, the planning director shall provide written notification to the applicant of the additional requirements necessary to establish a complete application. Once an application has been deemed a formal "complete application" by the planning director, the application package shall be distributed for formal review in accord with town policy. An incomplete application will not be reviewed. 
(c)	Staff review meeting #1: The planning director shall notify the applicant upon completion by town staff and relevant agencies of the first review of the TND district application package. Written comments shall be provided to the applicant at the first staff review meeting. The applicant shall revise and resubmit materials as necessary to satisfy town comments. 
(d)	Staff review meeting #2: The planning director shall notify the applicant upon completion of the second review by town staff and relevant agencies of the TND district application package. Written comments shall be provided to the applicant at the first staff review meeting. The applicant shall revise and resubmit materials as necessary to satisfy town comments. 
(e)	Planning commission work session: A work session with the planning commission may be requested by either the applicant or the planning director at any time subsequent to staff review meeting #1. 
(f)	Planning commission public hearing: One or more public hearings may be conducted by the planning commission to review and make recommendations on the applicant's TND district zoning map amendment application. 
(g)	Town council work session: A work session with the town council may be requested by either the applicant or the planning director at any time subsequent to the planning commission public hearing. 
(h)	Town council public hearing: One or more public hearings may be conducted by the town council to take action on the applicant's TND district zoning map amendment application. 
(i)	Public notifications and work sessions: The town may determine it is in the public interest to schedule a work session at any time during the zoning map amendment review process. 
(j)	Status of TND district approval: Given that each TND project will have a range unique characteristics (as defined by the code of development) and location within the town, an approved TND shall be established as separate zoning district. An approval of a traditional neighborhood development shall be considered an amendment to the zoning ordinance. 
The TND district approval by the town establishes the restrictions and regulations according to which the TND shall occur. The TND district approval shall define and may depart from the normal procedures, standards, and other requirements of the other sections of the zoning ordinance and subdivision ordinance regulations to the extent approved by the town council (see Section 90-358, herein below). 
(k)	Changes and modifications to an approved TND district: Any subsequent changes and modifications to the approved TND district, the code of development, or other elements related to the original conditions for approval of the zoning map amendment shall be submitted by the applicant to the planning director. 
The planning director shall determine whether the requested change is a major or minor change. Major changes shall require approval by the town council employing the zoning map amendment process. Minor changes shall require approval by the planning director, who, at its discretion, may obtain recommendations from the planning commission. The town, at its discretion, may establish policies for major and minor changes. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2012(1), § [J.])
Sec. 90-358. - Waivers, variances and modifications for TND. 
(a)	The applicant shall clearly identify and document all waivers, variances and modifications to existing town codes, ordinances, and development standards that may be required to implement the proposed TND project. 
(b)	Documentation to be submitted with the TND district zoning map amendment application shall (a) address the justification for each requested waiver, modification, or development standard, and (b) recommend alternative substitute proposals, including design and construction standards, where applicable. Graphic exhibits shall clearly depict areas and locations where the waiver, variance, or modifications impacts the proposed project. 
(c)	The town council, upon its consideration of the recommendation of the planning director and the planning commission, may, at is sole discretion, act to approve, modify, or deny each requested waiver, variance, or modification. 
(d)	No approval or modification shall be granted by the town council for any waiver, variance, or modification in the absence of an adequate and sufficient substitute, including design and construction details and standards, where applicable. Where a waiver, variance, or modification is approved by the town council, the accepted substitute shall become a condition of the TND district zoning map amendment approval. 
(e)	The town council, at its option, may recognize an approved code of development as having fulfilled its requirements for a preliminary subdivision plan or preliminary site plan. Upon such recognition, the applicant may proceed with the preparation of final plats and plans in accord with the provisions of the code of development and other conditions and proffers that were subject to the TND zoning map amendment approval. 
(Ord. of 4-3-2012(1), § [K.])
Secs. 90-359-90-375. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 62.

Sec. 90-376. - Generally. 
(a)	Visibility at intersections. On a corner lot nothing shall be erected (except street signs, utility poles or traffic signs), placed, planted or allowed to grow in such manner as to impede vision between a height of 21/2 and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street centerline of such intersecting streets and a line joining the street centerlines at a distance of 75 feet from the point of intersection. This subsection also applies to signs. 
(b)	Fences. No fragile, readily flammable material, such as paper, cloth or canvas, shall constitute a part of any fence, nor shall any such material be employed as an adjunct or supplement to any fence. Fences shall not exceed a height of six feet, as measured from the topmost point thereof to the ground or surface, along the centerline of the fence, in a commercial or residential zone, except on corner lots as set forth in subsection (a). Fences surrounding industrial sites, public playgrounds, institutions or schools may not exceed a height of 14 feet. 
(c)	Erection of more than one principal structure or conducting of more than one use on lot. The district regulations are designed to permit one permitted use or structure on a lot in residential districts. However, in other districts, more than one permitted principal use may be conducted on a single lot, but not more than one principal structure and accessory buildings, unless otherwise stated. 
(d)	Exceptions to height regulations. The height limitations contained in the district regulations do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, silos, barns, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys or other similar appurtenances. 
(e)	Buildings to have access. Every main building erected or moved shall be on a lot fronting on a street, and all buildings shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required off-street parking. 
(f)	Lot area and lot width for lots not served with public water or sanitary sewers. Where a lot is not served by a public water supply or sanitary sewerage system and any state or local statute or ordinance in force or the health official requires a higher standard for lot areas or lot width than this chapter, the more restrictive regulations shall apply. 
(g)	Front yard exceptions. When an unimproved lot is situated between two improved lots with front yard dimensions less than those required for the zoning district, the front yard required for the unimproved lot may be reduced to a depth equal to the average of the two adjoining lots; provided, that this provision shall only apply in such cases where the improved lots in question are improved as of December 1, 1977. For the purposes of this section, an unimproved lot shall be the same as a vacant lot, and an improved lot shall be one on which a principal building is erected. In no case shall a front yard be reduced by more than 50 percent of the required front yard for that district. 
(h)	Projections into yards. The following projections shall be permitted into required yards in commercial and industrial districts and shall not be considered in the determination of yard size or lot coverage: 
(1)	Terraces, patios or open porches; provided, that such terraces, patios or open porches are unroofed or otherwise unenclosed and are not closer than five feet to any adjacent lot line. 
(2)	Open balconies for fire escapes; provided, that such balconies or fire escapes are not supported on the ground and do not project more than five feet into any yard or closer than three feet to any adjacent lot line. 
(3)	Projections into yards in residential districts. Unenclosed and uncovered structures may extend 15 feet into a required rear yard and five feet by five feet into a front yard, provided that the structure is not enclosed or covered and the structure floor is not constructed higher than the finished floor elevation of the primary entrance to the dwelling unit. 
(4)	Uncovered handicap ramps projecting into yards in any district may be granted a waiver by the town manager if in his review the town manager finds the projection is necessary to accommodate said handicap ramp. 
(i)	Widening of highways and streets. Whenever there shall be plans in existence, approved by either the state department of transportation or by the town council, for the widening of any street or highway, the commission may recommend additional front yard setbacks for any new construction or for any structures altered or remodeled adjacent to the future planned right-of-way, in order to preserve and protect the right-of-way for such proposed street or highway widening. 
(Code 1968, § 29-75; Ord. of 9-3-96(3); Ord. of 9-2-97(2); Ord. of 5-6-2008)
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30. 
Sec. 90-377. - Home occupations. 
(a)	Intent. Under certain unique circumstances a small-scaled commercial activity may be an appropriate use within a residential dwelling. The standards and procedure for establishing such uses are intended to limit the scope and nature of such uses and insure compatibility with the adjoining properties. 
(b)	General standards. 
(1)	Home occupations shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes and shall not change its character as a residence. The use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, or other means inconsistent with a residential use shall be prohibited. 
(2)	No equipment or process shall be used in a home occupation which creates noise in excess of 60dB(A) measured at the property line, or vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the premises or through common walls. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises or through common walls. 
(3)	There shall be no outside storage of goods, products, equipment, or other materials associated with the home occupation, nor shall these materials be stored inside an accessory structure. No toxic, explosive, flammable, radioactive, or other hazardous materials used in conjunction with the home occupation shall be used, sold, or stored on the site. 
(4)	The maximum floor area permitted for a home occupation shall be 25 percent of the finished floor area of the dwelling unit. Storage of goods or products shall not exceed five percent of the finished floor area. 
(5)	One person who is not a permanent resident of the dwelling may be engaged or employed in the home occupation. 
(6)	The street address of the home occupation may be used in advertisements.
(7)	One sign, per the provisions of section 90-383(1) of this article. 
(8)	The type and volume of traffic generated by a home occupation shall be consistent with the traffic generation characteristics of other dwellings in the area. In addition, the lot or property on which the home occupation is conducted shall not have any parking spaces added to it during the time the home occupation is being conducted. 
(9)	The home occupation shall not increase demand on water, sewer, or garbage collection services to the extent that the combined demand for the dwelling and home occupation is significantly more than is normal to the use of the property for residential purposes. 
(c)	Bed and breakfast establishments. Bed and breakfast establishments shall be considered a permitted home occupation, subject to the following: 
(1)	They are permitted only in single-family dwellings by special use permit.
(2)	A maximum of four guestrooms, with a maximum occupancy of eight persons, are permitted.
(3)	Breakfast shall be served only to overnight guests.
(4)	No receptions, private parties, etc., for a fee shall be permitted.
(5)	Applicable provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code shall be met.
(6)	Issuance of an operator permit from the state department of health shall be required.
(7)	The maximum length of stay for each guest shall be five days.
(8)	All other provisions pertaining to home occupations shall be met, with the exception of signage, which will be addressed as a part of the special use permit process. 
(Code 1968, § 29-76; Ord. of 8-1-95; Ord. of 8-2-2006; Ord. of 9-1-2009)
Cross reference- Building code, § 14-31 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 62. 
Sec. 90-378. - Accessory uses, structures or buildings. 
(a)	No accessory structure or building shall be erected in any required front yard. No detached accessory building shall be erected within five feet on any other building on the same lot. 
(b)	No detached one story accessory building shall be located within five feet of any side or rear property line. Accessory buildings may only exceed one story in height if located outside of the required side and rear yard space and if the building is no closer than ten feet to any side yard lot line. In no case shall an accessory structure be habitable (capable of being lived in) or exceed the principal structure in height. When a detached garage is entered from an alley, it shall not be located closer than five feet to the alley line. If the garage or carport is attached to the main structure or is within five feet from the main building, the garage or carport shall be regarded as part of the main building for the purpose of determining the side and rear yards. No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has actually commenced, and no accessory building shall be used, except for other than temporary storage of construction materials, unless the main building on a lot is completed and used. 
(c)	Private, noncommercial, permanently installed, below-the-ground swimming pools must be entirely enclosed with a permanent fence not less than four feet in height. Such fence shall contain a gate which can be locked. This subsection does not apply to portable aboveground or temporary pools. 
(d)	Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit other accessory uses not mentioned, so long as they are clearly accessory to the principal permitted use of land and do not create a threat to public health, safety or the welfare of the community. 
(e)	Outdoor boilers and outdoor wood stoves are prohibited in all zoning districts.
(f)	One portable storage container not to exceed 16 feet in length, eight feet in width, or eight feet in height shall be permitted per lot. No such structure may be placed in a front yard or required off street parking area, unless such container is to be removed from the lot within 14 days. No such structure shall be located closer than five feet to any other structure, side, or rear lot line. A portable storage container may display no more than one sign having a maximum area of six square feet only if the portable storage container is to be on said lot for no more than 14 days. 
(g)	In residential districts, no motor homes, recreational vehicles, trailers or boats shall be parked on the public street right-of-way. No more than two of any combination of the above cited vehicles shall be parked on a residential lot. No parking of any of the above cited vehicles shall be permitted in a front yard of a residential lot for a period longer than 72 hours. No such vehicle may be connected to a private or public utility for the purpose of being used for any form of habitation on a residential lot or public street right-of-way. 
(h)	Temporary family health care structures - permitted per the provisions of Sec. 15.2-2292.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
    A zoning permit, with fee, shall be required prior to the placement of any portable storage container to remain. Portable storage containers are to be allowed for a period not to exceed 14 consecutive days. All fees are to be set by the Woodstock Town Council. 
(Code 1968, § 29-77; Ord. of 5-2-2006; Ord. of 6-6-2006; Ord. of 5-5-2009; Ord. of 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 90-379. - Garden apartment or condominium developments. 
    Garden apartment or condominium developments shall require two acres and more. However, for the purposes of this chapter, any multifamily dwelling under two acres shall only comply with those requirements for apartment houses. The following regulations shall apply to garden apartment developments: 
(1)	Area regulations. The number of dwelling units to be constructed on two acres and above shall be determined in accordance with section 90-155. 
(2)	Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 125 feet at the setback line. 
(3)	Minimum yard requirements for development site. 
a.	Front yard. The front yard shall be 40 feet from the road right-of-way. Required parking may be located in a front yard, but not closer than ten feet to the ultimate street right-of-way. 
b.	Rear yard. The rear yard shall be 40 feet. 
c.	Side yard. The side yard shall be 35 feet. 
(4)	Maximum building height. The maximum building height shall not exceed 35 feet. 
(5)	Regulations for garden apartment or condominium development construction. 
a.	Street or easement access. Each garden apartment or condominium structure or parking area shall have access on a dedicated public street or on an access easement as specified by the town planning commission. 
b.	Curb and gutter. Concrete curb and gutter shall be installed along both sides of all streets within the development. However, should a street act as a boundary for an apartment or condominium development, curb and gutter need only be installed on the side of the street adjacent to the development. 
c.	Sidewalks. Sidewalks of four feet in width, constructed of concrete or brick, shall be installed from parking areas to all apartment or condominium structures served by such parking areas. 
d.	Water and sewer. The proposed development shall be served by approved public water and sewer systems. 
e.	Culs-de-sac. The radius of any cul-de-sac shall be at least 50 feet. No more than 25 dwelling units shall have sole principal access on any cul-de-sac. 
f.	Distances. The horizontal distance between groups of garden apartments or condominiums shall be: 
1.	Two times the average height of the two groups for front or rear walls facing front or rear walls. 
2.	One and one-half times the average height for front or rear walls facing side walls.
3.	Equal to the height of the highest building for side walls facing side walls.
g.	Open space-Generally. There shall be provided 0.25 square feet of usable open space, not including parking or driveway areas, devoted to recreational use, for every square foot of gross residential floor area. This space shall take the form of parks or play areas, etc. 
h.	Same-Management. Management of open space shall be in accordance with the following: 
1.	All open space shall be preserved for its intended purpose as expressed in the site plan. 
2.	There shall be an establishment of a nonprofit association, corporation, trust or foundation of all individuals or corporations owning residential property within the planned development to insure the maintenance of open spaces. 
3.	When the development is to administer open space through an association, nonprofit corporation, trust or foundation, such organization shall conform to the following requirements: 
i.	The developer must establish the organization prior to the sale of any lots or units.
ii.	Membership in the organization shall be mandatory for all residential property owners, present or future, within the planned community, and such organization shall not discriminate in its members or shareholders. 
iii.	The organization shall manage all open space and recreational and cultural facilities, shall provide for the maintenance, administration and operation of such land and improvements and any other land within the planned community and shall secure adequate liability insurance on the land. 
iv.	The organization shall conform to the Condominium Act (Code of Virginia, § 55-79.39 et seq.). 
4.	Should the units be for rental purposes, the developer or rental agent shall be responsible for maintenance and management of open space. 
i.	Same-Use; plans. Usable open space devoted to recreational use as herein required shall be designed for use by tenants of the development and shall be improved and equipped by the developer in accordance with plans submitted and approved by the town planning commission and the town council. 
j.	Joint parking facility. Parking may be provided in a joint parking facility for a group of apartments, with such deed restrictions as are necessary to determine ownership and maintenance of common parking facilities and methods of assigning charges for maintenance, snow removal and repairs. 
k.	Screening. Screening shall be provided of sufficient height and density to screen the site from adjoining residential districts. A planting plan, specifying type, size and location of existing and proposed planting material, shall be submitted with the application for the permit. 
l.	Parking facilities generally. Parking facilities shall be in accordance with the following: 
1.	Off-street parking, whether garage or on-lot, shall be provided on the premises in accordance with section 90-387. 
2.	Required parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot as the building served.
i.	All access drives shall be at least 15 feet from any building on the lot and from exterior lot lines. 
ii.	Parking areas shall not be designed or located so as to require or encourage cars to back into a street in order to leave the lot. 
iii.	Entrances and exitways to parking areas shall have a minimum width of 12 feet for each lane of traffic entering or leaving the site but shall at no time exceed 30 feet in width at the street line. 
iv.	All dead-end parking lots shall be designed to provide sufficient backup area for the end stalls of the parking area. 
v.	All accessways and parking areas shall be paved with a double surface treatment or concrete covering. 
vi.	Entrances and exitways and interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent the blocking of vehicles entering or leaving the site. 
vii.	Any other requirements shall be complied with which are deemed necessary by the planning commission or town council for the public health and safety. 
m.	Drainage. A storm runoff and drainage system shall be installed by the developer in accordance with sound engineering practice, so as to adequately drain the project site and to adequately dispose of all runoff and drainage from the project site, and so as not to permit excess flow of water across streets or adjoining properties. Plans for such drainage system shall be submitted with the application for the permit and shall be subject to approval by the town engineer. 
n.	Lighting. Lighting for buildings, accessways and parking areas shall be so arranged as not to reflect toward public streets or cause any annoyance to building occupants or surrounding property owners or residents. 
o.	Trash and rubbish storage. Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be well-screened on three sides and contain verminproof containers. Interior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall at all times be kept in an orderly and sanitary fashion. 
p.	Site plan. A site plan drawn in accordance with section 90-391 shall be reviewed by the planning commission and approved or rejected by the town council. 
(Code 1968, § 29-78)
Sec. 90-380. - Townhouses. 
    The following regulations shall apply to townhouses: 
(1)	Area regulations. 
a.	Lot size. The minimum lot size for townhouse construction shall be 20,000 square feet. 
b.	Lot area. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be 2,500 square feet. 
(2)	Minimum width. 
a.	Lot width-Development. The minimum lot width for the development shall be 125 feet at the setback line. 
b.	Same-Per unit. The minimum lot width per townhouse unit shall be 20 feet; in the case of a lot at the end of a row of townhouses, the lot width shall be 30 feet. For corner lots at street intersections, the minimum lot width shall be 40 feet. 
(3)	Minimum yard requirements. 
a.	Front yard. The front yard shall be 40 feet from the road right-of-way line. Required parking may be located in a front yard but not closer than ten feet to the ultimate street right-of-way. The town council, in its discretion, may reduce the front yard requirement to 30 feet from the street right-of-way if it finds that necessary parking is otherwise provided. Any such reduction by the town council shall be a part of any special use permit issued under this section. 
b.	Rear yard. The rear yard shall be 40 feet for each townhouse dwelling. 
c.	Side yard. The side yard shall be ten feet for each end unit and 20 feet for each corner lot at street intersections. 
(4)	Maximum building height. The maximum building height shall be three stories but shall not exceed 35 feet. 
(5)	Minimum parking space. An off-street parking space shall be a minimum of ten feet by 20 feet. Parking areas shall be set back at least ten feet from property lines of the development. See also section 90-387. 
(6)	Other regulations for all townhouse construction. 
a.	Party wall. Each dwelling shall be separated by a noncombustible party wall going to the roof, with a fire resistance of not less than two hours' duration. 
b.	Street front, etc. Each townhouse or townhouse parking area shall front on a dedicated public street or on an access easement meeting state department of transportation and town standards. 
c.	Curb and gutter. Concrete curb and gutter shall be installed along both sides of all streets within the development. However, should an existing public street act as a boundary for townhouse developments, curb and gutter need only be installed on the side of the street adjacent to the development. 
d.	Sidewalks. Sidewalks of four feet in width, constructed of concrete or brick, shall be installed from parking areas to all townhouse structures served by such parking areas. 
e.	Culs-de-sac. The radius of any cul-de-sac shall be at least 50 feet. No more than 25 dwelling units shall be located on any cul-de-sac. 
f.	Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings are not permitted; except, that on any lot there may be an enclosed storage structure not exceeding seven feet in height, nor exceeding ten feet by ten feet in area. 
g.	Water and sewer. All developments must be connected to a public water and public sewer system. 
h.	Easement. A ten-foot easement along the side and rear of properties shall be provided in townhouse developments of under three acres. 
i.	Facades. The facades of dwelling units in a townhouse structure shall be varied by changed front yards of not less than two feet and variation in materials and design so that not more than four abutting units will have the same front yard depth and the same or essentially the same architectural treatment of facades and roof lines. Balconies and roofed porches may encroach up to five feet within the setback area. 
j.	Site plan. A site plan drawn in accordance with section 90-391 shall be reviewed by the planning commission and approved or rejected by the town council prior to the issuance of a zoning permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(7)	Special regulations for townhouse developments of three acres and over. For townhouse developments of three acres or more, the following regulations shall apply, in addition to those previously noted: 
a.	Open space-Generally. There shall be provided 0.25 square feet of usable open space, not including parking or driveway areas, devoted to recreational use for every square foot of gross residential floor area. This space shall take the form of parks or play areas, etc. Usable open space shall not include front, rear or side yard areas of individual townhouse units. 
b.	Same-Management. Management of open space shall be as follows: 
1.	All open space shall be preserved for its intended purpose as expressed in the site plan. 
2.	There shall be an establishment of a nonprofit association, corporation, trust or foundation of all individuals or corporations owning residential property within the planned development, to insure the maintenance of open spaces. 
3.	When the development is to administer open space through an association, nonprofit corporation, trust or foundation, such organization shall conform to the following requirements: 
i.	The developer must establish the organization prior to the sale of any lots.
ii.	Membership in the organization shall be mandatory for all residential property owners, present or future, within the planned community, and such organization shall not discriminate in its members or shareholders. 
iii.	The organization shall manage all open space and recreational and cultural facilities, shall provide for the maintenance, administration and operation of such land and improvements and any other land within the planned community and shall secure adequate liability insurance on the land. 
iv.	The organization shall conform to the Condominium Act (Code of Virginia, § 55-79.39 et seq.). 
4.	Should the units be for rental purposes, the developer or rental agent shall be responsible for maintenance and management of open space. 
c.	Distances. The horizontal distance between groups of townhouses shall be: 
1.	Two times the average height of the two groups of townhouses for front or rear walls facing front or rear walls. 
2.	One and one-half times the average height for front or rear walls facing side walls.
3.	Equal to the height of the highest building for side walls facing side walls.
d.	Access; service; parking. Access and service shall be provided in the front of each townhouse. Parking may be provided on the lot, as carports, as an integral part of the townhouse or a joint parking facility for a group of townhouses with such deed restrictions as are necessary to determine ownership and maintenance of common parking facilities and methods of assigning charges for maintenance, snow removal and repairs. 
e.	Improving and equipping open space. Usable open space devoted to recreational use as herein required shall be designed for use by tenants of the development and shall be improved and equipped by the developer in accordance with plans submitted and approved by the town planning commission and the town council. 
f.	Screening. Screening shall be provided of sufficient height and density to screen the site from adjoining residential districts. A planting plan, specifying type, size and location of existing and proposed planting material, shall be submitted with the application for the permit. 
g.	Parking facilities. Parking facilities shall comply with the following regulations: 
1.	Required parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot as the building served or a joint facility in the development. 
2.	All access drives shall be at least 15 feet from any building on the lot and from exterior lot lines. 
3.	Parking areas shall not be designed or located so as to require or encourage cars to back into a street in order to leave the lot. 
4.	Entrances and exitways to parking areas shall have a minimum width of 12 feet for each lane of traffic entering or leaving the site but shall at no time exceed 30 feet in width at the street line. 
5.	All dead-end parking lots shall be designed to provide sufficient backup area for the end stalls of the parking area. 
6.	All accessways and parking areas shall be paved with a double surface treatment or concrete covering. 
7.	Entrances and exitways and interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent the blocking of vehicles entering or leaving the site. 
8.	Any other requirements shall be complied with which are deemed necessary by the planning commission or town council for the public safety. 
h.	Drainage. Drainage shall comply with the following regulations: 
1.	A storm runoff and drainage system shall be installed by the developer in accordance with sound engineering practice, so as to adequately drain the project site and to adequately dispose of all runoff and drainage away from the project site, and so as not to permit excess flow of water across streets or adjoining properties. Plans for such drainage systems shall be submitted with the application for the permit and shall be subject to approval by the town engineer. 
2.	Drainage shall comply with all provisions of existing town ordinances and regulations regarding storm drainage. 
i.	Lighting. Lighting for buildings, accessways and parking areas shall be so arranged as not to reflect toward public streets or cause any annoyance to building occupants or surrounding property owners or residents. 
j.	Trash and rubbish storage. Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be well-screened on three sides and contain verminproof containers. Interior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall at all times be kept in an orderly and sanitary fashion. 
(Code 1968, § 29-79; Ord. of 2-4-97; Ord. of 5-2-2006)
Sec. 90-381. - Shopping centers. 
1.	Purpose and intent. In the interest of enhancing and preserving the economic vitality of large retail facilities in the town, all retail establishments having a gross floor area exceeding 50,000 square feet shall conform with the development criteria contained herein. The intent of these regulations is to ensure that such retail establishments are designed, constructed and maintained in a manner that is compatible with surrounding development and that will contribute to the economic development goals and objectives of the town by attracting customers and generating revenues. These regulations will also serve to protect the public health, safety and welfare by minimizing adverse impact on town facilities and services and providing against hazards to pedestrians and vehicles that might otherwise arise in busy retail areas. 
2.	Applicability. 
A.	These regulations shall apply to all retail establishments having a cumulative gross floor area in excess of 50,000 square feet, whether such gross floor area is contained entirely within a freestanding building or is within two or more buildings that are connected by party walls, partitions, canopies, or walkways. In addition, landscaping regulations set out or referenced in section 90-392 below will apply to any out-parcel connected to a retail establishment by drive aisles, entrances or parking areas. 
B.	These regulations shall also apply to expansions and additions that increase the gross floor area of an existing retail establishment by more than 50 percent of the gross floor area shown on the originally approved final site plan, such that the establishment exceeds 50,000 square feet. In such cases, these regulations shall apply to the existing and expanded portions of the retail establishment. 
C.	In calculating the gross floor area of a retail establishment, the zoning administrator shall include all customer, employee and storage areas, including without limitation, areas used for permanent outside display, storage and sales of merchandise. 
D.	The requirements of section 90-381 shall be in addition to all other applicable ordinances, regulations and requirements; provided that should there be any conflict between the requirements of this section and any other city ordinance, regulation or requirement, the more stringent requirement shall control. 
E.	The use of the word "shall" or "must" as used in section 90-381 denotes a mandatory requirement. The use of the word "should" or "may" as used in section 90-381 denotes a voluntary provision; provided, however, that when any retail establishment proposed to exceed 50,000 square feet in gross floor area requires the approval of the town council, whether by rezoning, conditional zoning or special use permit, the town council shall, in determining whether or not to grant such approval, consider the extent to which the proposed retail establishment conforms to the voluntary provisions of this section; and provided further, that high-quality design elements not addressed by the provisions of this section shall be encouraged. 
3.	Regulations. 
A.	The following regulations apply to all retail establishments constructed or expanded so as to exceed 50,000 square feet in gross floor area: 
(1)	Landscaping. All retail establishments, and all out-parcels connected to such retail establishments by drive aisles, entrances and parking areas, should be designed, constructed and maintained in conformance with all guidelines and standards set out in section 90-381. In the case of conflict, the more stringent criteria shall apply. 
(2)	Minimum parking. The retail establishment shall meet the minimum parking requirements set out in section 90-387 of this article. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in section 90-387, however, parking required by this section may be reduced to one space for every 250 square feet of gross floor area where pedestrian walkways meeting the requirements of paragraph (4) below are provided. The parking reduction shall be subject to the approval of the director of planning or designee. 
(3)	Maximum parking area (parking lot scale). Areas devoted to parking shall not exceed one parking space per 180 square feet of gross floor area unless the developer or applicant provides the director of planning with an independent study showing the need for a greater number of spaces. Such study shall be based on the Institute of Transportation Engineers Manual or other accepted documented engineering standards. Based on the content and findings of this study, the director of planning or designee may determine that a specific number of additional parking spaces is warranted and approve same. 
(4)	Sidewalks and pedestrian walkways. Sidewalks shall be installed along all public right-of-way frontages. The sidewalks shall be shown on preliminary and final site plans and shall be installed in accordance with the specifications of the director of planning prior to the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy for the retail establishment. In addition, pedestrian walkways should be installed to provide access from the sidewalks and parking area to the retail establishment. The walkways should be a minimum of five feet in width and constructed in a manner that is readily distinguishable from driving surfaces by use of alternate materials conducive to customer convenience or by use of pavement colorized (not painted) in contrasting or complementary hues such as brick, gray, white and other similar neutral or non-obtrusive colors. The pedestrian walkways should also be landscaped in an attractive manner with trees, shrubs, flowerbeds and other vegetative or ornamental features. The location, size, materials, color and landscaping of the pedestrian walkways must be approved by the director of planning or designee in order to receive the benefit of reduced parking requirements. The parking reduction may only be approved by the director of planning or designee if found that internal pedestrian walkways will promote interconnectivity of pedestrian walkways throughout the site. 
(5)	Shopping cart collection and storage areas. All corrals for the temporary collection of shopping carts and all shopping cart storage areas shall be designated on preliminary and final site plans. If these areas are not shown on the plan, the plan shall contain the following note: "There shall not be any shopping collection or storage areas permitted on the site." Shopping carts shall be removed from parking lots and collection corrals on a regular basis to avoid hazards to pedestrians and vehicular traffic or when collection corrals become unsightly. Shopping cart collection corrals should be painted dark green, brown, silver or black to complement the retail establishment. Shopping cart storage areas located adjacent to the front of the building should be fully screened from the public view by architectural features that match the principal building. 
(6)	Outside display, storage and sales. All permanent outside storage and display areas shall be enclosed on all sides by a high-quality decorative wall or fence. Chain link fences are strongly discouraged unless fully screened from exterior view by a decorative wall or fence. Approved decorative fencing that is used to enclose permanent outside storage and display areas and located within the setbacks for the principal building shall be exempt from fence height restrictions in article IV of this chapter. 
(7)	Outdoor vendors/vending machines. Outdoor vendors and vending machines shall be located only in areas designated for such purposes on the final site plan. Vending machines shall be flush with established principal building lines and shall be screened from view from all public rights-of-way in a manner approved by the director of planning or designee. No vending machines or buildings, structures, vehicles or facilities used in connection with outdoor sales shall be located in parking areas, fire lanes, loading areas and pedestrian walkways. 
(8)	Area and bulk regulations.
a.	Building height. Building height shall be two stories or 45 feet maximum. 
B.	All administrative approvals authorized by subsection (3)A above shall be subject to concurrence by the town council in cases where a special use permit or other city council approval is required for a proposed retail establishment. 
C.	Where a special use permit is required for a proposed retail establishment, the mandatory criteria set out in subsection (2)A above shall not be subject to waiver or variance. 
(Code 1968, § 29-80; Ord. of 9-2-97(1); Ord. of 5-2-2006; Ord. of 8-1-2006)
Sec. 90-382. - Development plan. 
(a)	Required. Prior to the issuance of a special permit, ten copies of a development plan shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for review by the administrator, planning commission and town council. 
(b)	Contents. The development plan shall contain the following data, together with supplementary data for a particular development, as reasonably deemed necessary by the planning commission or town council: 
(1)	Development site information.
a.	A vicinity map at a scale of not less than one inch to equal 2,000 feet.
b.	A title insurance policy or attorney's certificate showing the owners of the subject property, marketable title to the subject property in such owners, the source of the applicant's title or interest in the subject property and the place of record of the latest instrument in the chain of title for each parcel constituting the tract. 
c.	The total area of the tract.
d.	The abutting street names, widths and route numbers.
e.	The owners, zoning districts and uses of each adjoining tract.
f.	A topographic map with minimum contour intervals and scale acceptable to the administrator.
(2)	Development design information.
a.	A concept plan, illustrating the location and functional relationship between all proposed land uses. 
b.	Land use plans, showing the location and arrangement of all proposed land uses, including the height and number of floors of all buildings, both above and below finished grade; the building setbacks and yard areas from the development boundaries and adjacent streets, roads, alleys and ways; the proposed traffic circulation pattern, including the location and width of all streets, driveways, walkways and entrances to parking areas; all off-street parking and loading areas; all proposed open space areas, including common open space, dedicated open space and developed recreational open space; the approximate location of existing and proposed utility systems of sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water, electric, telephone and gas lines, along with any necessary easements. 
c.	A plan or statement showing the location and design of all screening and indicating the type and height of such screening. 
d.	Statements or plans relating to all covenants, restrictions and conditions pertaining to the use, maintenance and operation of common spaces, and the percentage of the tract to be used as open space. 
e.	A statement in tabular form of the anticipated commercial gross floor area.
f.	When the development is to be constructed in stages or units, a sequence of development schedule, showing the order of construction of each principal functional element of such stages or units, the approximate completion date for each stage or unit and a cost estimate of all improvements within each stage or unit. 
g.	A plan or report indicating the extent, timing and estimated cost of all offsite improvements, such as road, sewer and drainage facilities, necessary to construct the proposed development, which plan or report shall relate to the sequence of development schedule if the development is to be constructed in stages or units. 
h.	Where required by the planning commission or town council, a fiscal impact analysis, listing town revenue generated by the project and town expenditures resulting from the construction of the project. 
(Code 1968, § 29-81)
Sec. 90-383. - Signs in residential districts. 
    In any residential district, the following signs shall be permitted: 
(1)	Home occupation signs. One sign, not exceeding two square feet in area, for the purpose of indicating a home occupation, when erected or displayed on a dwelling and bearing only the name or home occupation of an occupant of such dwelling such sign shall be fixed flat against the main structure only and shall be in no way illuminated. 
(2)	Church bulletin boards. One church bulletin board, not exceeding 18 square feet in area, when erected or displayed on the property of the church; provided, that when a church faces more than one street, one such church bulletin board may be erected or displayed on each street frontage. Church bulletin boards shall be set back at least ten feet from any lot line. 
(3)	Identification signs. One sign, not exceeding 12 square feet in area, for the purpose of showing the name and use of a permitted use, when in a residential zone and when such sign is erected or displayed on the property so identified. Such identification signs shall be set back at least ten feet from any lot line. 
(4)	Subdivision signs. Signs, not exceeding 18 square feet in area, for the purpose of advertising or identifying a housing development or subdivision, when erected or displayed on the property so advertised or identified, at least ten feet from any lot line; provided, that only one such sign shall be erected or displayed facing any one street on the perimeter of such development or subdivision. 
(5)	Temporary signs. 
a.	One contractor's sign, not exceeding 24 square feet in area, and two subcontractor's signs, not exceeding eight square feet in area each, when erected or displayed on the premises upon which building operations are being conducted; provided, that such signs shall be removed upon completion of the work. 
b.	Signs, not exceeding eight square feet each, for the purpose of advertising the sale, lease or future use of real estate, when erected or displayed on the property so advertised; provided, that a total sign area of not more than 24 square feet (may be more than one sign) shall be permitted when such signs are set back at least five feet from the front lot line. 
c.	Yard sale signs. Yard sale signs shall not exceed three in number per yard sale and shall not exceed six square feet each. Such signs must be freestanding signs. No such signs shall be erected more than 24 hours before the commencement of the sale and shall be removed within 24 hours of the sale. 
d.	Political election signs. Political election signs shall not exceed 12 square feet and shall not be placed in the public right-of-way. All such signs shall be freestanding and shall not be erected more than 60 days before the election and shall be removed within seven days after the election. 
(6)	Public school signs. One informational sign not exceeding 24 square feet in area and one identification sign not exceeding 24 square feet in area. 
(Code 1968, § 29-82; Ord. of 12-4-90(2), § 29-82; Ord. of 9-3-96(4); Ord. of 8-2-2006; Ord. of 9-1-2009) 
Cross reference- Subdivisions, ch. 70. 
Sec. 90-384. - Signs in commercial district. 
(a)	Permitted signs. In the commercial district, the following signs shall be permitted: 
(1)	Church bulletin boards, identification, subdivision and temporary signs, with the sign setback requirement reduced to five feet. 
(2)	Signs advertising only the general business conducted within the premises upon which such signs are erected or displayed. 
(3)	Real estate and contractors' signs as specified in section 90-383(5)b. 
(4)	Public school signs as provided in section 90-383(6). 
(b)	Size; location. Signs permitted within a commercial district shall be erected or displayed only on such walls of a building as face a street, alley or parking area, or as freestanding signs upon the lot, subject to the following provisions as to size and location: 
(1)	One-story building. The total area of all signs (may be more than one) facing a street, alley or parking area shall not exceed one square foot for each foot of building width facing such street, alley or parking area, but in no case shall the aggregate of such signs exceed 100 square feet. 
(2)	First floor businesses in multistory buildings. The total area of all signs facing a street, alley or parking area shall not exceed one square foot for each foot of building width facing such street, alley or parking area, but in no case shall the aggregate of such signs exceed 100 square feet. All such signs shall be kept within a height of 20 feet above the sidewalk. 
(3)	Upper stories of multistory buildings containing one or more businesses above first floor. The total area of all signs facing a street, alley or parking area on any wall above the 20-foot height specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section shall not exceed 40 square feet or 1/40 of the area of that wall above such 20-foot height, whichever is greater. 
(4)	Multistory buildings occupied by one business only. Where entire buildings over one story in height are occupied by one business, a total sign area of 100 square feet facing any street, alley or parking area or of 1/40 of the area of that wall above such 20-foot height, whichever is greater. 
(5)	Signs hung on marquees, etc. No sign shall be hung on a marquee, canopy or portico if such sign shall extend beyond the established setback line. The area of any such sign shall be included in determining the total area of signs erected or displayed. 
(6)	Signs advertising occupants, etc. Signs advertising only the name of the occupant of a store, office or building, or the business or occupation conducted or the products sold therein, may be placed on show windows; provided, that not more than 20 percent of the area of such windows shall be covered. The area of such signs shall be included in determining the total area of signs erected or displayed. 
(7)	Projection and height of signs. A sign may be erected or displayed flat against a wall or at an angle thereto, but no sign shall project beyond 25 feet from the street right-of-way. The bottom of a sign, the area of which exceeds six square feet, erected flat against a wall, shall not be less than eight feet above the sidewalk, alley or parking area. The bottom of a sign projecting from a wall shall not be less than ten feet above a walkway or parking area or less than 14 feet above an alley. 
(8)	Roof signs. No roof signs shall be permitted. 
(9)	Freestanding advertising signs. Freestanding signs upon a lot may be erected or displayed only where drive-in service or parking is provided, leaving a distance between the building and a side lot line of ten feet or more from the lot line; provided, that not more than one such freestanding sign shall be permitted for any building or building unit having a street frontage with such drive-in service area, parking areas or building setback. No signs other than those indicated on the sign application shall be attached to a freestanding sign. Freestanding signs shall not be erected more than 30 feet above the grade, and no part of the sign or supporting structure shall be located closer than ten feet from the street right-of-way, and shall not exceed 100 square feet in area. Where signs are erected as freestanding signs upon a lot, the total area of all signs permitted by this section shall be one square foot for each foot of lot frontage; provided, that signs conform to the other requirements and restrictions contained in this section. The town manager or the town manager's agent has the discretion to increase the sign setback if sight distance is impacted. 
(9A)	Portable signs. A portable sign is a nonilluminated or illuminated self-contained sign, not permanently attached to the ground, including those signs commonly known as "trailer signs" or "spider signs" but not including signs painted or otherwise inscribed on a self-propelled vehicle. For purposes of this chapter, portable signs as herein described shall be considered freestanding signs and shall be considered in the total allowable square footage for freestanding signs and must meet the setback regulations set forth for freestanding signs. 
(10)	Signs advertising theater acts, etc. Signs advertising the acts or features to be given in movie theaters may be displayed on permanent frames erected on theater buildings in accordance with the provisions of this section as to size and location, and the bottom of any such frame erected flat against a wall may be less than eight feet above the sidewalk, alley or parking area; provided, further, that when the area of any such frame facing a street, alley or parking area does not exceed 24 square feet and the total area of all such frames facing such street, alley or parking area does not exceed 48 square feet, the area of the signs displayed thereon shall not be included in determining the total area of signs erected or displayed. 
(11)	Temporary signs. 
a.	Interior window sign. A temporary interior window sign is a sign describing a brief commercial activity. The size of a temporary sign shall not be included in the computation of aggregated signage permitted in this section. If a temporary interior window sign becomes tattered, worn or illegible, it must be removed upon notice of the zoning administrator. The sign must be removed within five days of the conclusion of the advertised event. 
b.	Exterior banner signs. An exterior banner sign is a sign applying to seasonal or other brief activity including special sales, "grand opening", "under new management", or "going out of business", events to be held within the premises. A zoning permit, without fee, shall be required. An exterior banner sign may be displayed for 14 days, not more than four times per calendar year. A total maximum of 50 square feet shall be permitted for banner signs, with no more than two signs being displayed at any one time. Banner signs must be attached flush to the building. 
    Any other type of temporary advertising signs, including but not limited to cardboard/metal/foam/ plastic product signs attached to poles or inserted into portable metal frames, and similar nonpermanently mounted displays are not permitted. 
(11A)	Political election signs. Political election signs shall not exceed 32 square feet and shall not be placed in the public right-of-way. All such signs shall be free standing and shall not be erected more than 60 days before the election and shall be removed within seven days after the election. 
(12)	Retail establishments exceeding 50,000 square feet director signs. Retail establishments exceeding 50,000 square feet which constitute more than one retail establishment, as defined in subsection 90-381(2)A of this chapter, are permitted one freestanding sign. The total allowed area of such sign is one square foot for each foot of street frontage and the total shall not exceed 150 square feet. The area of the retail establishments exceeding 50,000 square feet directory sign shall not be included in the total area of signs otherwise permitted for separate businesses. 
(13)	Buildings housing more than one tenant where each tenant has its own outside entrance. Maximum of one square foot of sign area for each linear foot of building frontage occupied by each tenant. Maximum per tenant, 100 square feet. Individual businesses may have only wall signs. 
(14)	Commercial centers. For commercial centers, freestanding signage shall be permitted on the following basis. 
a.	One sign for every 1,200 linear feet of public street frontage; the first such sign shall not exceed 250 square feet in area nor 50 feet in height, and any additional such signs shall not each exceed 75 square feet in area nor 25 feet in height; OR, 
b.	One sign for each public street frontage; the first such sign shall not each exceed 125 square feet in area nor 25 feet in height, and any additional such signs shall not each exceed 50 square feet in area nor 20 feet in height; OR, 
c.	For commercial centers with at least 500 linear feet of public street frontage, one sign not exceeding 50 square feet in area nor 25 feet in height shall be permitted in addition to the low-rise signage. 
d.	Freestanding signs permitted under this section shall be situated at least 50 feet apart from each other within the limits of the development. 
e.	No sign shall project closer than ten feet to the property line.
f.	For commercial centers with at least 800 linear feet of frontage on the right-of-way of Interstate 81, one permitted freestanding sign in section 90-384 (b)(14)a.-c., may be replaced with one freestanding sign not exceeding 200 square feet in area nor 40 feet height. Such sign shall be no further than 100 feet from the Interstate right-of-way line; shall be no closer than 300 feet to a freestanding sign on an adjacent commercial center; and shall be at least 300 feet from residentially zoned land. 
(c)	Stop lines, etc. 
(1)	Stop lines shall be solid white lines at least 24 inches wide and extending across all lanes exiting vehicular traffic onto public streets and highways. The stop line shall indicate the point behind which each approaching vehicle required to stop, and the stop lines shall be accompanied by a stop sign, appropriately placed, or the letters "STOP" painted in the center of the lane as provided in this subsection. 
(2)	Stop lines shall be placed not less than three feet from the sidewalk or not less than nine feet from the public street or highway curbline, whichever is greater. 
(3)	The letters "STOP" when used in place of stop signs shall be white and painted approaching the stop line approximately two feet from the nearest point of the stop line. The letters shall be at least three feet in height with appropriate width. 
(4)	The provisions of this section shall apply to and be required of the owners of all commercial properties which allow vehicle access to any public street or highway. 
(Code 1968, § 29-83; Ord. of 2-5-90(1), § 29-83; Ord. of 12-4-90(1), § 29-83; Ord. of 10-4-94(1); Ord. of 10-4-94(2); Ord. of 9-3-96(2); Ord. of 10-1-96; Ord. of 5-2-2000; Ord. of 4-2-2002; Ord. of 8-2-2006; Ord. of 10-3-2006; Ord. of 11-1-2011; Ord. of 4-3-2012(2)) 
Sec. 90-385. - Signs on interstate intersection corridor. 
    Due to the nature of the commercial development along State Route 42 (West Reservoir Road) and Interstate 81 (all of which is known as interstate intersection corridor), the following provisions shall apply to signs therein: 
(1)	Official interstate intersection corridor map-Adopted; identification; location and availability to public. 
a.	The town is hereby delineating the interstate intersection corridor, as shown n the official interstate intersection corridor map, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this chapter, together with all future notations, references and amendments. 
b.	The official interstate intersection corridor map shall be identified by the signature of the governing body and attested to by the secretary of that body, together with the date of the adoption of this section (July 1, 2006). 
c.	The official interstate intersection corridor map shall be located in a public place, as designated by the governing body, and shall be the final authority as to the inclusion of parcels within the interstate intersection corridor, regardless of unofficial copies which may have been made or published from time to time. The official interstate intersection corridor map shall be available to the public at its immediate request. 
(2)	Freestanding signs. 
a.	One freestanding sign with its parts and support structure shall be located at least ten feet from all property lines. 
b.	The total area of freestanding signs shall not exceed 200 square feet. If the signs for two businesses on the same lot are located on the same pole, the total signage permitted is 400 square feet. 
c.	Freestanding signs shall not be erected more than 85 feet above the grade, not to exceed an elevation of 1,000 feet. 
d.	One freestanding sign is permitted per lot.
e.	The provisions of this section shall apply to parcels located within the interstate intersection corridor and the provisions of section 90-386 do not apply. 
(3)	Total sign area. The total square footage of signs, including but not exclusive of freestanding signs, shall be 800 square feet and conform to the following requirements and restrictions: 
a.	The total area of all signs (may be more than one) facing a street, alley or parking area shall not exceed 15 percent of the total wall area of the wall which the sign is being placed. 
b.	The provisions of this section shall apply to parcels located within the interstate intersection corridor and the provisions of section 90-386 do not apply. 
(4)	Validation of signs existing as of July 1, 2006. All signs existing within the interstate intersection corridor on or before July 1, 2006, although such signs may fail to comply with the existing limitations in section 90-384(b)(9), are hereby accepted and validated as erected. Signs within the interstate intersection corridor erected after July 1, 2006, shall fully comply with this article. Signs erected or existing on or before that date which are moved or removed from their existing locations shall not be moved to or replace at another location except under the strict provisions and limitations set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 4-2-91(1), § 29-83.1; Ord. of 3-3-98(2); Ord. of 8-1-2006; Ord. of 5-6-2008; Ord. of 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 90-386. - Signs in industrial districts. 
    Any sign that is permitted in any commercial zone shall be permitted also in industrial districts. The allowable area of any such sign shall be a maximum of 11/2 times the allowable area specified in sections 90-384. Exceptions. 
(1)	Political election signs shall be limited to signs in commercial districts as provided in section 90-384(b)(11A). 
(2)	Political election signs located on residential use properties in industrial districts shall be limited to the restrictions for signs in residential districts as set forth in 90-383(5)(d). 
(3)	Commercial center signs shall be limited to signs in commercial districts as provided in section 90-384(b)(14). 
(Code 1968, § 29-84; Ord. of 3-3-98(2); Ord. of 1-5-99; Ord. of 9-3-2002; Ord. of 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 90-387. - Off-street parking-Generally. 
(a)	General requirements. There shall be provided at the time of erection of any main building or at the time any main building is enlarged, or at the institution or enlargement of any use, minimum off-street parking space with adequate provisions for entrance and exit. Two hundred square feet (ten feet by 20 feet) of lot or floor area shall be deemed parking space for one vehicle. All parking spaces and access driveways shall be covered with an all-weather surface, unless otherwise provided by this chapter, and shall be graded and drained to dispose of surface water. 
(b)	Commercial and industrial districts. In commercial and industrial districts, a driveway or parking space shall be at least five feet from a property line, and no parking space for a multiple-family dwelling shall be less than ten feet from a residential structure. 
(c)	When provided or reduced. There shall be provided, at the time of the erection of any principal building or structure or at the time that any principal building or structure is altered, enlarged or increased in size, not less than the parking space in the amounts stated herein. Minimum off-street parking space required may be reduced when the capacity and use of a particular building is changed in such a manner that the new use or capacity would require less space than before the change. 
(d)	Where located. The parking spaces required for all residential dwellings shall be located on the same lot as the dwelling; the parking spaces required for other land uses shall be located on the same lot as the principal use or on a lot which is within 600 feet of the principal use, such distance to be measured along lines of public access to the property. However, before such offsite parking facilities are approved, a written agreement thereto assuring their retention for such purposes shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form by the town attorney and filed with the zoning administrator. 
(e)	Collective parking. Collective provision of off-street parking facilities for two or more structures or uses is permissible; provided, that the total number of parking spaces is at least equal to the sum of the minimum number of required spaces computed separately for each use. Collective parking is subject to all stated parking requirements. 
(f)	Residential districts. In all residential districts there shall be provided, either in a private garage or on the lot, space for the parking of two automobiles for each single-family dwelling unit in a new building or each dwelling unit added to an existing building. Off-street parking for residences in two-family and multifamily dwellings shall be provided as two spaces per dwelling unit. In R-2 and R-3 districts, parking shall be permitted in the side or rear yards; provided, that no parking area shall be located closer than five feet to the property line. 
(g)	Roominghouses, hotels, etc. Roominghouses, boardinghouses, tourist homes, hotels and motels shall provide on-the-lot parking space for one automobile for each guestroom or residence unit, plus spaces equal to 20 percent of the capacity of any restaurant, club or assembly space, plus one space for each employee on the maximum shift. 
(h)	Assembly halls generally. For church and school auditoriums and for theaters, general auditoriums, stadiums and other similar places of assembly, there shall be provided at least one off-street parking space for every four fixed seats, based on the maximum seating capacity in the main place of assembly for the building. For assembly halls without fixed seats, there shall be provided one parking space for each 100 square feet of usable floor area. 
(i)	Nurseries, schools, etc. For public or private nurseries, day care facilities, kindergartens or elementary, intermediate or high schools, there shall be provided one parking space for each teacher, employee or administrator, whether full- or part-time, whose activities are conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., in addition to the requirements of the auditoriums. In addition, high schools shall provide one parking space for every 20 students for the maximum rated capacity of the school, as determined by the school board. 
(j)	Use of other parking spaces by assembly halls. Parking space already provided to meet off-street parking requirements for stores, office buildings and industrial establishments lying within 300 feet of the place of public assembly, as measured along lines of public access, and which are not normally in use on Sundays or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and midnight on other days, may be used to meet not more than 75 percent of the off-street parking requirements of a church or other similar place of public assembly. 
(k)	Hospitals. For hospitals, there shall be provided at least one parking space for each two beds, based on the maximum capacity in terms of beds, including those of infants and children, plus one space for each employee or staff member on maximum shift, excluding doctors. 
(l)	Physicians; dentists. For a physician's office, there shall be provided at least one parking space for each 200 square feet of floor area or ten spaces, whichever is greater. For a dental office, there shall be at least one parking space for each 200 square feet or five spaces, whichever is greater. In addition to the above spaces for a physician's or dental office, three parking spaces shall be provided for each additional professional associate of any kind having an office in the same building. 
(m)	Nursing homes. For nursing and convalescent homes, there shall be provided at least one parking space for each six beds, plus one space for each employee on maximum shift. 
(n)	Retail stores. For retail stores selling directly to the public there shall be the following requirement: 
Less than 10,000 square feetOne space per 250 square feet10,000-50,000 square feetOne space per 300 square feet50,000 square feet and above One space per 350 square feet 
(o)	Funeral homes. For funeral homes and mortuaries, there shall be one parking space for each four seats in chapels or parlors with fixed seats or one parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area for assembly rooms without fixed seats for services, plus five parking spaces for employees in both instances noted above. 
(p)	Restaurants. The following requirements shall apply to restaurants with a seating capacity in excess of eight: 
(1)	Sit-down restaurants. There shall be provided at least one parking space for each 50 square feet of seating area, and one parking space for each 400 square feet of non-seating area. 
(2)	Fast-food restaurants. There shall be provided at least one parking space for each 40 square feet of seating and serving area and one parking space for each 400 square feet of non-seating and non-serving area. 
(q)	Roadside stands. For wayside or roadside stands or markets, there shall be provided at least five parking spaces. 
(r)	Offices; personal service. For office buildings, offices of professionals and personal service establishments, there shall be provided one parking space for each 300 square feet of floor space occupied by the office or personal service. 
(s)	Industrial and wholesale establishments. For industrial establishments or wholesale establishments, there shall be provided one parking space for each employee, computed on the basis of the maximum number of individuals employed within an eight-hour shift, plus space to accommodate all trucks and other vehicles used in connection therewith. 
(t)	Surface of parking area; guards; lights. Every parcel of land used as a public parking area shall be surfaced with gravel, stone, asphalt or concrete. It shall have appropriate guards where needed, as determined by the administrator. Any lights used to illuminate such parking areas shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises in a residential district. 
(u)	Landscaping. Where a parking area adjoins a lot in a residential district, suitable landscaping shall be planted between the parking lot and the adjoining property or street line. A plan for such planting shall be submitted to the zoning administrator with a request for a zoning permit. 
(Code 1968, § 29-85; Ord. of 4-4-95(2); Ord. of 4-2-2013)
Cross reference- Stopping, standing and parking, § 78-81 et seq. 
Sec. 90-388. - Same-Exception to section 90-387. 
    The town council may decrease or waive any of the provisions and restrictions set forth in section 90-387 in the section of the town designated within the off-street parking reduction/exemption overlay district. 
    Official off-street parking reduction/exemption overlay district map - Adopted; identification; location and availability to public. 
(1)	The official off-street parking reduction/exemption overlay district map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor and attested to by the clerk of that body, together with the date of the adoption of this section (May 3, 2011). 
(2)	The official off-street parking reduction/exemption overlay district map shall be located in a public place, as designated by the governing body, and shall be the final authority as to the inclusion of parcels within the off-street parking reduction/exemption overlay district, regardless of unofficial copies which may have been made or published from time to time. The official off-street parking reduction/exemption overlay district shall be available to the public at its immediate request. 
(Code 1968, § 29-85.1; Ord. of 5-3-2011; Ord. of 5-3-2011)
Sec. 90-389. - Off-street loading. 
(a)	On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof erected and occupied for uses involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, turning, loading and unloading services, in order to avoid interference with public use of the streets and alleys. 
(b)	Such space shall be a minimum of 15 feet wide and 50 feet in length, with a minimum clear height of 15 feet. Off-street truck loading spaces shall be provided at a rate of one space for the first 10,000 square feet or less of gross floor area, plus a minimum of one additional space for each additional 30,000 square feet of gross floor area or part thereof. For the purposes of this section, "gross floor area" shall also include gross outdoor storage area, whether covered or uncovered. 
(Code 1968, § 29-86)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 90-390. - Conditions for special permits. 
    The following conditions shall apply to those uses which require a special permit. In addition to the following criteria, a site plan may be required in accordance with the provisions of section 90-391 and as set forth in section 90-464: 
(1)	Gasoline service stations. 
a.	The effect of such proposed buildings and uses upon the character of the neighborhood, traffic conditions, public utility facilities and other matters pertaining to the public health, safety and general welfare shall be considered. 
b.	All activities except those required to be performed at the fuel pumps shall be performed within a completely enclosed building. 
c.	Fuel pumps may be located within the front yard but shall be at least 20 feet from any street line. 
d.	All automobile parts, dismantled vehicles and similar articles shall be stored within a building. 
(2)	Carwashing facilities. 
a.	No structure shall be located closer than 75 feet to any lot line.
b.	An approach drive to accommodate a minimum of ten cars shall be constructed for the purpose of avoiding an accumulation of cars backing upon a public thoroughfare. 
(3)	Nursing and convalescent homes (including homes for the elderly). 
a.	All state rules and regulations for the licensing of such uses shall apply.
b.	All requirements of the state health department and fire marshal's office regarding such uses shall apply. 
c.	Architectural barriers, such as stairs, for residents of such establishments shall be overcome to the greatest extent possible. Additional safety features, such as handrails in various areas, shall be installed. 
(4)	Professional offices. 
a.	All parking shall be off-street and shall conform to the requirements of section 90-387. 
b.	All activity and equipment, other than parking, must be housed in a fully enclosed building. 
c.	No noise or odor produced as a result of activity in such offices shall be discernible beyond the boundaries of the lot. 
d.	All vehicular access to the site shall be from a street which meets town standards.
e.	No display in the building shall be visible from outside of the building.
f.	Property/Structure must be located within the high-density residential zoning district and be included within the Town of Woodstock Historic District. 
g.	The following definition shall only apply to professional offices by special use permit within the high-density residential zoning district and be included within the Town of Woodstock Historic District, by special use permit: 
Professional office means a structure used by a person in offering a service which requires specialized knowledge gained by intensive academic preparation, such as medicine, law, engineering and dentistry. 
For all other applications within this chapter the definition of professional offices, as defined in section 90-1, shall apply. 
h.	All other provisions pertaining to professional offices shall be met, with the exception of signage, which will be addressed as a part of the special use permit process. 
(5)	Wayside stands. 
a.	Structures for wayside stands shall not exceed 400 square feet in floor area.
b.	Structures shall not be closer than 20 feet to the side property line.
c.	Entrances and exits to roads shall be clearly delineated and located to provide safe ingress and egress. 
(6)	Wind turbines. 
a.	The application for special permit shall include a site plan that will show the location of the turbine and its appurtenances on the site, height, specifications of the turbine, location of utility lines, rights of way, access and service roads, structures on the lot, erosion and sediment controls, property lines, as well as distances from the turbine to said utility lines, rights of way, access and service roads, structures, property lines, etc. 
b.	The applicant must comply with applicable State and Federal regulations, as well as the regulations found in the Building Code of the County of Shenandoah. 
c.	No turbine or any parts thereof shall have any sign, writing or picture that may be construed as advertising. 
d.	No wind turbine shall be taller than 70 feet in height or located on a parcel less than five acres in size. 
e.	A wind turbine shall be set back a distance of at least equal to 110 percent of its total height from all property lines and occupied structures. 
f.	Noise from a wind energy system shall not exceed 60 decibels, as measured at or beyond any property line. 
g.	A wind turbine which has reached the end of its useful life or has been abandoned shall be removed within 150 days after the operation has been discontinued. Removed shall mean physical elimination of the wind turbine, foundation, accessories, equipment, electrical components, roads, cables, transmission lines and any other appurtenances from the site. The stabilization and/or re-vegetation of the site is necessary after removal. 
(Code 1968, § 29-87; Ord. of 5-1-2012; Ord. of 9-3-2013)
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30. 
State Law reference- "Conditional zoning" defined, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-430; conditional zoning, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-491.1 et seq. 
Sec. 90-391. - Site plans. 
(a)	Site plans may be required for any use within a commercial district or the medical-hospital center district and are required for all uses in an industrial district. 
(b)	All applicants submitting a site plan shall request a preliminary meeting with the administrator in order to determine which of the following shall be included on the site plan: 
(1)	The proposed title of the project and the name of the preparer and developer.
(2)	The north point, scale, date and vicinity map.
(3)	Existing zoning and zoning district boundaries on the property in question and on immediately surrounding properties. 
(4)	The present use of all abutting property.
(5)	The boundaries of the property involved, by bearings and distances, certified by a land surveyor licensed to practice in the state. 
(6)	All existing property lines, existing streets, buildings, watercourses, waterways or lakes and other existing physical features in or adjoining the project. Those physical features such as watercourses, waterways or lakes on adjoining properties need only be shown in approximate scale and proportion. 
(7)	Topography of the project area, with contour intervals of two feet or less.
(8)	The location and sizes of sanitary and storm sewers, gas lines, water mains, culverts and other underground structures in or affecting the project, including existing and proposed facilities and easements for these facilities. 
(9)	The location, dimensions and character of construction of proposed streets, alleys and driveways and the location, type and size of ingress and egress to the site. 
(10)	The location of all off-street parking, loading spaces and walkways, indicating types of surfacing, size, angle of stalls, width of aisles and a specific schedule showing the number of parking spaces. 
(11)	The location, height, type and material of all fences, walls, screen planting and landscaping details of all buildings and grounds and the location, height and character of all outdoor lighting systems. 
(12)	The location of all proposed buildings and structures, accessory and main, number of stories and height, proposed general use for each building and the number, size and type of dwelling units where applicable. 
(13)	Provisions for the adequate disposition of natural and storm water, indicating location, sizes, types and grades of ditches, catchbasins and pipes and connection to existing drainage system. 
(14)	The location, character, size, height and orientation of proposed signs.
(Code 1968, § 29-88; Ord. of 5-2-95(2))
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66. 
Sec. 90-392. - Landscape planning. 
(a)	A landscape plan shall be submitted as part of every site plan and every application for a special use permit. The town manager shall review the landscape plan submitted and he shall make recommendations and set requirements, and the final landscape plan shall be subject to the approval of the town manager. 
(b)	The landscape plan shall indicate planter dimensions, planter island locations, the location of plant material, and a plant list including common name, botanical name, size and spacing of plants. Tree preservation methods and any other treatments such as mulch, seed, sod, etc., shall be noted on the plan and shown in detail. 
(c)	The location of existing and new utilities, rights-of-way, easements and dedications, as well as all other information required on a site plan for preliminary plat, shall be shown on the landscape plan. The landscape plan may be incorporated into the required site plan, application for special use permit, or preliminary plat. 
(d)	The landscape plan shall be reviewed and comments shall be included with those of the site plan, application for special use permit, or preliminary plat review. 
(e)	The landscape plan shall include a time schedule for implementation. The developer shall complete the plan in accordance with this schedule. 
(f)	The owner, his agent, or a homeowners' association shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair and replacement of all landcaping materials and barriers indicated on the landscape plan. 
(g)	All plant material shall be tended and maintained in a healthy growing condition, replaced when necessary and kept free of refuse and debris. 
(h)	Fences and walls shall be maintained in good repair. Openings within the barriers may be required for accessibility to an area for necessary maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 465, 6-2-92)
Secs. 90-393-90-430. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES, STRUCTURES AND BUILDINGS 

Sec. 90-431. - Statement of intent. 
(a)	Within the zoning districts established by this chapter or subsequent amendments thereto, there exist or will exist certain nonconformities which, if lawful before December 1, 1977, or before the adoption date of any applicable amendments to this chapter, may be continued, subject to certain limitations. 
(b)	Nothing contained in this chapter shall require any change in the plans or construction of any building or structure for which a permit was granted prior to December 1, 1977. However, such construction must commence within 30 days after December 1, 1977. If construction is discontinued for a period of six months or more, further construction shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter for the district in which the operation is located. 
(Code 1968, § 29-89)
Sec. 90-432. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
    In any district, structures may be erected on any single lot of record on December 1, 1977, or on the adoption date of any applicable amendment to this chapter, or land may be used notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width that are generally applicable in the district; provided, that yard dimensions and requirements, other than those applying to area or width, shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the board of zoning appeals. 
(Code 1968, § 29-90)
Sec. 90-433. - Nonconforming uses of land. 
    Lawful uses of land, that is, uses not carried on in a structure, which, on December 1, 1977, or as a result of subsequent amendments to this chapter, become nonconforming, may be continued by the present or any subsequent owners, so long as such uses remain otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)	No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land than 25 percent more land than was owned or leased by the user on December 1, 1977, or on the effective date of any applicable amendment to this chapter. 
(2)	Wherever a nonconforming use of land has been discontinued for a period of two years, such use shall not thereafter be reestablished. Any future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)	A nonconforming use, if changed to a conforming use, shall not thereafter be changed back to any nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may, by special exception, be changed to another nonconforming use; provided, that the board of zoning appeals shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate in the zoning district than the existing nonconforming use. 
(4)	No additional structures or buildings not conforming to the requirements of this chapter shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land. 
(Code 1968, § 29-91)
Sec. 90-434. - Nonconforming structures or buildings. 
    Structures or buildings which, on December 1, 1977, or on the effective date of any applicable amendment of this chapter, become nonconforming by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards or their locations on their lots may be continued to be used so long as such structures or buildings remain otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)	No nonconforming structure may be altered in a way which increases the nonconformity. However, a principal structure which is nonconforming due to encroachment into a required yard may be enlarged within or coextensive with the plane of the structure, so long as no new nonconformity is thereby created. 
(2)	A nonconforming use, if changed to a conforming use, shall not thereafter be changed back to any nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may, by special exception, be changed to another nonconforming use; provided, that the board of zoning appeals shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate in the zoning district than the existing nonconforming use. 
(3)	Whenever a nonconforming use of a structure or building or portion thereof has been discontinued or abandoned for two years, such structure or building or portion thereof shall not thereafter be used for a nonconforming use. 
(4)	Removal or destruction of the structure or building in which a nonconforming use is located shall eliminate the use of the land upon which the structure or building was erected for a nonconforming use. "Destruction," for the purposes of this subsection, is defined as damage to an extent of 75 percent or more of the market value of the structure or building immediately prior to such damage or destruction. However, if construction begins within 12 months after destruction or partial destruction occurs, the same nonconforming use or a use which is more appropriate in the zoning district, according to the board of zoning appeals, may be carried on. 
(Code 1968, § 29-92; Ord. of 3-3-3009)
Secs. 90-435-90-460. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-461. - Zoning administrator. 
(a)	Appointment. A zoning administrator shall be appointed by the governing body to administer and enforce this chapter. The zoning administrator may also hold another office in the town. 
(b)	Powers and duties generally. It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to enforce literally the provisions of this chapter and the amendments thereto, and he shall have such duties and powers as are conferred on him by this chapter and as are reasonably implied for that purpose. The zoning administrator's duties shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Receive applications for and issue zoning permits as permitted by the terms of this chapter. 
(2)	Receive applications for certificates of occupancy.
(3)	Issue certificates of use and occupancy in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
(4)	Receive applications for variances and transmit the same to the board of zoning appeals.
(5)	Receive applications for special permits and transmit the same to the planning commission.
(6)	Issue special permits or variances only after a special permit or variance has been approved by the board of zoning appeals or the town council, whichever applies, in accordance with the regulations of this chapter. 
(7)	Keep an official record of all business and activities, including complaints of violations of any of the provisions of this chapter and of the subsequent action taken on each such complaint. All such records shall be open to public inspection. File copies of all applications received. Permits issued and reports and inspections made in connection with any structure, building, sign or land shall be retained as long as they remain in existence. 
(8)	Make inspections as required to fulfill his duties.
(9)	Be responsible for keeping this chapter and the official zoning map up to date, so as to include all amendments hereto. 
(10)	Be responsible for the identification and registration of nonconformance when necessary.
(11)	Order the remedying of any violation of this chapter in accordance with subsection (c) and the bringing of legal action to insure compliance with this chapter. 
(c)	Notice of violation. The zoning administrator shall serve a written notice of violation on any person responsible for violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or any amendment thereto, or in violation of a detailed statement or a plan approved thereunder. If such notice of violation is not complied with before expiration of the time period set forth in such notice, the zoning administrator shall order the discontinuance of such unlawful structure, building, sign or use thereof or land involved in such violation. 
(Code 1968, § 29-94)
Sec. 90-462. - Zoning permit. 
(a)	Required. No building, structure or sign shall be erected, constructed, moved, added to or structurally altered, nor shall land or structure be put to any use, without a permit therefor issued by the zoning administrator. No such permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, or upon written order from the board of zoning appeals or the town council, in the form of a variance or special permit where provided by this chapter, any applicable laws or any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)	Application. 
(1)	All applications shall be made in writing on triplicate forms provided by the zoning administrator and shall show at least the following information: 
a.	Actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon.
b.	The exact size and location on the lot of all buildings, structures or signs existing, proposed extensions thereto or buildings, etc., to be constructed thereon. 
c.	The number of dwelling units, if any, to be provided.
d.	Parking spaces provided or loading facilities.
e.	Statement indicating the existing or proposed use.
f.	In the case of new construction, additions or replacements, the height of structures, buildings or signs. 
g.	For industrial uses, plans should show, in sufficient detail, the operation and processes of the industry. 
h.	All other information necessary for the zoning administrator to determine conformance with, and provide for enforcement of, this chapter. 
(2)	One copy of the forms shall be returned to the applicant by the zoning administrator, after he shall have marked such copies either as approved or disapproved and attested to the same by his signature on such copy. 
(3)	One copy of all such forms shall be retained by the zoning administrator for his permanent records, and one copy shall be sent to the county department of building inspections. 
(4)	Such approval and zoning permit shall be issued or refused within 30 days from the date of application, unless additional time is permitted by this chapter. In case of refusal, the applicant shall be informed of his rights of appeal. The application for a permit shall be submitted in such forms as the zoning administrator may prescribe. 
(c)	Expiration. A zoning permit shall expire six months after the date of issuance, if work described in any permit has not begun. If work described in any zoning permit has begun within such six-month period, such permit shall expire two years from the date of issuance thereof. 
(Code 1968, § 29-95)
Sec. 90-463. - Certificate of use and occupancy. 
(a)	Required. A certificate of use and occupancy shall be required upon the completion of the work for which a zoning permit was issued. It shall be unlawful to use or occupy any structure, building, land or portion thereof in any manner until a certificate of use and occupancy has been issued. 
(b)	Form of application. The application for a certificate of use and occupancy shall be submitted in such form as the zoning administrator may prescribe. 
(c)	Inspection of work; issuance or denial; reinspections. 
(1)	The zoning administrator shall inspect any structure, building, sign, land or portion thereof and shall determine the conformity of the same with this chapter and with the work as listed in the zoning permit. If he is satisfied that the completed work is in conformity with this chapter and with the work listed in the zoning permit, he shall issue a certificate of use and occupancy. 
(2)	A certificate of use and occupancy shall be granted or refused in writing, within ten days from the date of application. 
(3)	In zoning districts in which performance standards are imposed, no certificate of use and occupancy shall become permanent until the zoning administrator has reinspected the facility and determined that it is in compliance with all performance standards. The owner of the facility shall request, in such form as the zoning administrator may prescribe, that the zoning administrator reinspect such facility. 
(4)	Such request shall be made no less than 30 nor more than 45 days after the facility is fully operating, but in no event shall such request be made more than 120 days after the certificate of use and occupancy has been issued. The zoning administrator shall reinspect the facility within 30 days of receipt of such notification, and he shall notify the applicant in writing, within ten days thereof, that: 
a.	The facility is in full compliance with all performance standards and the certificate of use and occupancy is permanent; or 
b.	The facility does not comply with the performance standards and the certificate of use and occupancy is still temporary and may be revoked if the applicant does not correct all violations. 
Requests for additional reinspections and action by the zoning administrator for correction of violations shall follow the same procedure and requirements as described in this subsection for reinspection. If the zoning administrator fails to reinspect a facility within 30 days of receipt of notification requesting reinspections, the facility shall be deemed to be in full compliance with all performance standards, and the certificate of use and occupancy shall be considered permanent without further action on the part of the applicant. 
(Code 1968, § 29-96)
Sec. 90-464. - Special use permit-Generally. 
    Applications for special use permits shall be made to the zoning administrator. He shall promptly transmit the same to the town manager, who will schedule a joint public hearing with the planning commission and the town council. After receiving the commission's recommendation on the application, the town council must approve or disapprove the special use permit within 60 days after the initial application was filed with the administrator. No such special use permit shall be authorized except after notice and hearing as required by Code of Virginia, § 15.1-431. The granting of a special use permit may require a site plan, pursuant to section 90-391, to be submitted to the administrator. When specifically authorized by the terms of this chapter, the granting of a special use permit shall be subject to the following standards and criteria: 
(1)	Such use shall be one which is specifically authorized as a special permit in the zoning district wherein the applicant seeks a special permit. 
(2)	Such permit shall only be granted subject to any applicable conditions and safeguards as required by this chapter. 
(3)	Such permit may be granted subject to additional reasonable conditions and safeguards as may be deemed by the town council to be advisable and appropriate. 
(4)	Such use shall be found by the council to be in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this chapter. 
(5)	Such use shall not adversely affect the character of the zoning district, the conservation of property values or the health and safety of residents or workers on adjacent properties and in the general neighborhood. 
(6)	Such use shall be of such size and so located and laid out in relation to its access streets that vehicular and pedestrian traffic to and from such use will not create undue congestion or hazards prejudicial to the general neighborhood. 
(7)	Such use shall not conflict with development in accordance with the comprehensive plan. 
(Code 1968, § 29-97)
Sec. 90-465. - Same-Expiration. 
    Any special use permit granted in accordance with section 90-464 shall expire and be null and void if the applicant does not comply with the requirements of the special use permit or the applicant fails to perform fully according to his application within one year of the approval of the special use permit. 
(Code 1968, § 29-97.1)
Sec. 90-466. - Same-Authority of town council to renew or extend. 
    The town council is authorized to renew and/or extend special use permits heretofore granted by the town council upon the application of the landowner to whom the special use permit was granted or upon application by a successor in title or a prospective successor in title to such landowner. If a special use permit is no longer allowed as initially granted as a result of amendments to the zoning ordinances of the town, the town council is nevertheless authorized to renew and/or extend the special use permit to the landowner, a successor in title to the landowner, or a prospective successor in title to the landowner. Renewals or extensions granted under this section shall be subject to the terms and conditions as set forth by the town council at the time of such renewal or extension. 
(Ord. of 9-3-91(2), § 29-97.2)
Sec. 90-467. - Schedule of fees, charges and expenses. 
    The governing body shall establish, by resolution, a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and collection procedures for zoning permits, certificates of use and occupancy, special use permits, variances, appeals, amendments and other matters pertaining to this chapter. The schedule of fees shall be available for inspection in the office of the zoning administrator and may be altered or amended by the governing body by resolution. Until all application fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. 
(Code 1968, § 29-98)
Sec. 90-467.1. - Applicant to pay delinquent taxes. 
    Prior to the initiation of an application for a special exception, special use permit, variance, rezoning or other land disturbing permit, including building permits and erosion and sediment control permits, or prior to the issuance of final approval, the authorizing body shall require the applicant to produce satisfactory evidence that any delinquent real estate taxes owed to the locality which have been properly assessed against the subject property have been paid. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2010)
State Law reference- Permitted provisions in zoning ordinances; amendments; applicant to pay delinquent taxes; penalties, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2286(b). 
Sec. 90-468. - Amendments. 
    The regulations, restrictions and boundaries established in this chapter may, from time to time, be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed by the governing body; provided, that: 
(1)	The planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing on such proposed amendment, after notice as required by law, and may make appropriate changes in the proposed amendment to the governing body, together with its recommendations and appropriate explanatory materials. Such public hearing may be held jointly with the governing body at its public hearing. 
(2)	Changes may be made by the governing body in this chapter or the zoning map only after such changes shall have been referred to the planning commission for its recommendations. Action shall be taken by the governing body only after a report has been received from the planning commission, unless a period of 90 days has elapsed after the date of referral to the commission, after which time it may be assumed that the commission has approved the change or amendment. 
(3)	Before approving and adopting any amendment, the governing body shall hold at least one public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice as required by Code of Virginia, § 15.1-431, after which the governing body may make appropriate changes or corrections in this chapter or the proposed amendment. In the case of a proposed amendment to the zoning map, such public notice shall state the general usage and density range of such proposed amendment and the general usage and density range, if any, set forth in the applicable part of the comprehensive plan. However, no land may be zoned to a more intensive use classification than was contained in the public notice without an additional public hearing after notice required by Code of Virginia, § 15.1-431. Such ordinances shall be enacted in the same manner as all other ordinances. 
(4)	When a proposed amendment of this chapter involves a change in the zoning classification of 25 or less parcels of land, then, in addition to the advertising as above required, written notice shall be given by the local commission at least five days before the hearing to the owner or owners, their agent or the occupant, of each parcel involved, and to the owners, their agent or the occupant, of all abutting property and property immediately across the street or road from the property affected. Notice shall also be given to the owner, his agent or the occupant, of all abutting property and property immediately across the street from the property affected which lies in the county. Notice sent by registered or certified mail to the last known address of such owner as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books or current real estate tax assessment records shall be deemed adequate compliance with this requirement. If the hearing is continued, notice shall be remailed. Costs of any notice required under this chapter shall be taxed to the applicant. 
(Code 1968, § 29-99)
State Law reference- Zoning ordinance may provide for amendments, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-491(g); preparation and adoption of zoning ordinance and map and amendments thereto, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-493. 
Secs. 90-469-90-490. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2.
State Law reference- Board of zoning appeals, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-494 et seq.

Sec. 90-491. - Generally. 
(a)	A board of zoning appeals, consisting of five members, shall be appointed by the circuit court of the county. Members of the board may receive such compensation as may be authorized by the governing body. Members shall be removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after public hearing. Appointments for vacancies occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall in all cases be for the unexpired term. Members of the board shall hold no other public office in the town; except, that one may be a member of the town planning commission. 
(b)	The term of office shall be for five years; except, that of the first five members appointed, one shall serve for five years, one for four years, one for three years, one for two years and one for one year. One of the five appointed members may be an active member of the planning commission. 
(c)	Any member of the board shall be disqualified to act upon a matter before the board with respect to property in which the member has a legal interest. 
(d)	The board shall choose annually its own chairman and vice-chairman, who shall act in the absence of the chairman. 
(Code 1968, § 29-100)
Sec. 90-492. - Powers and duties generally. 
    The board of zoning appeals shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)	To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)	To authorize upon appeal or original application in specific cases such variance as defined in Code of Virginia, § 15.1-430(p) from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, when, owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions will result in unnecessary hardship; provided that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done, as follows: 
a.	When a property owner can show that his property was acquired in good faith and where by reason of the exceptional narrowness, shallowness, size or shape of a specific piece of property on June 2, 1987, or where by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary situation or condition of such piece of property, or of the condition, situation, or development of property immediately adjacent thereto, the strict application of the terms of this chapter would effectively prohibit or unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property or where the board is satisfied, upon the evidence heard by it, that the granting of such variance will alleviate a clearly demonstrable hardship approaching confiscation, as distinguished from a special privilege or convenience sought by the applicant, provided that all variances shall be in harmony with the intended spirit and purpose of this chapter. 
b.	No such variance shall be authorized by the board unless it finds:
1.	That the strict application of this chapter would produce undue hardship.
2.	That such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity. 
3.	That the authorization of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and that the character of the district will not be changed by the granting of the variance. 
c.	No such variance shall be authorized except after notice and hearing as required by Code of Virginia, § 15.1-431. 
d.	No variance shall be authorized unless the board finds that the condition or situation of the property concerned is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to this chapter. 
e.	In authorizing a variance the board may impose such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed structure or use as it may deem necessary in the public interest, and may require a guarantee or bond to ensure that the conditions imposed are being and will continue to be complied with. 
(3)	To hear and decide appeals from the decision of the zoning administrator. No such appeal shall be heard except after notice and hearing as provided by Code of Virginia, § 15.1-431. 
(4)	To hear and decide applications for interpretation of the district map where there is any uncertainty as to the location of a district boundary. After notice to the owners of the property affected by any such question, and after public hearing with notice as required by Code of Virginia, § 15.1-431, the board may interpret the map in such way as to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter for the particular section or district in question. The board shall not have the power to change substantially the locations of district boundaries as established by ordinance. 
(5)	No provision of this section shall be construed as granting to the board the power to rezone property. 
(Code 1968, § 29-101)
State Law reference- Powers and duties of board of zoning appeals, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-495. 
Sec. 90-493. - Rules and regulations; meetings; quorum; voting. 
(a)	The board of zoning appeals shall adopt such rules and regulations as it may consider necessary. 
(b)	The meetings of the board shall be held at the call of its chairman or at such times as a quorum of the board may determine. 
(c)	The chairman or, in his absence, the acting chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(d)	The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. It shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
(e)	All meetings of the board shall be open to the public.
(f)	A quorum shall consist of at least three members.
(Code 1968, § 29-102(a)-(f))
Sec. 90-494. - Appeals to board. 
    An appeal to the board of zoning appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the town affected by any decision of the zoning administrator or from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by any other administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of this chapter. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days after the decision appealed from by filing with the zoning administrator, and with the board, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the zoning administrator certifies to the board that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order granted by the board or by a court of record, on application and on notice to the zoning administrator and for good cause shown. 
(Code 1968, § 29-103)
State Law reference- Appeals to board, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-496.1. 
Sec. 90-495. - Procedure on appeal. 
(a)	The board of zoning appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an application or appeal, give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest and decide the same within 90 days of the filing of the application or appeal. In exercising its powers the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify, an order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from. The concurring vote of a majority of the membership of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative officer or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under the ordinance or to effect any variance from the ordinance. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and other official actions which shall be filled in the office of the board and shall be public records. The chairman of the board, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings shall be advertised in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 15.1-431. 
(b)	The zoning administrator is authorized to grant a variance from any building setback requirement contained in the zoning ordinance if the administrator finds in writing that: (i) the strict application of the ordinance would produce undue hardship; (ii) such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity; and (iii) the authorization of the variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and the character of the zoning district will not be changed by the granting of the variance. Prior to the granting of a variance, the zoning administrator shall give, or require the applicant to give, all adjoining property owners written notice of the request for variance, and an opportunity to respond to the request within 21 days of the date of the notice. If any adjoining property owner objects to said request in writing within the time specified above, the request shall be transferred to the board of zoning appeals for decision. 
    The zoning administrator shall respond within 90 days of a request for a decision or determination on zoning matters within the scope of his authority unless the requester has agreed to a longer period. 
(Code 1968, §§ 29-102(g), 29-104; Ord. of 1-4-2005)
State Law reference- Procedure on appeal, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-496.2; permitted provisions in zoning ordinances; amendments; applicant to pay delinquent taxes, § 15.2-2286. 
Sec. 90-496. - Certiorari to review decision of board. 
(a)	Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board of zoning appeals, or any taxpayer or any officer, department, board or bureau of the town, may present to the circuit court of the county a petition specifying the grounds on which aggrieved within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board. 
(b)	Upon the presentation of such petition, the court shall allow a writ of certiorari to review the decision of the board of zoning appeals and shall prescribe therein the time within which a return thereto must be made and served upon the relator's attorney, which shall not be less than ten days and may be extended by the court. The allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may, on application, on notice to the board and on due cause shown, grant a restraining order. 
(c)	The board of zoning appeals shall not be required to return the original papers acted upon by it but it shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies thereof or of such portions thereof as may be called for by such writ. The return shall concisely set forth such other facts as may be pertinent and material to show the grounds of the decision appealed from and shall be verified. 
(d)	If, upon the hearing, it shall appear to the court that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take evidence or appoint a commissioner to take such evidence as it may direct and report the same to the court with his findings of fact and conclusions of law, which shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the determination of the court shall be made. The court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision brought up for review. 
(e)	Costs shall not be allowed against the board, unless it shall appear to the court that it acted in bad faith or with malice in making the decision appealed from. If the decision of the board is affirmed and the court finds that the appeal was frivolous, the court may order the person who requested the issuance of the writ of certiorari to pay the costs incurred in making a return of the record pursuant to the writ of certiorari. 
(Code 1968, § 29-105)
State Law reference- Certiorari to review decision of board, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-497. 
Secs. 90-497-90-525. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 90-526. - Compliance of public employees, officials, etc., with permit issuance requirements; effect of permits issued in conflict with chapter. 
    Any departments, officials and public employees of this town who or which are vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. They shall issue permits for uses, buildings or purposes only when they are in harmony with the provisions of this chapter. Any such permit, if issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, shall be null and void. 
(Code 1968, § 29-106)
Sec. 90-527. - Exemption of public utilities corporations. 
    This chapter shall not apply to any existing or proposed buildings, or extension thereof, used or to be used by a public utility corporation, if, upon petition of the corporation, the state corporation commission shall, after a public hearing, decide that the present or proposed situation of the building in question is reasonably necessary for the convenience or welfare of the public. 
(Code 1968, § 29-108)
Sec. 90-528. - Penalty. 
    Any person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating, causing or permitting the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, may be fined not less than $10.00 nor more than $1,000.00. Such person shall be deemed to be guilty of a separate offense for each day during which any portion of any violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punishable as herein provided. 
(Code 1968, § 29-107)
State Law reference- Penalty for violation of zoning ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-491(e). 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1968 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections in the 1968 Code, as updated. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1968 Code
SectionSection
this Code1-1-1-5 1-1-1-5 2-1 2-1 2-2, 2-3 2-31, 2-32 2-5, 2-62-51, 2-52 2-8-2-162-53-2-61 2-172-101 2-182-1032-192-1022-202-86 2-21, 2-222-137, 2-138 2-232-136 2-24-2-272-166-2-169 2-28-2-422-196-2-210 2-43, 2-442-241, 2-242 2-45, 2-462-276, 2-277 2-47, 2-482-301, 2-302 3-1-3-510-1-10-5 3-5.1, 3-5.210-6, 10-7 3-6-3-810-36-10-38 3-9, 3-1010-61, 10-62 3.1-1, 3.1-278-126, 78-127 3.2-16-14-1-4-314-1-14-3 4-4, 4-514-31, 14-32 4-714-33 5-1, 5-222-1, 22-26-3-6-614-56-14-596-7-6-1614-81-14-906.1-1, 6.1-226-27, 26-28 6.1-326-26 6.1-4-6.1-1126-29-26-366.1-13-6.1-1526-37-26-397-11-7 7-1.11-8 7-21-9 7-338-17-41-6 8-130-1 8-1.130-29 8-2.1, 8-2.230-26, 30-27 8-930-28 11-1, 11-218-1, 18-2 11-3-11-2918-4-18-30 11-3018-3 11-31-11-3418-31-18-3411-3618-6611-36.118-6711-37-11-4318-68-18-7411-43.118-7511-44-11-5518-76-18-8711-5618-10111-5818-10211-67(a)-11-67(f)18-121-18-12611-67.118-12118-12711-69, 11-7018-128, 18-12911-7218-13011-73-11-8418-156-18-16711-85-11-8718-169-18-17111-87.118-16811-8818-3512-1.146-17 13-478-1 13-7-13-978-4-78-6 13-10, 13-1178-11, 78-12 13-13, 13-1478-13, 78-1413-15-13-1746-25-46-27 13-19.1, 13-19.278-85, 78-86 13-2078-2 13-2178-713-2278-913-2778-813-34-13-3778-51-78-54 13-37.178-55 13-3878-56 13-38.178-57 13-39-13-4178-58-78-60 13-4278-3 13-9178-20 13-9578-82 13-100, 13-10178-83, 78-84 13-102, 13-10378-96, 78-97 13-103.178-10 13-104-13-11178-98-78-105 13-11278-81 13-16278-1513-181.178-151 13-18278-152 14-1 46-1 14-2 46-21 14-3 46-5 14-4, 14-546-2, 46-3 14-646-6 14-846-9 14-926-86 14-1046-15 14-11, 14-1246-19, 46-20 14-1446-16 14-15, 14-1646-22, 46-23 14-1726-87 14-1846-18 14-1946-12 14-19.146-14 14-2046-11 14-2146-10 14-2678-19 14-2778-18 14-27.178-17 14-2846-28 14-2946-4 14-3046-7 14-31 46-24 14-31.146-12 14-32 46-8 14-33 46-13 14-3478-16 15-1-15-654-36-54-41 17-1-17-1438-26-38-39 17-15-17-1938-51-38-55 18-1, 18-2 50-36, 50-37 19-162-1 19-246-12 62-2 19-362-3 19-462-4, 62-5 19-5-19-962-5-62-9 19-10-19-1334-26-34-29 19-14, 19-1558-1, 58-2 19-15.134-30 19-16-19-1834-41-34-43 19-2034-44 20.1-1, 20.1-226-61, 26-62 21-1-21-466-1-66-4 21-5-21-766-36-66-38 21-846-12 21-9-21-1466-66-66-71 22-170-2 22-270-1 22-3-22-970-36-70-42 22-10-22-1470-76-70-80 22-15-22-2270-111-70-118 22-22.170-119 22-23-22-2970-120-70-126 22-30-22-3670-151-70-157 23-12-10423-2, 23-374-1, 74-2 23-474-4 23-574-3 23-6-23-874-31-74-33 23-8.174-34 23-9-23-1674-56-74-63 23-17-23-2074-86-74-89 23-21-23-3074-91-74-100 23.1-186-2623.1-2-23.1-1486-36-86-48 24-146-5124-246-52, 46-5324-3, 24-446-54, 46-5524-5, 24-646-67, 46-6824-746-6625-1-25-542-1-42-5 26-1-26-6 46-91-46-9627-182-1 27-2-27-1582-26-82-39 27-16-27-2082-51-82-55 27-20.182-56 27-21, 27-2282-57, 82-58 27-2382-40 27-24-27-2882-81-82-85 27-29-27-3282-96-82-99 27-33-27-3982-111-82-11727-40-27-4882-131-82-13927-49-27-5182-151-82-15327-51.182-15427-52-27-6082-155-82-16327-61-27-6682-186-82-19128-1-28-746-116-46-122 29-1, 29-290-1, 90-2 29-3-29-890-36-90-41 29-9-29-1190-86-90-88 29-13-29-1590-89-90-91 29-15.190-92 29-16, 29-1790-93, 90-94 29-18-29-2590-111-90-118 29-2690-120 29-27-29-3490-151-90-158 29-3590-160 29-36-29-4590-186-90-195 29-46-29-5590-221-90-230 29-56-29-5890-251-90-253 29-60-29-6690-254-90-260 29-66.1-29-66.390-276-90-278 29-66.5-
29-66.1190-279-90-285 29-75-29-8390-376-90-384 29-84, 29-8590-386, 90-387 29-85.190-388 29-86-29-8890-389-90-391 29-89-29-9290-431-90-434 29-94-29-9790-461-90-464 29-97.190-465 29-98, 29-9990-467, 90-468 29-100, 29-10190-491, 90-492 29-102(a)-(f)90-493 29-102(g)90-495 29-103-29-10590-494-90-496 29-10690-526 29-10790-528 29-10890-527  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1968 Code, as updated. Prior ordinances were incorporated into the 1968 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance
NumberDateSectionSection
this Code8-1-8929-3990-189 29-4990-224 2-5-90(1)29-8390-384 10-2-90(1)74-9710-2-90(2)23-1874-87 10-2-90(3)23-20.174-90 12-4-90(1)29-8390-384 12-4-90(2)29-8290-383 2-5-91(2)13-878-5 3-5-9113-3578-52 4-2-91(1)29-83.190-385 4-2-91(2)90-1 4-2-91(3)29-34.190-159 4-2-91(4)29-3490-158 4-2-91(5)29-3390-157 4-2-91(6)29-3190-155 4-2-91(7)29-3090-154 4-2-91(8)29-25.190-119 4-2-91(9)29-2590-118 4-2-91(10)29-2490-117 4-2-91(11)29-2290-115 4-2-91(13)29-2190-114 6-4-91(1)14-446-2 6-4-91(2)7-1.11-8 6-4-91(3)2.226-62 7-2-91(1)13-4278-3 7-2-91(2)70-38 7-2-91(3)70-36 7-2-91(4)14-2678-19 7-2-91(5)14-2046-11 7-2-91(6)14-1846-18 7-2-91(8)14-1046-15 7-2-91(9)46-9 7-2-91(11)14-646-6 7-2-91(12)14-546-3 7-2-91(13)14-3 46-5 7-2-91(14)14-2 46-21 7-2-91(15)14-1 46-1 9-3-91(2)29-97.290-466 9-3-91(3)23-374-2 4461-7-921.1-1.490-297-90-300 1.690-303art. II90-296 3.1-3.490-321-90-324 4.1-4.590-336-90-340 art. V, art. VI90-301, 90-302 4613-3-9226-27.1 4624-7-9246-27.1 4634-7-9278-87 4644-7-9246-27.1 4656-2-9290-392 4677-7-9278-3 4687-7-9246-9411-3-9222-1470-80(c) 2-2-93Adopting Ordinance, pg. ix4-6-932-311 6-1-93(1)34-30.1 6-1-93(2)74-87 7-6-93(1)78-3 7-6-93(2)78-88 10-5-93     Rpld26-29(10)11-2-93(1)78-89 11-2-93(2)78-1067-5-9478-3 10-4-94(1)     Added90-384(b)(9A) 10-4-94(2)     Added90-384(b)(11) 4-4-95(1)90-94 90-120 90-160 4-4-95(2)90-387(p) 5-2-95(1)     Added90-161-90-171 5-2-95(2)90-391(a) 6-6-9578-18 7-11-9578-3 8-1-9590-377(c)(2) 12-5-9582-1576-4-9674-57(b) 7-2-96(1)     Added34-31 7-2-96(2)78-3 9-3-96(1)90-1 9-3-96(2)90-384(b)(12) 9-3-96(3)90-376(h)(3) 9-3-96(4)90-383(5)c., d. 10-1-9690-384(b)(13) 12- 3-96ch. 18  2- 4-9790-380(3)a.  6- 3-97(1)     Added30-41-30-48  6- 3-97(2)78-18  7- 1-97(1)78-3  7- 1-97(2)78-3  9- 2-97(1)90-381  9- 2-97(2)90-376(e)  1- 6-98(1)10-37(a)  1- 6-98(2)     Added18-11  1- 6-98(3)     Added18-12  3- 3-98(1)     Added46-123  3- 3-98(2)90-385(1), (2)  4- 7-9878-56, 78-58 10- 6-9818-9(1)i. 12- 1-98(1)18-9 12- 1-98(2)18-9(1) 12- 1-98(3)74-2 12- 1-98(4)90-1  1- 5-9990-386  5- 2-2000     Added10-39  5- 2-2000     Added90-95  5- 2-2000     Added90-121  5- 2-2000     Added90-160.1  5- 2-200090-384(11)a.b.  6-26-200074-86-74-92 10-17-2000     Added74-64-74-67 11- 7-2000 78-89(a) 11- 7-2000      Added78-90 11- 7-2000      Rpld78-96-78-106  1- 2-2001     Added78-61  4- 3-2001     Added66-80  3- 6-2001     Added74-101-74-112  9- 4-200134-30(a)  9- 4-200134-30.1(a) 10- 2-2001     Rpld38-3911- 6-2001 26-26 11- 6-2001 26-27.1 11- 6-2001 26-28 11- 6-2001 26-29(7)11- 6-2001 26-30(a)11- 6-2001 26-32(a)(1)11- 6-2001 26-3311- 6-2001 26-3411- 6-2001 26-39(a) 1-8-200262-4(a)(b)  4- 2-200274-5  4- 2-200290-384(b)(11A)  9- 3-200274-113-74-127  9- 3-200290-386  7- 1-2003     Rpld78-2, 78-7-78-9 78-10, 78-11(b)      Rpld78-13-78-15, 78-20 78-81      Rpld78-83, 78-84 78-85(a)      Rpld78-86 78-89(d)  7- 1-20031.190-2871.290-298 1.390-299 1.490-300 1.590-304art. II90-296 3.190-321 3.290-322 3.390-323 3.490-324 4.190-336 4.290-337 4.390-338 4.490-339 art. V90-301 art. VI90-302 11-12-200378-96-78-101 12- 2-200390-187(1)  3- 2-200490-1  5- 4-200426-88-26-93  5- 4-200430-2  6-17-2004     Added90-38(c)  7- 6-200478-85  9- 7-2004     Added26-100-26-105  1- 4-200590-495  1- 4-200590-1 90-112(5) 90-115(a)(c) 90-117(a)(c) 90-118(a)(c) 90-119 90-152(7) 90-155(a)(c) 90-157(a)(c) 90-158(a)(c) 90-159  2- 7-200690-95  2- 7-200690-121  2- 7-200690-160.1  2- 7-200690-196  2- 7-200690-231  5- 2-200690-1 90-160 90-166 90-194 90-229 90-258 90-380 90-381(8)a  5- 2-200690-378  6- 6-200690-378  6- 6-200690-1  7- 1-2006     Rpld78-2, 78-7-78-9 78-10 78-11(b)      Rpld78-13-78-1578-20 78-81      Rpld78-83, 78-84 78-85(a)      Rpld78-86 78-89(d)  8- 1-200690-385  8- 1-200690-1 90-224(1) 90-26190-286 90-381  8- 1-200626-61 8- 1-200678-20  8- 2-200690-222(21)  8- 2-200678-89(a)  8- 2-200690-1 90-377      Rpld90-383(1) 90-384(a)(1) 10- 3-200682-81 10- 3-200690-384(b)(12) 10- 3-200682-157-82-160 4- 3-200746-29  4- 3-200782-157-82-160 6-28-200774-103  6-28-200774-114 11- 6-2007 34-41-34-44 11- 6-2007 26-30(e)11- 6-2007 66-3 11- 6-2007 74-6-74-13 12- 4-200770-36(f) 12- 4-200770-40  3- 4-200862-8  3- 4-200874-6-74-13  3- 4-200882-54, 82-57  3- 4-200882-56  5- 6-200890-376(h)(4)  5- 6-200890-385(2)a  6- 3-2008     Rpld82-81-82-85 82-96-82-99 82-111-82-11782-131-82-13982-151-82-163 6- 3-200881-82, 81-8282-90-82-96 82-106-82-109 82-116-82-126 82-136-82-143 82-206-82-210 82-221-82-227 82-236-82-238 82-246-82-252 82-261, 82-262 82-271-82-277  3- 3-200990-434(1)  5- 5-200990-378(g)  5- 5-200990-385(2)b  6- 2-200978-3  8- 4-20092-311  8- 4-200930-30-30-32  9- 1-200910-40  9- 1-200990-377(b)(7) 90-383(1)  9- 2-200982-246  2- 2-201060-1-60-10  6- 1-201078-3  6- 1-201078-151  8- 3-201090-467.1  1- 4-201146-28  4- 5-201190-378(h)  5- 3-201190-388  6- 7-201126-1, 26-2  6- 7-2011     Rpld26-26 26-28      Rpld26-29-26-39 6- 7-2011     Rpld26-61, 26-62 26-63-26-65  6- 7-201162-4(a), 62-5 62-7, 62-8  6- 7-201162-20-62-25  6- 7-201178-3  9- 6-201182-65-82-71 11- 1-2011 90-1 90-384, 90-386  5- 3-201190-388  4- 3-2012(1)[A.]     Added90-348 [B.]     Added90-349 [C.]     Added90-350 [D.]     Added90-351 [E.]     Added90-352 [F.]     Added90-353 [G.]     Added90-354 [H.]     Added90-355 [I.]     Added90-356 [J.]     Added90-357 [K.]     Added90-358  4- 3-2012(2)90-384(b)(9)  5- 1-201290-1 90-114 90-390  6- 5-201278-3  7- 3-201274-114 10- 2-2012(1)     Rpld86-2686-36-86-38      Rpld86-39 86-40      Rpld86-41, 86-42 86-43-86-45      Rpld86-46, 86-47 86-48 10- 2-2012(2)     Added2-320 10- 2-2012(3)90-252      Rpld90-261 3-19-2013     Rpld74-6-74-13      Added74-14, 74-15  4- 2-201390-387(n) 90-387(p) 90-387(r)  6- 4-201378-3  9- 3-201390-1 90-154 90-390  1- 7-2014(1)1-2 1-4, 1-5 1-8      Added1-12, 1-13  1- 7-2014(2)     Rpld2-53      Rpld2-102-2-1042-197      Rpld2-200-2-202      Rpld2-207  1- 7-2014(3)     Rpldch. 6  1- 7-2014(4)     Rpld14-2      Rpldart. III §§ 14-56-14-90 3- 4-2014(1)     Rpldch. 22, §§ 22-1, 22-2  3- 4-2014(2)26-102(a)  3- 4-2014(3)     Added30-42.1      Rpld30-43, 30-44      Rpld30-46, 30-47  5- 6-2014(1)     Rpld38-1     Rpld38-33-38-38 38-51      Rpld38-55  5- 6-2014(2)     Rpld46-1-46-3      Rpld46-5-46-11      Rpld46-13-46-16      Rpld46-18-46-27.1      Rpldart. II, art. III46-116      Rpld46-117      Rpld46-120-46-122  6- 3-201478-3  7- 1-2014(1)58-1(d) 58-2(c)  7- 1-2014(2)     Added60-7.1  7- 1-2014(3)     Rpld66-2 66-3 66-4(a) 66-36, 66-37  7- 1-2014(4)74-1  8- 5-201466-36-66-38      Added66-39, 66-40  9- 2-201478-10 78-87 10- 8-2014     Rpld82-27      Rpld82-29, 82-30 82-32, 82-33 82-35, 82-36      Rpld82-37 82-38 82-54 82-65 82-67 82-71 82-120  6- 2-201578-3  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Code of Virginia. 
Code of
Virginia
SectionSection
this Code1-13.31-2 1-13.5-1-13.71-2 1-13.91-5 1-13.131-2 1-13.15, 1-13.161-2 1-13.191-2 1-13.231-2 1-13.261-2 1-13.28, 1-13.291-2 1-13.321-2 1-17.11-3 2.1-340 et seq.Ch. 2 2.1-343, 2.1-3442-31 3.1-723 et seq.Ch. 10 3.1-796.66 et seq.      Ch. 10 3.1-796.8610-62 3.1-796.9310-36 3.1-796.97:110-62 3.1-796.9810-61 3.1-796.100Ch. 10, Art. II, Div. 2 10-38 3.1-796.12110-5 3.1-796.12210-4 3.1-796.122 et seq.      Ch. 10 3.1-796.127,
3.1-796.128Ch. 10 3.1-1011 et seq.Ch. 34 9-179 et seq.Ch. 38 9-179-9-18138-29 10.1-560 et seq.Ch. 26, Art. II 26-64 10.1-56526-3510.1-603.1 et seq.      Ch. 26, Art. III 10.1-603.2 et seq.26-64 10.1-1100 et seq.Ch. 30 10.1-1200 et seq.Ch. 26 10.1-140062-1 10.1-1400 et seq.Ch. 62 10.1-141462-1 10.1-1419 et seq.46-12 10.1-142446-12 10.1-143362-1 13.1-501 et seq.18-1 15-77.1-
15-77.70Char., § 4 15.1-1 et seq.Ch. 2 15.1-7Ch. 2, Art. II 15.1-1134-26 Ch. 62 15.1-11.134-30 15.1-11.2Ch. 14 Ch. 30 15.1-11.4Ch. 14 15.1-131-7 Pt. 2, Ch. 1 Ch. 2, Art. III 2-137 15.1-14Ch. 78 15.1-14(1)Ch. 66 15.1-14(5)Ch. 26, Art. IV Ch. 30 Ch. 34 15.1-14(6)Ch. 30 15.1-14(9)Ch. 66 Ch. 66, Art. II 15.1-15Ch. 50 15.1-15(1)Ch. 14 Ch. 30 15.1-15(2)-
15.1-15(5)Ch. 30 15.1-16Ch. 66 Ch. 78 15.1-28Ch. 58 15.1-28.1Ch. 62 15.1-28.246-4 15.1-28.02,
15.1-28.03Ch. 62 15.1-29.1:1Ch. 10 15.1-29.15Ch. 46, Art. IV 15.1-33.1Ch. 90 15.1-33.446-17 15.1-37 et seq.Ch. 82 15.1-37.31-1 1-11 Ch. 70 15.1-3838-28 15.1-38 et seq.Ch. 2, Art. III 15.1-50(A)(1)Ch. 2, Art. V 15.1-51Ch. 2, Art. II, Ch. 2, Art. III 15.1-52Ch. 2, Art. III 15.1-131 et seq.Ch. 38 15.1-131.7Ch. 38, Art. II, Div. 2 38-26 15.1-131.838-29 15.1-135.1Ch. 38, Art. II, Div. 2 15.1-136.1 et seq.      Ch. 38 15.1-137 et seq.Ch. 38 15.1-138Ch. 38, Art. II 38-32 15.1-140.146-8 15.1-159.238-30 15.1-159.2 et seq.      Ch. 38 15.1-159.538-30 15.1-159.82-1 15.1-159.8 et seq.      2-199 15.1-239 et seq.Ch. 66 15.1-271 et seq.Ch. 50 15.1-291Ch. 50 15.1-292Ch. 82, Art. III 82-39 15.1-292 et seq.Ch. 82 15.1-317 et seq.Ch. 82 Ch. 82, Art. III 15.1-320 et seq.Ch. 82, Art. III 15.1-332.1 et seq.      Ch. 82 15.1-363 et seq.Ch. 66 15.1-42790-2 15.1-427 et seq.Ch. 54 15.1-427.154-36 15.1-427.1 et seq.      70-37 15.1-43070-1 90-390 15.1-430(p)90-492 15.1-43170-41 70-156 90-464 90-468 90-492 90-495 15.1-43754-37-54-40 15.1-437 et seq.70-37 15.1-44454-41 15.1-46570-1, 70-2 15.1-465 et seq.Ch. 70 15.1-466Ch. 70, Art. IV 15.1-466(A)(1)Ch. 70, Art. III 15.1-466(A)(3)70-36 15.1-466(A)(5)70-40 15.1-466(A)(8)70-42 15.1-466(A)(9)Ch. 70, Art. II 15.1-466(B)70-151 15.1-466.1Ch. 42 15.1-473Ch. 70, Art. II 15.1-473(d)70-153 15.1-474Ch. 70, Art. II 15.1-475Ch. 70, Art. III 70-41 15.1-476, 15.1-47770-77 15.1-47870-112 70-154 15.1-486 et seq.Ch. 90 15.1-486, 15.1-48790-2 15.1-488Ch. 90 90-2 Ch. 90, Art. III 15.1-48990-2 15.1-49090-2 Ch. 90, Art. III 15.1-49190-2 15.1-491(d)90-1 15.1-491(e)90-528 15.1-491(g)90-468 15.1-491.1 et seq.      90-390 15.1-49290-2 15.1-49390-2 90-468 15.1-49490-2 15.1-494 et seq.Ch. 90, Art. VI, Div. 2 15.1-49590-2 90-492 15.1-49690-2 15.1-496.1,
15.1-496.290-494, 90-495 15.1-49790-2 90-496 15.1-49890-2 Ch. 90 15.1-50434-31(b) 15.1-792 et seq.Ch. 2 15.1-794Ch. 2, Art. III 15.1-7952-166 15.1-800Ch. 2, Art. II 15.1-826Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 2 15.1-826 et seq.Ch. 2 15.1-829Ch. 2, Art. II 15.1-831Ch. 2, Art. III 15.1-832Ch. 2, Art. II 2-32 15.1-836.2Char., § 3 15.1-837-15.1-839Char., § 4 15.1-840Char., § 4 1-7 15.1-841Char., § 4 Ch. 74 Ch. 74, Art. IV 15.1-842-15.1-845Char., § 4 15.1-846Char., § 4 Ch. 14 15.1-847-15.1-853Char., § 4 15.1-854Char., § 4 Ch. 82 15.1-855Char., § 4 Ch. 82 Ch. 82, Art. III 15.1-856Char., § 4 Ch. 82 15.1-857Char., § 4 Ch. 62 15.1-858Char., § 4 Ch. 50 15.1-859Char., § 4 15.1-860Char., § 4 Ch. 22 15.1-861-15.1-864Char., § 4 15.1-865Char., § 4 30-28 15.1-866Char., § 4 Ch. 58 15.1-867Char., § 4 Ch. 14 Ch. 26, Art. IV Ch. 34 Ch. 34, Art. II, Div. 2 34-26 66-3 15.1-868Char., § 4 15.1-869Char., § 4 Ch. 14 15.1-870Char., § 4 Ch. 10 10-4 15.1-871Char., § 4 Ch. 50 15.1-872Char., § 4 Ch. 30 15.1-873Char., § 4 15.1-874Char., § 4 Ch. 50 15.1-875Char., § 4 Ch. 82 15.1-876Char., § 4 Ch. 82 Ch. 82, Art. III 15.1-877Char., § 4 Ch. 82 15.1-878-15.1-882Char., § 4 15.1-883Char., § 4 Ch. 22 15.1-884Char., § 4 Ch. 78, Art. III 15.1-885-15.1-888Char., § 4 15.1-888 et seq.Ch. 66 15.1-889, 15.1-890Char., § 4 Ch. 66 15.1-891Char., § 4 Ch. 78 15.1-892Char., § 4 15.1-893, 15.1-894Char., § 4 Ch. 66 15.1-895Char., § 4 Ch. 82 15.1-896-15.1-900Char., § 4 15.1-901, 15.1-902Char., § 4 1-7 15.1-903, 15.1.904Char., § 4 15.1-905Char., § 4 1-7 15.1-906, 15.1-907Char., § 4 15.1-1031.1, 15.1-1031.2Char., § 3 15.1-1400 et seq.Ch. 54 15.2-901ch. 34, art. II, div. 2 15.2-908ch. 26, art. V 15.2-1115ch. 34, art. II, div. 2 66-3 15.2-228690-495 15.2-2286(b)90-467.1 15.2-2292.190-378(h) 15.2-229890-38(c) 17-69.1Ch. 66 18.2-1 et seq.Ch. 46 18.2-91-7 18.2-11-18.2-131-7 18.2-51.1Ch. 38 18.2-8346-5318.2-132-18.2-13646-9118.2-13726-92(a) 18.2-13826-92(a) 18.2-174Ch. 38 18.2-175Ch. 38 38-31 18.2-212Ch. 30 46-4 46-5318.2-230.1 et seq.      6-118.2-266 et seq.78-3 18.2-28046-116 18.2-28646-116 18.2-323Ch. 10 18.2-32446-12 18.2-340.86-118.2-36146-22 18.2-403.1 et seq.      Ch. 10 18.2-461Ch. 38 18.2-51010-5 tit. 18.2, ch. 7, art. 278-3 19.2-1 et seq.Ch. 38 19.2-8Ch. 14 19.2-12 et seq.Ch. 38 19.2-71 et seq.Ch. 38 19.2-76.2Ch. 62 20-10346-9124.1-90Char., § 4a 27-1 et seq.Ch. 30 27-730-1 27-94 et seq.Ch. 30 tit. 29.1Ch. 10 32.1-34Ch. 34 32.1-48.1 et seq.Ch. 10, Art. II, Div. 2 32.1-163 et seq.Ch. 82 32.1-16782-271 33.1-25 et seq.Ch. 66 33.1-34646-12 Ch. 62 33.1-346.1Ch. 62 33.1-347Ch. 62 33.1-348Ch. 58 35.1-1 et seq.Ch. 42 36-70 et seq.Ch. 14 Ch. 42 36-85.2 et seq.Ch. 42 36-85.16 et seq.Ch. 42 36-97 et seq.Ch. 14 14-31 36-98Ch. 14 36-99.1Ch. 14 36-105Ch. 14 tit. 38.260-1 40.1-79.130-2 40.1-117 et seq.Ch. 14 42.1-76 et seq.Ch. 70 46.1-20478-20 tit. 46.278-3 46.2-1001-2 34-30 46.2-100 et seq.Ch. 78 90-1 46.2-22078-4 46.2-310Ch. 86 46.2-472 et seq.Ch. 86 46.2-600 et seq.Ch. 78, Art. II 46.2-694Ch. 86 46.2-711Ch. 86 46.2-75278-51 78-56 78-58, 78-59 46.2-752 et seq.Ch. 78, Art. II, Div. 2 46.2-75578-53 46.2-90078-152 46.2-93646-12 46.2-94178-89(b) 78-10446.2-105278-54 46.2-1200 et seq.34-31 46.2-121330-32 46.2-1220Ch. 78, Art. III, Div. 2 46.2-123978-82 46.2-1300 et seq.Ch. 78 46.2-131378-3 49-1Ch. 2, Art. III 38-28 49-91-2 tit. 54.1Ch. 18 54.1-1100 et seq.Ch. 14 55-202 et seq.Ch. 10 55-248.41 et seq.Ch. 42 56-14Ch. 66 56-257 et seq.Ch. 66 56-274Ch. 86 56-291.1 et seq.Ch. 86 56-468.166-80 56-59474-64 tit. 58.1, ch. 3718-1 58.1-1574-34 58.1-1200 et seq.Ch. 74, Art. II 74-32, 74-33 58.1-120174-31 58.1-120474-32 58.1-120574-31 58.1-120774-33 58.1-1209Ch. 74, Art. II 58.1-121174-32, 74-33 58.1-121274-33 58.1-121674-34 58.1-1821, 58.1-1822     18-6(c) 58.1-290174-65(c), 74-66(c) 58.1-3000 et seq.Ch. 74 58.1-3005-58.1-3007Ch. 74 58.1-3213(D)74-8 58.1-321474-6 58.1-350474-3 58.1-3700 et seq.Ch. 18 58.1-370118-1, 18-10 58.1-370918-4(b) 58.1-381374-65(i), 74-66 58.1-381474-65(a) 58.1-3714.B18-1 58.1-371518-1, 18-3(a) 18-4(a)(1) 58.1-3717, 58.1-3718,58.1-3719.118-9(1)m. 58.1-372818-3(a), 74-65 58.1-3814Ch. 74, Art. III 58.1-3814.F. G.74-65(c), 74-66(a) 58.1-3814.H74-66(c) 58.1-3840Ch. 74, Art. IV 58.1-398418-6(c) 74-9758.1-3900 et seq.Ch. 18 58.1-390318-5(b) 58.1-3910 et seq.2-302 58.1-390674-92 58.1-391618-3(f) 58.1-3940 et seq.18-5(c), 34-31(d) 58.1-3965 et seq.34-31(d) 58.1-398418-5(c) Ch. 74 58.1-391674-2 59.1-137 et seq.Ch. 30 59.1-142 et seq.Ch. 30 30-29 62.1-44.2 et seq.Ch. 82 62.1-44.85(8)90-2  
