BARRE TOWN CODE OF BARRE, VERMONT 
____________ 
CONTAINING THE CHARTER AND GENERAL  
ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN 
____________ 
Adopted December 1, 1987  
Effective January 1, 1988 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Board of Selectmen 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF BARRE, VERMONT 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Nathaniel J. Tupper  
Town Manager 
____________ 
Richard Jensen, Chairman  
Bruce Haskell  
W. John Mitchell, III  
Raymond Carrier  
William Scott  
Board of Selectmen 
____________ 
Daniel T. Monte  
City Attorney 
____________ 
Ruth Finn  
Town Clerk-Treasurer 
PREFACE 
    This Code is a codification of the ordinances of the Town of Barre of a general and permanent 
nature. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various 
sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related 
sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing 
the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this 
volume. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal 
codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the 
dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section 
within the chapter. Thus, the first section of chapter 3 is numbered 3-1 and the fourth section of chapter 1 
is 1-4. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or 
even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for 
amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come 
between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 3-1.1, 3-1.2 
and 3-1.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner If the new material is to be 
included between chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the 
alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new 
divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the 
chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article 
embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
    The indices of the Code have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been 
placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal 
terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are 
numerous cross references within index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item 
in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf 
system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-
date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the 
appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of 
copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete 
pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into this Code, may be cited as a part hereof. 
    The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder 
of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have 
the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the 
publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, 
in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    The publication of this Code was under direct supervision of Jan N. Shekitka, Supervising Editor, of 
the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of 
the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publishers are most grateful to Mr. Nathaniel Tupper, Town Manager, Ms. Ruth Finn, Town 
Clerk-Treasurer and Mr. Dan Monte, Town Attorney for their cooperation and assistance during the 
progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted 
in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and 
which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION  
Tallahassee, Florida 
BARRE TOWN CODE ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the Town of Barre, Vermont; Providing for the 
Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; 
Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This 
Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
The Selectmen of the Town of Barre Hereby Ordain: 
    Section?1.? The Code entitled "Barre Town Code" published by Municipal Code Corporation 
consisting of Chapters 1 through 8, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section?2.? All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before March 17, 
1987, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are 
repealed. 
    Section?3.? The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any 
ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this 
ordinance. 
    Section?4.? The ordinances of the town are substantively amended, revised or altered as follows: 
(1) ?A new chapter entitled "General Provisions" consisting of Sections 1-1 through 1-13 has been 
added. 
(2) ?The specific penalty provided in the Ordinance of November 5, 1985, ( Rabies Ordinance ) 
Section 6, is deleted. 
(3) ?The last sentence of the Ordinance of May 14, 1974, ( Ambulance Ordinance ) Article 3, has 
been changed to read "costs and attorney's fees pursuant to Section 33(a) and (b) of the Town 
Charter." 
(4) ?The specific penalty in the Ordinance of November 11, 1975, ( Winter Ordinance ) Section 1 is 
deleted. 
(5) ?The definitions of "person," "shall," and "may" of the Ordinance of February 28, 1985, ( Sewer 
Use Ordinance ) Article 1, Sections 8 and 18 are deleted. 
(6) ?The general repealer language in the Ordinance of February 28, 1985, ( Sewer Use Ordinance 
) Article XI, Section 1 is deleted. 
(7) ?The penalty language in the Ordinance of November 11, 1975, ( Winter Ordinance ) Section 1, 
has been revised to read, "Violators shall be punished as provided by the general penalty in 
Part I, the Charter, Section 37(j)." 
(8) ?The summary of 24 VSA Chapter, 129 included in the Ordinance of November 16, 1982, ( 
Sterling Hill Water Ordinance ) Section A(7), has been deleted. 
    Section?5.? Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of 
any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, 
shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a single offense, or in the 
case of a continuing offense, a fine not to exceed the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for 
each day a violation shall continue unabated. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such 
violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless 
another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not 
such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the 
Board of Selectmen may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and 
revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section?6. ?Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form to indicate the intention 
of the Board of Selectmen to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in 
the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section?7. ?Ordinances adopted after March 17, 1987 that amend or refer to ordinances that have 
been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section?8. ?This ordinance shall become effective January 1, 1988. 
    Dated at Town of Barre, Washington County, State of Vermont, this 1st day of December, 1987. 
BARRE TOWN BOARD OF SELECTMEN 
Richard N. Jensen       
Bruce S. Haskell       
William Scott       
W. John Mitchell II       
Raymond A. Carrier       


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have 
been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent 
nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and 
permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be 
able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. 
Date  
Adopted 
Included/  
Omitted 
Supp. No. 
Ord. of 
?7-?6-10 
Included 
15 
Ord. of 
?6-22-10 
Included 
15 
Ord. of 
?6-29-10 
Included 
15 
Ord. of 
?8-?3-10 
Omitted 
15 
Ord. of 
12-21-10 
Included 
15 
M-3(H.335) 
?4-?4-11 
Included 
15 
Ord. of 
?5-24-11 
Included 
15 
Ord. of 
?9-20-11 
Included 
16 
Ord. of 
?9-11-12 
Included 
16 
Ord. of 
10-23-12 
Included 
16 
Ord. of 
?2-12-13 
Included 
16 
Ord. of 
10-21-14 
Included 
17 
M-2(H.10) 
?2-25-15 
Included 
17 
Ord. of 
?4-21-15 
Included 
18 
Ord. of 
?4-28-15 
Included 
18 
Ord. of 
11-10-15 
Included 
18 
Ord. of 
?1-26-16 
Included 
18 
Ord. of 
?9-27-16 
Included 
18 
Ord. of 
?6-13-17 
Included 
18 
Ord. of 
10-?3-17 
Included 
19 
 


PART I - TOWN CHARTER[1] 
PREFACE 
    Under authority granted by the General Assembly of the State of Vermont, the voters of the Town of 
Barre hereby adopt a new Charter for the following purposes: 
(a) ?To clarify the structure and organization of town government; 
(b) ?To define the duties and responsibilities of town officers, officials and employees; 
(c) ?To establish procedural requirements for the proper transaction of town business; and 
(d) ?To provide for the citizens of the Town of Barre a unified and more convenient reference than 
is now available with respect to the basic laws affecting local government. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— This Charter replaces the Charter granted to the Town of Wildersburgh petitioned for by 
Colonel William Williams and his associates and granted by Governor Thomas Chittenden on August 12, 
1781. Wildersburgh later became the Town of Barre and its Charter was amended on several occasions. 
This amendment, in effect a new Charter, represents the first major departure from the Charter granted by 
Governor Chittenden and was approved by the voters of the Town of Barre on Tuesday, November 5, 
1974. Amendments to the 1974 Charter have been worked into their proper places and are indicated by 
history notes in parentheses at the end of affected sections. 
State Law reference— Authority of general assembly to grant charters, Vt. Const. Ch. II, §§ 6, 69. 


CHAPTER 1. - TOWN OFFICERS RESPONSIBLE TO CITIZENS: TOWN MEETINGS 


Section 1 - Authority of Citizens 
    All governmental authority of the Town of Barre rests with the citizens of the town, who exercise their 
powers in town meeting, and/or town elections, and to whom the elected and appointed officers of the 
town are ultimately responsible. 


Section 2 - Meetings and Elections 
(a) ?The second Tuesday in May shall be the date for the annual election of town officers and for voting 
upon all questions to be decided by Australian ballot. Polls shall be open no less than nine (9) 
consecutive hours. The selectboard may designate one (1) or more polling places within the town for 
voting and may provide for the use of any mechanical or computer type devices for voting or 
counting votes, consistent with requirements of law. The Wednesday evening preceding the date for 
the annual election of the town officers, beginning at 7:30 p.m. at a place designated by the Barre 
Town Selectboard, shall be the date of the annual meeting at which time there will be considered all 
non-Australian ballot matters. However, the voters at any annual election may designate a different 
date, time or place for annual town elections. 
(b) ?Special town meetings or elections 
(1) ?may be called by a majority of the selectmen or 
(2) ?shall be called by the town clerk upon receipt by him of a petition signed by at least ten (10) 
percent of the voters. The petition shall specify the business to be transacted at such meeting. 
The meeting shall be held within sixty (60) days from the date the petition is filed with the clerk. 
(c) ?The budget proposal, established by the selectmen in accordance with Section 28, shall be 
submitted to the electorate at the annual election. If this proposal fails, the town clerk shall 
immediately warn an open Town meeting, at which the budget shall be determined without a 
subsequent Australian ballot election. Section 5 on reconsiderations, shall not apply to budget votes. 
(Amended 11-29-83, 5-14-85; Amended 4-4-11, Act. No. M-3) 


Section 3 - Warnings 
(a) ?Public notice of every annual or special town meeting or town election shall be given by a warning 
posted at the municipal building, on the official town website, and at three (3) public places in the 
town, as designated by the selectboard, at least fourteen (14) days prior to the meeting; and 
published two (2) times, on the same day of the week for two (2) consecutive weeks, in a newspaper 
having general circulation in the town. The first such publication shall be at least ten (10) days prior 
to the date of the meeting. 
(b) ?The warning shall: 
1. ?State the date, time and place of the meeting; 
2. ?Be signed by a majority of the selectmen; 
3. ?Specifically indicate by separate articles what business is to be transacted at the meeting; 
4. ?Contain any article approved by the selectmen; 
5. ?Contain any article requested by petition signed by at least ten (10) percent of the voters and 
filed with the town clerk at least forty-five (45) days prior to the day of the meeting, and 
6. ?State that copies of the proposed budget shall be available as required by Section 28(b). 
(Amended 11-29-83; Amended 4-4-11, Act. No. M-3; Amended 2-25-15, Act. No. M-2) 


Section 4 - Conduct 
(a) ?The moderator shall preside at all town meetings, but in the moderator's absence, the town clerk 
shall call the meeting to order, and the first order of business shall be the election of a moderator pro 
tempore to preside for the duration of the meeting. The moderator shall conduct every meeting 
according to this charter, the laws of Vermont and Robert's Rules of Order, Revised, when not in 
conflict with this charter or the laws of Vermont. He shall preserve order in the conduct of the 
business of the meeting and in all things preserve the principles of fairness and openness in town 
government. 
(b) ?The town clerk shall be the presiding official at all town elections and shall cooperate with the board 
of civil authority to assure that all laws relating to elections are faithfully observed. While the polls are 
open, the town clerk may rule on all questions concerning the conduct of the election, and shall not 
be disqualified from performing any such duties by reason of his own candidacy for any office. In the 
town clerk's absence, the members of the board of civil authority who are present may designate one 
of their members to perform the town clerk's duties under this section. 


Section 5 - Reconsideration of Actions Taken 
    A question considered at any town meeting or election may not be submitted to the voters for 
reconsideration or rescission except at a subsequent annual meeting or special meeting or election, 
specifically warned for the purpose and called by the selectmen by a resolution or by the town clerk 
pursuant to a petition requesting such reconsideration or rescission. Such petition must be signed by not 
less than ten (10) percent of the voters and filed with the town clerk within thirty (30) days following the 
date of the meeting or election at which the question was first considered. The clerk shall call for a vote in 
accordance with the petition within sixty (60) days of the date of filing. The manner of reconsideration 
shall be the same manner by which a question was originally considered. A question voted on or 
considered shall not be presented for reconsideration or rescission more than one (1) time; provided, 
however, that after the passing of at least eight (8) months from the date of any such reconsideration or 
rescission, the same or a similar question may be newly submitted for consideration. Unless rescinded as 
provided in this section, any vote or action lawfully taken at a town meeting or election shall remain in 
effect indefinitely. 
(Amended 11-29-83) 


Section 6 - Board of Civil Authority 
(a) ?A board of civil authority shall consist of the justices of the peace residing within the town, the town 
clerk, and the selectmen. At the first meeting following each annual town election, the board shall 
elect a chairman from among its members; the town clerk shall be the clerk of the board. In the event 
of the absence of either the chairman or clerk from any meeting of the board, the first order of 
business shall be the election of a chairman or clerk, pro tempore, to serve for the balance of the 
meeting. 
(b) ?The board of civil authority shall meet prior to every regular or special town meeting or election to 
prepare, revise and post in the manner required by law, an alphabetical list of all the legal voters in 
the town. For that purpose the board shall have access to any books or lists belonging to the town, 
except as provided by law, and may require the assistance of any of the town officers. The board 
shall post in five (5) places an attested copy of the list of voters so prepared and corrected, at least 
four (4) days prior to the meeting or election, and the said list of voters so prepared and corrected, 
and no others, shall be used at annual or special meetings and elections. In preparing the list of 
voters the board shall record each name in such manner as to identify each voter precisely, so as to 
avoid any possible confusion. 
(c) ?In addition to any other requirement of law, the board shall cause at least two (2) notices of the time 
and place of each of its meetings for the purpose of revising the checklist to be published in a 
newspaper of general circulation in the town. Publication shall be at least two (2) and not more than 
ten (10) days prior to such meeting, but no notice need be published with respect to an adjourned 
session of a meeting for which notice has been given. 
(d) ?The board shall assist the town clerk and moderator in supervising all town elections and meetings 
and shall take care that all laws and requirements relating to elections and election procedures and 
town meetings are fully and faithfully kept. The board may require the presence of any law 
enforcement officers it may judge necessary to preserve the integrity of any election or town 
meeting. 
(e) ?A majority of all of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum for all purposes. 
(f) ?Ballots, conduct of elections, counting of votes, recount of votes, and certification of results shall be 
governed by the general state law, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 


Section 7 - Nomination of Candidates 
    Nominations of persons to fill town offices shall be by petition containing the signatures of at least 
thirty (30) voters or one (1) percent of the voters, whichever is less. Petitions shall be filed with the town 
clerk, together with a written assent signed by the nominee. Both petition and written assent shall be filed 
at least forty-five (45) and not more than fifty-five (55) days prior to the election. When a petition is 
presented to the town clerk for filing, the town clerk shall immediately examine the same and ascertain 
whether it conforms to the provisions of this section. If not found in conformity, the town clerk shall 
designate the defect in writing and return the petition, together with the written reason for rejection, within 
six (6) hours, to the candidate in whose behalf it was filed. Such petition may again be presented when 
properly amended if this can be done within the time allowed for filing such petition. All town elections 
shall be nonpartisan and no party designation or slogan shall be printed on any town ballot or petition. 
(Amended 4-4-11, Act. No. M-3; Amended 2-25-15, Act. No. M-2) 


CHAPTER 2. - POWERS OF THE TOWN 


Section 8 - General Powers 
    The town shall have all powers which towns have under the constitution and laws of the State of 
Vermont, as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter, together 
with all powers that may hereafter be granted to towns by the legislature. All such powers shall be 
exercised in the manner prescribed in this Charter, or if not prescribed herein, in such manner as may be 
prescribed by ordinance. The town's powers shall include such as may be necessarily or reasonably 
implied from other powers and shall be construed liberally in favor of the town; any mention of specific 
powers in this Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power stated in this 
section. 


Section 9 - Intergovernmental Relations 
    Subject only to any applicable superior laws or constitutional provisions, the town through the board 
of selectmen may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions and may participate in the 
financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by contract or otherwise, with any one (1) or more states or 
civil divisions or agencies thereof, or the United States or any agency thereof, including other towns, cities 
and school systems. 


CHAPTER 3 - ELECTED OFFICERS 


Section 10 - Elected Officers; General 
(a) ?The following officers shall be elected by the legal voters of the Town of Barre and voting for all 
such officers shall be by Australian ballot: 
(1) ?Five (5) Selectmen 
(2) ?Three (3) Listers 
(3) ?Three (3) Auditors 
(4) ?One (1) Constable 
(5) ?One (1) Clerk-Treasurer 
(6) ?One (1) Moderator 
(b) ?The office of clerk-treasurer may be changed to an appointive office upon approval by the voters at 
any annual meeting of the town. The office of lister may be abolished and replaced by a single full-
time assessor hired by the selectmen at such salary as the selectmen may approve; provided the 
voters authorize such action at any annual town meeting. 
(c) ?Only a voter of the Town of Barre may seek election to or hold a town elective office, and no person 
may hold more than one (1) town elective office at the same time. No person shall hold offices which 
are defined as incompatible in Vermont statutes. 
(d) ?Vacancies occurring in any elective office shall be filled by a majority vote of the selectmen. The 
appointment shall be valid until the next annual town election, at which time the voters shall elect a 
person to fill the position for the unexpired term. 
(e) ?Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all elected officers shall perform the duties prescribed 
by ordinance. 
(Amended 4-4-11, Act. No. M-3) 


Section 11 - Board of Selectmen 
(a) ?Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all the powers of the town shall be entrusted to and 
exercised by a board of five (5) selectmen chosen by the voters of the Town of Barre. Three (3) 
members shall be elected for terms of three (3) years, and two (2) members shall be elected for 
terms of two (2) years. The board shall discharge all the duties conferred or imposed upon boards of 
selectmen by law, including the duties of sewer commissioners, board of liquor commissioners, and 
any similar ex-officio duties; and when sitting in such ex-officio capacity, it shall not be necessary 
specially to convene in a separate capacity. 
(b) ?The selectmen shall meet within seven (7) business days after the annual town election to elect a 
chairman and a vice chairman and to designate a clerk. At the same meeting the board shall adopt 
rules of order and fix the time and place of its regular meeting, which shall be held at least twice a 
month. Special meetings of the board may be called at any time by the chairman, or in his absence, 
the vice chairman, or by a majority of the board in writing to the chairman. Notice of any special 
meeting shall be served on members, posted in the municipal building, and, except for an 
emergency meeting, released to the news media at least twelve (12) hours prior to the meeting. 
(c) ?No action of the board, except on purely procedural matters, shall be valid or binding unless 
approved by a majority of the full board, except that in the case of passage of an emergency 
ordinance, at least four (4) affirmative votes shall be required. Voting on all matters, except 
procedural matters, shall be by roll call unless in the case of unanimous agreement. 
(d) ?Upon due notice and hearing, the board may remove one (1) of its members from office for failure to 
attend four (4) consecutive, regular meetings of the board without prior approval of the chairman. 
Such removal shall be done only upon the affirmative vote of all four (4) remaining members. 
(e) ?The selectmen shall, from time to time, designate an acting town manager who shall have all the 
powers and duties of the town manager in the event of the latter's absence or disability. The name of 
the acting town manager shall be on file in the town clerk's office at all times. 


Section 12 - Auditors 
    Auditors shall be elected for terms of three (3) years, with one (1) elected each year. They shall be 
responsible for the proper financial accountability of the town, and for this purpose all town officers shall, 
within thirty (30) days after the close of the fiscal year, submit to the auditors such reports, records and 
materials as the auditors may require for the discharge of their duties. The auditors shall thereupon 
proceed to examine and adjust the accounts of all town officers and report their findings in writing, not 
later than one hundred eighty-five (185) days after the close of the fiscal year. They shall cause their 
findings to be printed and made available to the voters. The auditors may employ the services of a 
certified public accountant at town expense, for such purposes as they shall deem proper. They shall also 
supervise the preparation, publication, and, within budgetary limitations, the distribution of the annual 
town report. 
(Amended 5-12-98; Amended 4-4-11, Act. No. M-3) 


Section 13 - Board of Listers 
(a) ?The board of listers shall consist of three (3) listers, one (1) elected each year for a term of three (3) 
years. The board shall have the same powers and duties prescribed for listers under the laws of the 
State of Vermont. 
(b) ?The board shall annually review, or cause to be reviewed, their appraisals of all property in the town 
which is subject to taxation. The property shall be appraised in accordance with standards 
established by the laws of the state. 
(c) ?If the town shall vote to replace the board of listers with a single assessor in the manner provided in 
Section 10(b) of this Charter, then the assessor shall perform all of the duties and have all of the 
powers prescribed for listers under the laws of Vermont. 


Section 14 - Moderator 
    A moderator shall be elected for a term of one (1) year and shall perform all duties required by this 
Charter, and to the extent not in conflict with this Charter, all duties required by the laws of Vermont. 


Section 15 - Constable 
    A constable shall be elected to serve for a term of one (1) year. He shall have all the powers and 
duties prescribed for constables under the laws of Vermont, except as provided in this Charter. 


Section 16 - Clerk-Treasurer 
(a) ?The clerk-treasurer shall be elected for a period of three (3) years. He shall keep account of 
moneys, bonds, notes and evidences of debt paid or delivered to him, and of moneys paid out by 
him for the town. In addition he shall: 
(1) ?Record the amount voted for support of highways, special departments and for general town 
purposes; 
(2) ?Collect taxes, assessments, charges and levies, including delinquencies in the hands of the tax 
collector, and maintain a record of monies collected and uncollected; 
(3) ?Receive fees for filing copies of records and other instruments; 
(4) ?Pay orders drawn on him by officials authorized to draw orders; 
(5) ?Provide detailed financial statements and reports, as may be required by the selectmen; 
(6) ?Maintain a record of all action taken at special or annual town meetings; 
(7) ?Maintain all town records and an index to those records; 
(8) ?Maintain and file all reports required by law; 
(9) ?Perform any other duties required of him by law, this Charter, or ordinances. 
(b) ?Before entering upon the duties of his office, the clerk-treasurer shall give a bond conditioned for the 
faithful performance of his duties. The bond shall be of a sum and with such surety as prescribed 
and approved by the board of selectmen, and the premium for such bond shall be paid by the town. 


CHAPTER 4. - ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENT 


Section 17 - Town Manager; Appointment; Term 
    A town manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the town. He shall be appointed by a 
majority of the full board of selectmen. He shall be selected with special reference to his training, 
experience, education and ability to perform the duties of his office, and without reference to his political 
persuasion. He shall be appointed for an indefinite period and shall be removable at the discretion of the 
board of selectmen, subject to such conditions relative to hearings, timing of notices, severance pay and 
grounds of dismissal as may be specified in this Charter, ordinances of the town, or any employment 
agreement or contract. The town manager shall not simultaneously hold any elective office within the 
town, nor shall he be employed by the town in any capacity except as town manager. 


Section 18 - Removal of the Town Manager 
    The manager may be removed by a majority vote of the full board of selectmen. At least thirty (30) 
days before the proposed removal of the manager, the board shall adopt a resolution in executive 
session, stating its intention to remove him and the reasons for removal, a copy of which shall be 
delivered forthwith to the manager. Upon or after passage of such resolution, the board may suspend the 
manager from duty, but his pay shall continue until removal. If the resolution is not withdrawn, the 
resolution shall automatically take effect. In case of such a suspension, the board may appoint an acting 
manager to serve at the discretion of the board. By ordinance or by contract with any manager, the 
selectmen may provide for the manager to have additional rights in removal proceedings, including the 
right to a hearing, provided such rights are otherwise consistent with the provisions of this section. The 
action of the board in removing the manager shall be final. 


Section 19 - Oath and Bond 
    Before entering into the duties of his office, the town manager shall be sworn to the faithful and 
impartial performance of his duties, and a certificate to that effect shall be filed with the town clerk. He 
shall execute a bond in favor of the town for the faithful performance of his duties in such sum and with 
such surety as may be determined by the board, and the premium on such bond shall be paid by the 
town. 


Section 20 - Responsibilities of the Town Manager in General 
    The town manager shall be accountable to the selectmen. He shall have general supervision of the 
property and business affairs of the town and expenditure of all monies appropriated for town purposes 
subject to prior approval of the selectmen. He shall not supervise any elected town officer in the conduct 
of such officer's duties. 


Section 21 - Powers and Duties in Particular 
    The town manager shall have power, and it shall be his duty: 
(a) ?To organize, operate, continue or discontinue such departments as the board of selectmen 
may determine. 
(b) ?To carry out the policies laid down by the board, to keep the board informed of the financial 
condition and future needs of the town, and to make such reports as may be required by law or 
requested by the board, together with any other reports and recommendations which he may 
deem advisable. 
(c) ?To appoint and remove, upon merit and fitness alone, all subordinate officials, employees and 
agents under his control and, with the approval of the selectmen, to fix their compensation as 
provided in Section 39(c) of this Charter. Although the town manager may hold subordinate 
officers and employees of the town responsible for the faithful discharge of their duties, the town 
manager shall remain ultimately responsible to the board for all administrative actions under his 
jurisdiction. 
(d) ?To be present at all regular meetings of the board of selectmen, except when excused by the 
board, and to have the right to attend all other meetings of said board and committees thereof, 
except when his removal or suspension is being discussed, provided that this section shall not 
be construed to deny any right the town manager may otherwise have to a public hearing 
relative to his removal. 
(e) ?To keep full and complete records of the actions of his office, to keep necessary accounts, to 
render to the board of selectmen an itemized monthly report showing in detail the 
disbursements of the preceding month, and to maintain an appropriate budget control system. 
(f) ?To keep the board of selectmen fully advised as to the needs of the town within the scope of the 
manager's duties; and annually to furnish to them, as prescribed in this charter, a detailed 
budget proposal; and also to furnish to them annually, a five-year projection of capital 
improvements for the town. To enable the town manager to make estimates of expenditures 
and receipts all boards, officers and committees of the town shall, upon his written request, 
furnish all information in their possession and submit to him in writing a detailed estimate of 
anticipated income and appropriations required for the efficient and proper conduct of their 
respective responsibilities during the next fiscal year. 
(g) ?To examine or cause to be examined, with or without notice, the affairs of any department 
under his control, or the conduct of any officer or employee thereof. For that purpose he shall 
have access to all books and papers of such department for the information necessary for the 
proper performance of his duties. 
(h) ?To be the general purchasing agent of the town and purchase all supplies for every 
department. 
(i) ?To supervise all special programs of the town as if the same were a separate department of the 
town, unless otherwise voted by the town. 
(j) ?To have charge, control and supervision of the following matters: 
(1) ?The police department, including appointment and removal of the chief thereof, with the 
consent of the selectmen. 
(2) ?Any town fire department supported by town funds, including the appointment and 
removal of the chief thereof, with the consent of the selectmen. 
(3) ?The system of licenses not otherwise regulated by law. 
(4) ?The system of sewers and drainage. 
(5) ?Lighting of highways, bridges and public places. 
(6) ?Construction and maintenance of town highways. 
(7) ?Town buildings, and repairs and construction on town buildings. 
(8) ?Maintenance of parks, playgrounds, forests and other public lands, unless otherwise 
provided for in the administrative code. 
(9) ?Any public water system owned or operated by the town. 
(k) ?To cause duties prescribed for towns and not committed to the care of any particular officer to 
be duly performed and executed. 
(l) ?To participate in the discussion of matters coming before the selectmen and its committees, but 
not the right to vote. 
(m) ?To perform such other duties which may be required of him by vote of the board of selectmen, 
by law or by ordinance, consistent with this Charter. 


Section 22 - Noninterference with Administration 
(a) ?Except for emergencies and for the purpose of inquiries or investigations authorized under this 
Charter, the board, its members and committees, shall deal with town officers and employees who 
are subject to the direction and supervision of the manager, solely through the town manager, and 
shall not give orders to any such officers or employees, either publicly or privately. 
(b) ?Neither the board nor any of its members or committees shall in any manner dictate the 
appointment or removal of any town administrative officers or employees whom the manager is 
empowered to appoint. The board may, however, express its views fully and freely and discuss with 
the manager, in open or executive session, consistent with law, anything pertaining to appointment 
and removal of such officers and employees. 
(c) ?No member of the board of selectmen shall attempt to control or direct the manager in the discharge 
of the duties entrusted to him, except by vote of the board at a duly constituted meeting. 


Section 23 - Filling of a Vacancy 
    Any vacancy in the office of town manager shall be filled as soon as practicable by the board of 
selectmen, and pending such appointment, or in case of the manager's absence or disability, the board 
shall designate some person to perform the duties of the office. In no case shall a selectman temporarily 
assume the duties of town manager for a period in excess of thirty (30) days and then only in the absence 
or disability of the town manager and acting town manager. 


Section 24 - Compensation of the Town Manager 
    The compensation of the town manager shall be set by resolution of the board of selectmen, within 
any budgetary limitations set by the voters at town meeting. As used in this section, the term 
"compensation" includes but is not limited to salary, additional benefits, time for sick leave and vacation, 
and expense allowance. 


Section 25 - Administrative Code 
(a) ?Within two (2) years following the effective date of this Charter, the town manager shall prepare and 
submit to the board of selectmen a proposal for an ordinance to be known as the Administrative 
Code of the Town of Barre. For the purpose of preparing the proposal, the town manager may have 
the assistance of the town attorney and shall have the authority to request a committee of citizens to 
assist in the preparation of the proposal. The proposal shall be a comprehensive code of 
administrative organization and procedure for the town and, at a minimum, shall include the 
following: 
(1) ?Organization of the administrative departments and elected offices of the town into such 
divisions as may be appropriate, defining the functions and duties of each. 
(2) ?A complete personnel policy for town employees. 
(3) ?A detailed outline of financial procedures to be followed by the town including purchasing 
policy, expenditure of appropriated funds, the system of accounting for the town, and the form 
and frequency of financial reports. 
(b) ?The administrative code shall be passed by the selectmen in the same manner as any ordinance 
and may be amended by the selectmen in the manner provided for amendment of ordinances. The 
administrative code shall provide for all specific requirements set forth in this Charter, and to such 
extent as the provisions of the administrative code are not inconsistent with this Charter, the code 
shall be considered a valid extension of the policies set forth in the charter. 


CHAPTER 5. - FINANCIAL 


Section 26 - Fiscal Year 
    The fiscal year of the town and all its departments shall begin on the first day of July and end on the 
last day of June unless another date is fixed by voters at any annual town election. 


Section 27 - Committee of Five 
    Annually, prior to January 31, a committee of five (5) voters shall be appointed to review, with the 
selectmen, the proposed town budget. Their terms shall expire upon final adoption of the budget. The 
selectmen shall appoint two (2) members and the clerk-treasurer, one (1) member; these three (3) shall 
appoint two (2) additional members. 


Section 28 - Budget Preparation 
(a) ?At such time as may be prescribed by the selectboard, the town manager shall propose a budget 
and submit a line itemized estimate of the income and expenditures required for the operation of the 
town government for the next ensuing fiscal year. 
(b) ?The selectboard, with the committee of five (5), shall review and finalize the proposed town budget 
publicly and prepare it for submission to the voters at the annual town election. Sufficient copies shall 
be available to the voters not less than ten (10) days prior to the election at the five (5) public places 
required by Section 3 of this Charter, and the warning shall state the availability of said proposed 
budget. 
(Amended 4-4-11, Act. No. M-3) 


Section 29 - Appropriation 
(a) ?All amounts specified in the budget and approved by the voters at an annual town election, are 
appropriated for the purpose specified in the budget. Adoption of the budget shall constitute 
appropriations of the amounts specified therein as expenditures from the funds indicated and shall 
constitute a levy for all revenues proposed in the budget. The selectmen may transfer within the 
fiscal year any unexpended appropriation balance or portion thereof between general classifications 
or expenditures. 
(b) ?Money shall not be paid out of the town treasury except on a payroll or warrant signed by at least 
three (3) of the members of the board of selectmen and authenticated by the town manager. 
(c) ?Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the 
fiscal year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for capital 
expenditure shall continue in force until the purposes for which it was made has been accomplished 
or formally abandoned. 


Section 30 - Budget Control 
    At the beginning of each quarterly period during the fiscal year, and more often if required by the 
board, the manager shall submit to the board data showing the relation between the estimated and actual 
income and expenses to date, together with outstanding indebtedness and estimated future expenses 
and income. The manager may provide for monthly or quarterly allotments of appropriations to 
departments, funds or agencies under such rules as he shall have prescribed. 


Section 31 - Purchasing Policy 
    The town manager may expend an amount determined by the selectboard; and the selectboard may 
expend ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for an established program without requesting competitive 
bids. Any expenditures other than those specified above shall be open to competitive bidding, except if 
the selectboard shall find that bidding would be of no advantage to the town. In such case, they shall then 
detail in their minutes the reasons for such findings and no bidding shall be required for that particular 
expenditure. 
(Amended 4-1-98, Act No. M-13) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that the term "selectmen" was replaced by the term 
"selectboard" with the amendment of this section. 


Section 32 - Tax Rate 
(a) ?If the municipal and school budgets have been adopted by July 1, then as soon as practicable after 
the final adoption of the last budget and the filing by the listers of the grand list, the selectboard shall 
annually vote a uniform rate of tax sufficient to raise the amount of revenue voted by the town and 
town school district for the support of the town and town school district government for the ensuing 
fiscal year. In setting the rate, the board shall consider all other sources of revenue available to the 
town and town school district, including any surplus carried over from the previous year, and shall 
also make such allowance for delinquent taxes as they may think proper. 
(b) ?If the final municipal and school budgets have not been adopted by July 1, then as soon as practical 
thereafter the selectboard shall set an interim rate of tax. The interim tax rate shall be sufficient to 
raise the amount of tax revenue in any budget which has been adopted, plus an amount sufficient to 
raise one hundred (100) percent of the last adopted budget of the same type as that budget which 
has not yet been adopted. Once the final budgets have been adopted, the selectboard shall proceed 
to set a rate of tax as set forth in subsection (a), above. 
(Amended 5-14-96) 


Section 33 - Collection of Taxes 
(a) ?Real and personal property taxes and any other taxes, assessments, charges or levies by the town 
shall be due either in one (1) payment or in not more than four (4) installments, as equal as possible, 
on dates specified by the voters at the annual town election. If an interim tax rate has been set, the 
installments shall be calculated as though it were not an interim rate. However, once the budgets 
have been passed, revised tax bills shall be sent to the taxpayers and the remaining installments 
shall be calculated to offset equally, or as equal as possible, the over- or under-payment caused by 
the interim rate. Any installment not paid when due shall be delinquent and there shall immediately 
be added to the amount due a charge for late payment equivalent to five (5) percent of the 
delinquent installment. For a period of thirty (30) days immediately following the due date, delinquent 
accounts shall be retained by the treasurer and shall be payable to his/her office. 
(b) ?As soon as practicable after the expiration of thirty (30) days from the due date of each installment, 
the treasurer shall forward all accounts then remaining unpaid to the tax collector, together with a 
warrant for the collection of such accounts, in the form prescribed by law. Thereafter, all such 
accounts shall be payable only to the tax collector. Accounts forwarded to the tax collector shall bear 
simple interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month, which is an annual rate of twelve (12) 
percent, on the original amount of the tax due. In addition, a collection fee of eight (8) percent of the 
original tax due shall be charged together with any reasonable attorney fees and court costs incurred 
in the collection of any delinquent account. All such charges, fees, interest and other added amounts 
shall be cumulative and shall accrue at the times and in the manner herein specified. 
(c) ?The tax collector shall have all the powers which tax collectors of towns have under the general law 
of the state, including, but not limited to, the power to levy on personal property, bring actions at law, 
conduct tax sales, and bring petitions for foreclosure of tax liens. Such acts shall be done in the 
name of the Town of Barre and in the manner provided by such general law, except as modified by 
any provision of this Charter. 
(Amended 5-14-96; Amended 2-25-15, Act. No. M-2) 


Section 34 - Board of Abatement 
(a) ?The board of civil authority, together with the listers, shall constitute the board of abatement. The 
chair and clerk of the board of civil authority shall serve as the chair and clerk, respectively, of the 
board of abatement. 
(b) ?The board shall meet at least one time each year, at the call of the clerk, to consider all requests for 
abatement of any tax, assessment, charge, or other levy made by the town, or of any penalties, 
interest, and other delinquent charges. 
(c) ?Public notice of every meeting of the board of abatement shall be given by posting at the municipal 
building, on the official town website, and at least three (3) other public places within the town, as 
designated by the selectboard, and by publishing the notice two (2) times in a newspaper having 
general circulation within the town within at least two (2) and not more than ten (10) days prior to the 
meeting. 
(d) ?Any taxpayer may request abatement of any tax. assessment, charge, or other levy, or any other 
penalties, interest and other delinquent charges for which that individual is or may become liable. 
The tax collector may also submit to the board for its consideration such taxes, assessment charges, 
or other levies, or penalties, interest, and other delinquent charges as the tax collector may see fit 
and may also offer recommendations to the board. If the board finds: 
(1) ?That there is no reasonable probability of collection; or 
(2) ?That the tax, assessment, charge, or other levy was not properly assessed; or 
(3) ?That all persons liable for tax, assessment, charge, or other levy have died or removed from 
the state; or 
(4) ?That the persons liable for the tax, assessment, charge, or other levy are financially unable to 
pay same; or 
(5) ?That collection of the tax, assessment, charge, or other levy would work an injustice; or 
(6) ?That collection of the tax, assessment, charge, or other levy would create an undue expense 
for the town, then the board may abate the tax, assessment, charge, or other levy, or the 
accrued penalties, interest, and other delinquent charges in whole or in part. If wholly abated, all 
accrued penalties, interests, and other delinquent charges shall also abate in full. If partly 
abated, such penalties, interests, and charges shall abate pro rata. 
(Amended 2-25-15, Act. No. M-2) 


Section 35 - Bonded Indebtedness 
    The limits of bonded indebtedness of the town and the procedures for incurring a debt shall be 
governed by the general laws of the State of Vermont. 


Section 35a - Bonding; Aldrich Public Library 
    By a majority vote of those present and voting at an annual or special meeting warned for the 
purpose, the town may issue municipal bonds for the cost of capital improvements to the Aldrich Public 
Library, which is located in the City of Barre, and used by the residents of both the city and town; and 
such improvements shall be considered "improvements" for the purposes of chapter 53 of Title 24 of the 
Vermont Statutes Annotated. 
(Amended 4-1-98, Act. No. M-14) 


CHAPTER 6. - PROCEDURAL MATTERS 


Section 36 - Meetings; Open Government 
    It shall be the policy of the Town of Barre to afford to all of its citizens the opportunity to participate in 
the government of their town as fully and completely as may be possible. To this end all meetings of 
agencies, boards, citizen committees and any other group acting under authority or color of authority of 
the town of Barre, shall be conducted openly and in accordance with the policy of the laws of the State of 
Vermont relative to meetings of governmental bodies, and no executive session shall be held except in 
accordance with the terms of the law; provided, however, that the penalties set forth in the general law 
shall not extend to any person solely by reason of this Charter. 


Section 37 - Ordinances 
(a) ?Town legislation shall be by ordinance. The board of selectmen shall constitute the legislative body 
of the town, except as otherwise provided herein, to adopt, amend, repeal and enforce ordinances. 
Each ordinance, when introduced, shall be in writing and shall be identified by a short title. The 
enacting clause of each ordinance shall be "The selectmen of the Town of Barre hereby ordain" and 
the effective date of each ordinance shall be specified not less than fifteen (15) days after final 
passage by the selectmen, except that if the ordinance is conditioned upon the approval of the 
voters, then the ordinance shall be effective upon favorable vote of a majority of those voting 
thereon. 
(b) ?Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced by one (1) or more selectmen at a duly convened 
meeting of the board and, with the consent of a majority of the board, introduction may be "by 
request" with no obligation on the part of the selectmen causing the proposed ordinance to be 
introduced to support said ordinance or work for its passage. At the time of introduction the 
ordinance shall be read for the first time and, by majority vote of the board, such reading may be by 
title only. At the time of the first reading the selectmen shall call a public hearing to consider the 
ordinance not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty-one (21) days from the date of the first 
reading. They shall further order that notice of the hearing be given by posting the notice, in at least 
five (5) conspicuous public places in the town and publishing the notice at least seven (7) days prior 
to the date of the hearing in a newspaper having general circulation within the town. The notice shall 
specify the date, time and place of hearing and shall state that the hearing is called for the 
consideration of the ordinance in question. Unless the selectmen find that publication of the full text 
of the ordinance would be unduly cumbersome, expensive, or otherwise inexpedient, the full text of 
the proposed ordinance shall also be included in the notice; if the full text is not published, then a 
brief explanation of the purpose of the ordinance shall be given together with information as to where 
and when any citizen of the town may obtain a copy of the complete ordinance. Such copies shall be 
available from the town clerk's library, without charge, at least seven (7) days prior to the date set for 
the hearing. 
(c) ?At the time and place advertised, the ordinance shall be read for the second time. If the selectmen 
shall find that sufficient copies of the proposed ordinance have been made available to the citizens, 
by publication or otherwise, and that no person would be prejudiced by failure to read the full text of 
the ordinance the board may, by majority vote of its members, order that reading shall be by title 
only; otherwise the full text shall be read. All voters and all other persons whose legal interests may 
be directly affected by the ordinance shall have an opportunity to be heard at the hearing. If the 
board shall see fit, the hearing may be adjourned from time to time, and from place to place. After 
such hearing the selectmen may: 
(1) ?Advance such ordinance to a third reading, which shall be held not less than five (5) and not 
more than ten (10) days from the time of such advancement; or 
(2) ?Vote against adoption of the ordinance, in which case no further action shall be taken on the 
proposal; or 
(3) ?Vote to make such changes or amendments in the proposed ordinance as they shall see fit, in 
which case they shall then order that another public hearing be held and shall cause notice of 
said hearing to be given in the manner set forth. 
    The public hearing procedure, and the procedure for the vote of the selectmen on second reading, 
shall be followed as many times as may be necessary either to advance the proposal to a third reading 
without any changes in its form as publicly noticed before hearing, or until a vote not to adopt the 
ordinance is passed. 
(d) ?If a proposal is advanced to a third reading, the selectmen shall, at the time of such advancement, 
specify the date, time and place at which third reading and final consideration will take place. At such 
third reading the ordinance shall be read either in full, or if a majority of the board shall so vote, by 
title only. The board may, in its discretion, hear the comments of any citizens interested in the 
ordinance, but they are not required to do so. Following such discussion as the board may deem 
appropriate, it shall either vote to adopt or reject said ordinance, and if the vote shall be in favor of 
adoption, the chairman of the board of selectmen and the town clerk shall thereupon authenticate 
the original copy of said ordinance, and it shall become effective as herein provided, except if 
rescinded by a town meeting in the manner hereafter specified. 
(e) ?All ordinances when finally passed shall be permanently recorded by the town clerk in the form 
adopted, as authenticated by the signature of the chairman of the board of selectmen and the clerk. 
The clerk shall also record each ordinance adopted in such manner as he shall find will provide the 
town with a current, useable codification of all town ordinances, excising repealed provisions, adding 
newly adopted material in an appropriate place, and organizing and indexing all such material in 
such manner as may best facilitate its intended use. For this purpose, the clerk may employ the 
services of the town attorney at town expense. The resulting product shall be maintained by the town 
clerk in his office, shall be known as the "Barre Town Code," and shall be available for public 
inspection and copying during regular business hours. The selectmen may by resolution direct that 
the entire Barre Town Code, or only certain portions thereof, be printed and copies made available, 
either free of charge or at a cost not in excess of the town's cost of preparation and printing. 
(f) ?The selectmen shall cause the entire text of each adopted ordinance to be published one (1) time in 
a newspaper having general circulation within the town; such publication to be at least seven (7) 
days prior to the effective date of the ordinance. If the selectmen shall find that publication of the full 
text of an adopted ordinance would be unduly cumbersome, expensive, or otherwise inexpedient, 
they may cause to be published a brief explanation of the purpose of the ordinance together with 
information as to where and when any citizen of the town may obtain a copy of the complete 
ordinance. This subsection, however, shall not require the publication of any standard code of 
technical regulations adopted pursuant to the provisions of subsection (i) below. 
(g) ?An ordinance adopted by the board in the manner set forth above shall be subject to rescission by a 
town meeting in the manner set forth in this subsection. If a petition signed by not less than ten (10) 
percent of the voters is filed with the town clerk on or before the effective date of the ordinance, the 
clerk shall call for a vote to be held within forty-five (45) days of the filing, at the annual town meeting 
or at a special town meeting duly warned to consider the question of rescission of the ordinance. 
Until the vote and the question of rescission is held, the ordinance shall not become effective. If a 
majority of votes cast shall be in favor of rescinding the ordinance, the same shall be rescinded, and 
no further action shall be taken on it. If a majority of votes cast shall be opposed to rescission, the 
ordinance shall become effective as of 12:01 a.m. on the day following such vote. 
(h) ?To meet a genuine public emergency affecting life, health, property, or the public peace, the board 
may adopt one (1) or more emergency ordinances. Such ordinances may not levy taxes, set the rate 
charged by the town for any services, authorize the borrowing of money, or raise revenue in any 
manner. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for 
ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall 
contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in 
clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or 
rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least four (4) selectmen 
shall be required for adoption. After its adoption the ordinance shall be published and printed as 
prescribed for other adopted ordinances. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later 
time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance automatically stands repealed as of the sixty-first 
(61st) day following the day on which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the 
ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency 
ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified 
in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(i) ?The board may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting 
ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such an adopting ordinance shall be as 
prescribed for ordinances generally, except that the requirements of this Charter for filing of copies of 
the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of the code of technical regulations as well as of 
the adopting ordinance, and a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations shall be 
authenticated and recorded by the chairman of the board of selectmen and the town clerk pursuant 
to this Charter. Prior to adoption, such copies shall be available from the town clerk's library without 
charge. After adoption, copies shall be available from the town clerk either without charge or for 
purchase at a reasonable price, as determined by the board. 
(j) ?The general penalty for violation of an ordinance of the town shall be a fine not to exceed the sum of 
Five Hundred ($500.00) dollars for a single offense, or in the case of a continuing offense, a fine not 
to exceed the sum of One Hundred ($100.00) dollars per day for each day a violation shall continue 
unabated. Any ordinance may contain a provision setting penalties for the violation thereof, provided 
such penalties are not in excess of the general penalty. If an ordinance does not contain any specific 
provision for a penalty, then the general penalty shall apply. No ordinance of the Town of Barre shall 
provide for the imprisonment or incarceration of any person for the violation thereof, except as the 
same may be imposed as a civil remedy for contempt of court. The selectmen may authorize the 
town attorney to bring an action in the name of the Town of Barre for any relief, including injunctive 
relief, which the town attorney may deem appropriate for the enforcement of any town ordinances. 
(Amend. of 3-1-07) 


Section 38 - Appointed Officers 
(a) ?The selectmen, by majority vote, shall appoint the following town officers for the terms indicated: 
(1) ?A town attorney for a term of one (1) year, to fulfill the duties prescribed by law for the grand 
juror and town agent of a town, and to perform such other professional duties as may be 
requested by the selectmen, or by any other officer or agency of town government, with the 
approval of the selectmen. 
(2) ?A tax collector for a term of one (1) year. 
(3) ?Five (5) cemetery commissioners, each for a term of five (5) years, with one (1) term beginning 
each year. 
(4) ?Such other officers as the laws of the State of Vermont or the ordinances of the Town of Barre 
shall direct the selectmen to appoint. The appointments shall be for the term indicated in the 
governing law, provided that any office abolished by this Charter shall not be deemed 
reestablished by this section. 
(b) ?A vacancy in any appointive town office may be filled for the duration of the unexpired term by the 
person, board of selectmen or other board having the authority to appoint such office holder for the 
usual term of office. 
(c) ?When it becomes necessary to make appointments to any office or position created by this Charter, 
ordinance or law, the board shall give notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the town 
specifying positions open and for which appointment will be made so that interested persons may 
apply. 


Section 39 - Compensation and Fees 
(a) ?The town election shall annually vote the compensation to be paid to the following officers: 
(1) ?Selectmen 
(2) ?Listers 
(3) ?Auditors 
(4) ?Moderator 
(b) ?The selectmen shall annually consider and from time to time shall set the compensation of the 
following officers: 
(1) ?Town Clerk-Treasurer 
(2) ?Constable 
(3) ?Town Attorney 
(4) ?Tax Collector 
(5) ?Town Manager 
(6) ?Board of Civil Authority 
(7) ?Board of Abatement 
(c) ?The town manager, with approval of the board of selectmen, shall set the compensation for all other 
town officers and employees. 
(d) ?All fees prescribed by state law, Charter, ordinance or otherwise shall be collected for the benefit of 
the town and paid to the town treasurer. No fees shall be used directly by any receiving officer or 
ensure directly to the benefit of the officer. 


Section 40 - Conflict of Interest 
    No elective or appointive officer or employee of the town shall be beneficially interested directly or 
indirectly in any contract with the town, regardless of amount, or furnish any material, or perform any 
labor, except in the discharge of his official duties, unless such contract shall have been awarded upon 
bids advertised for by publication. Such publication shall be at least two (2) times in a newspaper having 
general circulation in the town; the second publication shall be at least seven (7) days prior to the opening 
of such bids. No officer or employee of the town shall take part in any decision concerning the business of 
the town in which he has a direct or indirect financial interest, aside from his salary as an officer or 
employee, greater than any other citizen or taxpayer in the town. 


Section 41 - Public Lands 
    With the approval of the voters given at any duly warned meeting, the selectmen may sell any 
portion of real estate owned by the town and not needed for town purposes, or change the use of any real 
property owned by the town. Such authorization may be given in blanket form by the voters at the annual 
town meeting; and when so given, shall remain effective until the next annual town meeting. However, the 
selectmen shall not sell or substantially change the use of any such real estate without first holding a 
public hearing giving notice by posting in at least five (5) conspicuous public places within the town and 
by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the town. The notice shall be published not 
less than seven (7) nor more than twenty-one (21) days prior to the date of the hearing and shall also 
identify specifically the real estate involved. At the hearing all citizens of the town shall have an 
opportunity to be heard, to express their views, and to inquire as to the reasons, method, time and terms 
of the proposed sale or change of use. After all proper persons have had an opportunity to be heard, the 
selectmen shall vote upon the question and, if a majority of the full board shall vote in favor of the 
proposed action, the question shall be approved. If voter approval has previously been given to such 
action, the selectmen may then take such action as they have approved; otherwise, they shall submit the 
question to the voters at a town meeting and upon approval by a majority of those voting upon the 
question, the selectmen may proceed to sell or change the use of the real estate in question, as the case 
may be. 


Section 42 - Mergers and Consolidation of Municipalities 
    The procedure for mergers and consolidation of municipalities shall be as provided for in the general 
laws of the State of Vermont. 


CHAPTER 7. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 


Section 43 - Application of General Law 
    Except as altered, enlarged or modified by the provisions of this Charter or by any lawful ordinance 
or regulation of the Town of Barre, all provisions of the laws of the State of Vermont relating to towns and 
town officers shall apply to the Town of Barre and its officers. 


Section 44 - Definitions 
    As used in this Charter, except where the context or express terms require a contrary interpretation: 
(a) ?"Board" or "selectmen" shall mean the duly elected board of selectmen of the town, acting as a 
group and in their official capacity. 
(b) ?"Day" shall mean a calendar day. 
(c) ?A "vacancy" in any office shall be deemed to exist if the holder of the officer resigns, dies, is 
removed from office, moves from the town, is convicted of a felony, or is judicially declared to be 
mentally incompetent. 
(d) ?"Voters" shall mean the names included, at any given point in time, on the checklist most 
recently revised by the board of civil authority for use in a town meeting or election. 
(e) ?Terms of the masculine gender are intended in a generic sense and are used solely for clarity 
of expression. Such terms are intended to include the feminine counterpart and to carry no 
substantive meaning with respect to the sex of any person. 
(f) ?The term "town clerk" or "town treasurer" as used in this Charter, any existing ordinance or any 
ordinance enacted after adoption of this Charter shall be understood as referring to the clerk-
treasurer. 


Section 45 - Offices Abolished 
    The offices of road commissioner, tree warden, fence viewer, grand juror, inspector of lumber-wood-
shingles, second constable, town agent, and weigher of coal are all hereby abolished. Except as 
otherwise provided in this Charter, the town manager or his designee shall exercise the powers, duties 
and responsibilities of any of the offices abolished by this section in the event that the need should arise. 


Section 46 - Separability 
    The sections of this Charter and the parts thereof are separable. If any portion of this Charter or its 
application to any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder thereof or the application of 
such invalid portions to other persons or circumstances, shall not thereby be affected. 


Section 47 - Construction 
    The provisions of this Charter shall be construed liberally in favor of the town and in such manner as 
to give effect to the intent of this Charter to make government more efficient and more responsive to the 
citizens of the town. 


Section 48 - Transitional Provisions 
(a) ?The inhabitants of the Town of Barre shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the 
name of the "Town of Barre" and as such to enjoy all the rights, immunities, powers and privileges 
and be subject to all the duties and liabilities now appertaining to, or incumbent upon them as a 
municipal corporation. Under this Charter all existing property of the town shall remain vested in it 
and all its existing debts and obligations shall remain obligatory upon it. 
(b) ?The incumbents in all elective or appointive town offices not abolished or superseded when this 
Charter takes effect shall continue to hold office until the expiration of their respective terms where a 
term of office exists, or until such offices are abolished or superseded by any lawful act of the town. 
(c) ?At the first annual town election following the adoption of this Charter, the voters shall elect one (1) 
selectman for a term of three (3) years, one (1) for a term of two (2) years, and one (1) for a term of 
one (1) year. At subsequent annual town elections, the voters shall elect one (1) selectman for a 
term of three (3) years and one for a term of two (2) years. 
(d) ?All ordinances and other town legislation now in effect shall remain in effect until altered or 
repealed, except where a contrary intent appears in this Charter. In the event of an implied repeal by 
virtue of existing town legislation being contrary to any section of this Charter, the legislation shall be 
deemed repealed only to the minimum extent necessary to bring the legislation into conformance 
with this Charter. 


Section 49 - Amendment or Repeal 
    No section or provision of this Charter may be repealed or amended unless the act making such 
repeal or amendment refers specifically to this Charter and to the sections or provisions so repealed. Any 
amendment to this Charter must be submitted to the voters for their approval and, upon such approval, 
submitted as provided by statutes. Amendments may be placed on the ballot by the selectmen, a duly 
authorized Charter review commission appointed by the selectmen, or upon petition filed with the town 
clerk by ten (10) percent of the voters. The petition must clearly state the amendment and must be filed at 
least forty-five (45) days before any annual or special town election, but the town shall not be required to 
hold a special town election solely for the purpose of considering a proposed Charter amendment. 


Section 50 - Effective Date 
    This Charter shall become effective upon approval in accordance with 24 VSA Sec. 702a and when 
so approved, copies shall be made available to interested persons at cost. 


TOWN CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
?The revised Charter of the Town of Barre, sections 1 through 50, is set out as adopted on 
November 5, 1974. The following table shows the disposition of subsequent amendments. 
Date 
Disposition 
11-29-83 
§§ 2, 3, 5, 28 
?5-14-85 
§ 2 
?5-14-96 
§ 32(a), (b) 

§ 33(a) 
?4-?1-98 (Act No. M-13) 
§ 31 
?4-?1-98 (Act No. M-14) 
§ 35a 
?5-12-98 
§ 12 
?3-?1-07 
§ 37(f) 
?4-?4-11(Act. No. M-3) 
§ 2(a) 

§ 3(b)(1) 

§ 7 

§ 10(c) 

§ 12 

§ 28 
2-25-15(Act. No. M-2) 
§ 3(a) 

§ 7 

§ 33(a) 

§ 34 
 


PART II - TOWN OF BARRE SCHOOL DISTRICT CHARTER[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Part II contains the Town of Barre School District Charter adopted by the voters of the 
Town of Barre School District on November 29, 1983. This new charter became effective January 29, 
1984 under 17 V.S>A. § 2645(d). Amendments to the 1984 charter have been worked into their proper 
places and are indicated by history notes in parentheses at the end of affected sections. 
State Law reference— Authority of legislature to grant charters, Vt. Const. Ch. II, §§ 6, 69. 


Section 1. - Meetings and elections. 
(a) ?The first Tuesday in March shall be the date for the annual election of school district officers and for 
voting upon all questions to be decided by Australian ballot. The Monday evening preceding the date 
for the annual election of school district officers, beginning at 7:30 p.m. at a place designated by the 
Barre Town School Board, shall be the date of the Annual Meeting at which time there will be 
considered all non-Australian ballot matters. Polls shall be open no less than nine (9) consecutive 
hours. The school board may designate one or more polling places within the district for voting and 
may provide for the use of any mechanical or computer type devices for voting or counting votes, 
consistent with the requirements of law. However, the voters at any annual meeting may designate a 
different date, time or place for the annual school district election. 
(b) ?Special school district meetings or elections: 
1. ?May be called by a majority of the school board, or 
2. ?Shall be called by the school district clerk upon receipt by him of a petition signed by at least ten 
(10) percent of the voters, specifying the business to be transacted at such meeting. The 
meeting shall be held within sixty (60) days from the date the petition is filed with the clerk. 
(c) ?Budget preparation process: 
1. ?At such time as may be prescribed by the school board, the school superintendent shall submit 
a line itemized estimate of the income and expenditures required for the operation of the school 
district for the next ensuing fiscal year. 
2. ?The school board, with a committee of not less than five (5) voters appointed by them, shall 
review the proposed school budget publicly and prepare it for presentation to the voters at the 
annual school district election. Sufficient copies shall be available to the voters not less than ten 
(10) days prior to the election, at the five (5) public places required by Section 2(a) and the 
warning shall state the availability of the proposed budget. 
(d) ?Budget adoption process: The budget proposal shall be submitted to the electorate at the annual 
election. If this proposal fails, the school board shall warn another election at which a revised budget 
shall be submitted to the voters and decided by Australian ballot. If the school board's second or 
subsequent budget proposals fail, the board shall continue to warn special elections and submit 
revised budget proposals to the voters until a budget is adopted by the voters by Australian ballot. 
(Amended 5-14-85; 11-8-94) 


Section 2. - Warnings. 
(a) ?Public notice of every annual or special school district meeting or election shall be given by a 
warning posted in at least five (5) public places in the district at least fourteen (14) days prior to the 
meeting; and published two (2) times, on the same day of the week for two (2) consecutive weeks, in 
a newspaper having general circulation in the district. The first such publication shall be at least ten 
(10) days prior to the date of the meeting. 
(b) ?The warning shall: 
1. ?State the date, time and place of the meeting; 
2. ?Be signed by a majority of the school board; 
3. ?Specifically indicate by separate articles what business is to be transacted at the meeting; 
4. ?Contain any article approved by the school board; 
5. ?Contain any article requested by petition signed by at least ten (10) percent of the voters and 
filed with the school district clerk at least forty-five (45) days prior to the day of the meeting; and 
6. ?State that copies of the school board's proposed budget shall be available as required by 
Section 1(d) above. 
(Section (a) amended 11-2-82) 


Section 3. - Reconsideration of actions taken on the budget. 
    Reconsideration of actions, as applied to the budgetary process, shall not be permitted. 


TOWN OF BARRE SCHOOL DISTRICT CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
?The Town of Barre School District charter, sections 1 through 3 is set out as adopted on 
November 29, 1983. The following table shows the disposition of amendments adopted at 
subsequent elections. 
Date 
Disposition 
11-?2-82 
§ 2(a) 
?5-14-85 
§ 1 
11-?8-94 
§ 1(a), (d) 
 


PART III - CODE OF ORDINANCES 


Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to codify ordinances, § 37. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt and amend ordinances, 24 V.S.A. § 1971 et seq. 


Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated 
the "Barre Town Code," and shall be so cited. 


Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless 
such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of selectmen: 
    Charter. The words "Charter" or "Town Charter" shall be deemed to mean and refer to the Charter of 
the Town of Barre, Vermont, printed in Part I of this volume. 
    Code. Reference to "this Code" or "the Code" shall mean the Barre Town Code as designated in 
section 1-1. 
    Codifier. "Codifier" shall mean the town clerk or his designate pursuant to Part I, the Town Charter, 
chapter 6, section 37(e). 
    Computation of time. When time is to be reckoned from a date or day an act is done, such date or 
day when such act is done shall not be included in the computation unless otherwise provided. 
    Corporate limits, corporation limits, town limits. Whenever the term "corporate limits," "corporation 
limits" or "town limits" is used, it shall mean the legal boundary of the Town of Barre. 
    County. The term "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Washington in the State of 
Vermont. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the 
town to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the 
department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the 
required inspections unless the terms of the provision or section specifically designate otherwise. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine or feminine gender only shall extend and be applied to 
females or males and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males or females. 
    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be 
the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience 
and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject 
matter than the general provisions imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or 
regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    Joint authority. All words giving joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be 
construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Keeper, proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, 
associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, 
agent or employee. 
    Manager or town manager. The term "manager" or "town manager" shall mean the town manager of 
the Town of Barre. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Name of officer. Whenever the name of an officer is given, it shall be construed as though the words 
"of the Town of Barre" were added. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common 
and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have 
acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such 
meaning. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons 
and things as well as to one (1) person and thing, and words importing the plural number may be applied 
as if singular. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an 
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be 
equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, 
tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of 
such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, 
partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real 
property, as herein described. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, 
respectively. 
    Premises. Whenever the word "premises" is used, it shall mean place or places. 
    Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
    Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, recreation area, public building, cemetery, 
school yard or open space adjacent thereto, all streets and parking fields and all waterways. 
    Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Residence. The word "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his 
place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a 
person eats at one (1) place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed 
his residence. 
    Seal. Whenever the word "seal" is used, it shall mean the town seal. 
    Selectmen or board of selectmen shall mean the duly elected board of selectmen of the Town of 
Barre. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the 
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Signature, subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person shall include a mark when the 
person cannot write. 
    State. The words "the state" shall be construed to mean the State of Vermont. 
    Street. The word "street" shall include the entire width between property lines of every way used for 
vehicular and pedestrian travel which has become public by authority of the law, and such ways in public 
places other than highways as the public is permitted to use for vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
    Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any 
person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either 
alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Town. The words "the town" or "this town" shall be construed as if the words "of Barre" followed it. 
    V.S.A. The abbreviation "V.S.A." shall mean the latest edition of the Vermont Statutes Annotated, as 
amended. 
    Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven (7) consecutive days. 
    Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation 
of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a period of twelve (12) consecutive months. 
Charter reference— Definitions, § 44. 


Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines and headings. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code, printed in boldface type, and the chapter, article 
and division headings are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, chapter, 
article or division and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such section, chapter, article or division, 
nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, chapters, articles 
or divisions, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 


Sec. 1-4. - History notes and references. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and notes 
scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 


Sec. 1-5. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise 
affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1) ?Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the town, or 
authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town or any evidence of the town's indebtedness, 
or any contract or obligation assumed by the town; 
(2) ?Any administrative ordinances or resolutions; 
(3) ?Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution to any person; 
(4) ?Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, 
paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street, alley or other public way; 
(5) ?The annual appropriation ordinance; 
(6) ?Any zoning map amendment; 
(7) ?Any ordinance prescribing the street grades of any street in the town; 
(8) ?Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(9) ?Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific streets or locations; 
(10) ?Any ordinance creating a special district; 
(11) ?Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the town; 
(12) ?Any ordinance extending the boundaries of the town; 
(13) ?Any ordinance providing for the acquisition of lands for use as public parks; 
(14) ?Any ordinance providing for compensation to officers or employees of the town; 
(15) ?Any ordinance concerning zoning or subdivisions; 
(16) ?Any ordinance or resolution fixing utility rates and charges; 
(17) ?Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes; 
(18) ?Ordinances of 6-18-74 and 10-30-79 concerning fees for zoning matters; 
(19) ?Ordinances of 10-3-78 and 7-17-79 concerning speed limits in the town; 
(20) ?The salary classification manual, effective 1-14-86; 
and all such provisions shall continue in full force and effect as if fully set forth herein. 


Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a) ?The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the 
ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b) ?The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal 
took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding at the time of the repeal, for an offense 
committed under the ordinance repealed. 


Sec. 1-7. - Amendments to the Code. 
(a) ?Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by 
specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "The selectmen of 
the Town of Barre hereby ordain that section ____________ of Barre Town Code, is hereby 
amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(b) ?If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be 
used: "The selectmen of the Town of Barre hereby ordain that the Barre Town Code is hereby 
amended by adding a section to be numbered ____________ which section reads as follows:…." 
The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
Charter reference— Authority of board of selectmen to amend ordinances, § 37(a). 


Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a) ?By contract or by town personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed 
whenever authorized or directed by the board of selectmen. A supplement to this Code shall include 
all substantive parts of permanent and general ordinances passed by the board of selectmen during 
the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a 
supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, 
replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so 
prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the 
adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b) ?In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be 
excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c) ?When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier may make formal, nonsubstantive changes 
in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so 
to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1) ?Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2) ?Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the 
Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3) ?Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, 
where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision 
numbers; 
(4) ?Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this 
article," "this division," etc., as the cause may be, or to "sections ____________ to 
____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody 
the substantive sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance 
incorporated into the Code); and 
(5) ?Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance 
sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case may the codifier make any change in the 
meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the 
Code. 


Sec. 1-9. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion 
of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the Code in any 
manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Town of Barre to be misrepresented thereby. 


Sec. 1-10. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of selectmen that the sections, paragraphs, 
sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence, 
paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment of any court of 
competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, 
sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the board 
of selectmen without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, 
paragraph or section. 


Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provisions of this Code and any 
such person in violation of this Code and any such person in violation of any provisions of this Code shall 
be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a single offense, or in the case of 
a continuing offense, a fine not to exceed the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day 
a violation shall continue unabated. Any such person violating any of the provisions of this Code shall 
become liable to the town for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the town by reason of such 
violation. Where no specific penalty is provided therefor in this Code, the violation of any provision shall 
be punishable as set forth in Part I, the Town Charter, Chapter 6. 
Charter reference— General penalty for violation of town ordinances, § 37(j). 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to provide penalty for violation of ordinance, 
24 V.S.A. § 1974. 


Sec. 1-12. - Responsibility of officers of corporations violating this Code. 
    For the purpose of enforcing this Code, a corporation shall be deemed to be represented by its 
president, or in his absence the vice-president, or in the absence of both, by the officer or individual in 
charge of the affairs of the corporation. 


Sec. 1-13. - Conflicts. 
    If there is a conflict between any provisions of this Code and any code adopted by reference herein, 
the more restrictive provision shall apply. 


Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 4, 1991, amended Ch. 2 in its entirety. Such provisions have 
been included herein as §§ 2-1, 2-2, 2-21—2-27, 2-41—2-61, 2-81—2-84. Formerly, Ch. 2 pertained to 
the same subject matter as derived from an Ordinance adopted Nov. 17, 1981, and subsequently 
amended. 
Charter reference— Administrative department, Ch. 4. 
Cross reference— Any administrative ordinance or resolution saved from repeal, § 1-5(2); civil defense, 
Ch. 3; board of ambulance commissioners, § 5-26 et seq.; administrative procedures re water, § 8-41 et 
seq.; zoning, App. A; municipal plan, App. B; subdivisions, App. C. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 2-1. - Establishment of administrative code. 
    The selectmen of the Town of Barre hereby ordain that, pursuant to Section 25 of the Charter, there 
is hereby established an administrative code of the town which is meant to be a comprehensive code of 
administrative organization and procedure for the town and is divided into three (3) parts: 
(1) ?Administrative Organization 
(2) ?Personnel Policy 
(3) ?Financial Procedures 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 101) 


Sec. 2-2. - Title. 
    This entire chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Administrative Code of the Town of 
Barre, Vermont." 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 102) 


Secs. 2-3—2-20. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS AND ELECTED OFFICIALS 


Sec. 2-21. - Administrative organization. 
(a) ?The following officers are elected by the legal voters of the Town of Barre: 
(1) ?Five (5) selectmen; 
(2) ?Three (3) auditors; 
(3) ?One (1) constable; 
(4) ?One (1) clerk-treasurer; 
(5) ?One (1) moderator. 
(b) ?The following officers are appointed by the selectmen by majority vote: 
(1) ?A town manager who shall be the chief administrative officer of the town, by majority of the full 
board. 
(2) ?A town attorney for a term of one (1) year. 
(3) ?A tax collector for a term of one (1) year. 
(4) ?Five (5) cemetery commissioners, each for a term of five (5) years, with one (1) term beginning 
each year. 
(5) ?An assessor. 
(6) ?A town health officer (with concurrence of state department of health) for a term of three (3) 
years. 
(7) ?Eight (8) park and recreation commissioners, each for a term of three (3) years. 
(8) ?Such other officers as the laws of the State of Vermont or the ordinances of the Town of Barre 
shall direct the selectmen to appoint. The appointments shall be for the term indicated in the 
governing law, provided that any office abolished by the Charter shall not be deemed 
reestablished by this section. 
(c) ?The following officers are appointed by the town manager: 
(1) ?Director of public works; 
(2) ?Fire chief, with consent of selectmen; 
(3) ?Chief of police, with consent of selectmen; 
(4) ?Civil defense town chairman; 
(5) ?Director of emergency services. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 103) 


Sec. 2-22. - Departmental and divisional organization. 
    The elected and appointed officers shall be divided into the following units and heads thereof: 
(1) 
Departments: 

Department of public works ..... 
Superintendent of public works 

Department of fire ..... 
Fire chief 

Department of police ..... 
Chief of police 

Department of records and finance 
Town clerk-treasurer 

Department of emergency medical 
Director of EMS services 

Department of engineering ..... 
Town engineer 
(2) 
Divisions: 


Division of law ..... 
Town attorney 

Division of assessments ..... 
Town assessor 

Division of cemeteries ..... 
Cemetery commission chairperson 

Division of parks and recreation ..... 
Recreation board chairperson 

Division of tax collection ..... 
Town tax collector 

Division of public health ..... 
Town health officer 

Division of civil defense ..... 
Civil defense director 
 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 104; Ord. of 11-22-94, § 1) 


Sec. 2-23. - Administrative policy and procedures. 
(a) ?Officers. Each officer shall perform all duties required of his/her office by state law, the Town 
Charter, this code, and ordinances of the town and such other duties not in conflict therewith as may 
be required by the town manager. 
(b) ?Department and division heads. The heads of departments and divisions shall: 
(1) ?Be immediately responsible to the town manager for the effective administration of their 
respective department or division and all activities assigned thereto. 
(2) ?Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and shall inaugurate, with the 
approval of the town manager, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and 
to the public. 
(3) ?Submit quarterly and annual reports of the activities of his/her department or division to the 
town manager. 
(4) ?Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to 
furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental and divisional activities and 
to form a basis for the periodic reports to the town manager. 
(5) ?Have power, when authorized by the town manager, to appoint and remove, subject to 
personnel system regulations for personnel, all subordinates under him or her. 
(6) ?Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all town property and equipment used in his/her 
department or division. 
(c) ?Departments and divisions. Each department and division shall furnish, upon the direction of the 
town manager, any other town department or division such service, labor and materials as may be 
requisitioned by the head of such department or division, and as its own facilities permit, through the 
same procedure and subject to the same audit and control as other expenditures are incurred. 
(d) ?Operation of administrative service: 
(1) ?Make a daily deposit with the town clerk and treasurer of any monies received directly from the 
public except the tax collector who shall make weekly deposits to the clerk and treasurer. 
(2) ?Pay out monies belonging the town only in the manner prescribed herein. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 105) 


Sec. 2-24. - Bonds. 
    The following named town officials shall each, before entering upon their respective offices, give a 
bond in such sum and surety as may be determined by the board and duly approved by the town 
attorney, and conditioned upon the faithful performance and discharge of their respective duties, and for 
proper application and payment of all money or property coming into their hands by virtue of their office. 
The premium on such bond shall be paid by the town. 
(1) ?Town manager; 
(2) ?Town clerk and treasurer; 
(3) ?Constable; 
(4) ?Tax collector. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 106) 


Sec. 2-25. - Oaths. 
(a) ?Each of the following officers and employees in the administrative service shall be required to take 
an oath of office before entering upon the discharge of his duties, with oath shall be subscribed by 
the person taking it and shall be preserved in the office of the clerk and treasurer: 
(1) ?Town manager; 
(2) ?Board of selectmen; 
(3) ?Board of civil authority; 
(4) ?Town constable; 
(5) ?Police officers; 
(6) ?Moderator; 
(7) ?Clerk and treasurer; 
(8) ?Auditors; 
(9) ?Other elected officials. 
(b) ?Form of oath for the chief administrator and officers: 
State of Vermont  
County of Washington?ss.  
Town of Barre 
    I, ____________ , do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States, 
the Constitution of the State of Vermont, and the Charter and Ordinances of the Town of Barre; that I 
will faithfully, honestly and impartially discharge my duties as ____________ during my continuance 
therein; that I am not directly or indirectly pecuniarily interested in any public service corporation 
engaged in business or the Town of Barre, or in or with any person or corporation having contracts 
with said Town, so help me God. 
_____ 
    Subscribed and sworn to before me this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ 
/ ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
_____
Town Clerk and Treasurer 
(c) ?Form of oath for members of department of police: 
State of Vermont  
County of Washington?ss.  
Town of Barre 
    I, ____________ , do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States, 
the Constitution of the State of Vermont, and the Charter and Ordinances of the Town of Barre; and 
that I will, to the best of my ability, faithfully perform the duties of the office of ____________ during 
my continuance therein, so help me God. 
_____ 
    Subscribed and sworn to before me this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ 
/ ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
_____
Town Clerk and Treasurer 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 107) 


Sec. 2-26. - Duties and powers of elected officers. 
(a) ?Selectmen. The "board of selectmen" is the term given to the duly elected selectmen of the town, 
acting as a group and their official capacity. Such board shall: 
(1) ?Discharge all the duties conferred or imposed upon boards of selectmen by law, including the 
duties of sewer commissioners, board of liquor commissioners and any similar ex-officio duties 
not covered by this Code, ordinances, or Charter of the Town. 
(2) ?Appoint a town manager by vote of a majority of the full board, who shall be the chief 
administrative officer of the town. 
(3) ?Adopt, amend, repeal and enforce town ordinances unless otherwise provided by the Town 
Charter. 
(4) ?By majority vote, appoint a town attorney, a tax collector, five (5) cemetery commissioners, an 
assessor, eight (8) park and recreation commissioners, and any other such offices as the laws 
of the State of Vermont or the Charter and ordinances of the Town of Barre shall allow. 
(b) ?Board of civil authority. 
(1) ?The board of civil authority shall consist of the justices of the peace residing within the town, 
the town clerk, and the selectmen. At the first meeting following each annual town election, the 
board shall elect a chairman from among its members; the town clerk shall be the clerk of the 
board. 
(2) ?The board of civil authority shall meet prior to every regular or special town meeting or election 
to prepare, review and post in the manner required by law, an alphabetical list of all the legal 
voters in the town. The board shall post in five (5) places an attested copy of the list of voters so 
prepared and corrected, at least four (4) days prior to the meeting or election, and the said list of 
voters so prepared and corrected, and no others, shall be used at annual or special meetings 
and elections. In preparing the list of voters the board shall record each name in such manner 
as to identify each voter precisely, so as to avoid any possible confusion. 
(3) ?The board shall assist the town clerk and moderator in supervising all town elections and 
meetings and shall take care that all laws and requirements relating to elections and election 
procedures and town meetings are fully and faithfully kept. 
(c) ?Board of abatement. 
(1) ?The board of civil authority, together with the town assessor, shall constitute the board of 
abatement. The chairman and clerk of the board of civil authority shall serve as the chairman 
and clerk, respectively, of the board of abatement. 
(2) ?The board shall meet at least one (1) time each year, at the call of the clerk, to consider all 
requests for abatement of any tax, including any special assessment, charge or other levy made 
by the town. 
(3) ?Any taxpayer may request abatement of any tax for which he is or may become liable. The tax 
collector may also submit to the board for its consideration such taxes as he may see fit and 
may also offer his recommendations to the board. If the board finds: 
a. ?That there is no reasonable probability that the tax can be collected; or 
b. ?That the tax was not properly assessed; or 
c. ?That all persons liable for tax have died or removed from the state; or 
d. ?That the persons liable for the tax are financially unable to pay same; or 
e. ?That collection of the tax would work an injustice; or 
f. ?That collection of the tax would create an undue expense for the town; then 
the board may abate the tax in whole or in part. 
(4) ?The board shall make a record of taxes which are abated and record same in the office of the 
town clerk and treasurer, and a certified copy forwarded to the town tax collector. 
(5) ?The review and approval of the board of abatement shall not be required for corrections or 
credits to accounts receivable which are administrative or bookkeeping errors and such 
corrections or credits are approved by the town manager and acknowledged by the town clerk. 
The review and approval of the board of abatement shall not be required for adjustments and 
credits to emergency medical services billings to reflect collection of assigned payments by 
Medicare, Medicaid or other third party payments, and to debit bad debt reserves for such 
services. 
(d) ?Auditors. Auditors shall be elected for terms of three (3) years, with one (1) elected each year. They 
shall be responsible for the proper financial accountability of the town, and for this purpose all town 
officers shall, within thirty (30) days after the close of the fiscal year, submit to the auditors such 
reports, records and materials as the auditors may require for the discharge of their duties. The 
auditors shall thereupon proceed to examine and adjust the accounts of all town officers and report 
their findings in writing, not later than seventy-five (75) days after the close of the fiscal year. They 
shall cause their findings to be printed and made available to the voters. The auditors may employ 
the services of a certified public accountant at town expense, for such purposes as they shall deem 
proper. They shall also supervise the preparation, publication, and within budgetary limitations the 
distribution of the annual town report. 
(e) ?Constable. The town constable shall be elected for a term of one (1) year. He/she shall: 
(1) ?Serve writs of summons, processes, original and judicial as directed by a justice court; 
(2) ?Have all the additional power and duties prescribed for constables under the laws of the State 
of Vermont. 
(f) ?Clerk-treasurer: 
(1) ?The clerk-treasurer shall be elected for a period of three (3) years. He/she shall keep account 
of monies, bonds, notes and evidences of debt paid or delivered to him/her, and of monies paid 
out by him/her for the town. In addition, he/she shall: 
a. ?Record the amount voted for support of highways, special departments and for general 
town purposes; 
b. ?Collect taxes, assessments, charges and levies, including delinquencies in the hands of 
the tax collector, and maintain a record of monies collected and uncollected; 
c. ?Receive fees for filing copies of records and other instruments; 
d. ?Pay orders drawn on him/her by officials authorized to draw orders; 
e. ?Provide detailed financial statements and reports, as may be required by the selectmen; 
f. ?Maintain a record of all action taken at special or annual town meetings; 
g. ?Maintain all town records and an index of those records; 
h. ?Maintain and file all reports required by law; 
i. ?Perform any other duties required of him/her by law, this Charter, or ordinances. 
(2) ?Before entering upon the duties of his/her office, the clerk-treasurer shall give a bond 
conditioned for the faithful performance of his/her duties. The bond shall be of a sum and with 
such surety as prescribed and approved by the board of selectmen; and the premium for such 
bond shall be paid by the town. 
(g) ?Moderator. The town moderator shall be elected to serve for the term of one (1) year. He/she shall: 
(1) ?Call to order and preside over the annual town meeting and special meetings not involving 
Australian ballots, to decide points of order, and to make public declaration of votes passed. 
(2) ?Preserve order in the conduct of business and debate at the annual town meeting. He/she shall 
warn disorderly persons to desist, and, if after being warned the person continues to be 
disorderly he/she shall request him/her to leave the meeting. If he/she refuses the moderator 
may cause him/her to be removed by calling upon the town constable or police department. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 108) 


Sec. 2-27. - Duties and powers of appointed officers. 
(a) ?Town manager. The town manager shall be the chief executive and chief administrative officer of 
the Town of Barre, Vermont, and shall enforce the laws of the town and require the faithful 
performance of all administrative duties. 
(1) ?The town manager shall have power, and it shall be his/her duty: 
a. ?To organize, operate, continue or discontinue such departments or divisions as the board 
of selectmen may determine. 
b. ?To carry out the policies laid down by the board, to keep the board informed of the financial 
condition and future needs of the town, and to make such reports as may be required by 
law or requested by the board, together with any other reports and recommendations 
which he/she may deem advisable. 
c. ?To appoint and remove, upon merit and fitness alone, all subordinate officials, employees 
and agents under his/her control and, with the approval of the selectmen, to fix their 
compensation as provided in the Town Charter. Although the town manager may hold 
subordinate officers and employees of the town responsible for the faithful discharge of 
their duties, the town manager shall remain ultimately responsible to the board for all 
administrative actions under his/her jurisdiction. 
d. ?To be present at all regular meetings of the board of selectmen, except when excused by 
the board and committees thereof, except when his/her removal or suspension is being 
discussed, provided that this section shall not be construed to deny any right the town 
manager may otherwise have to a public hearing relative to his/her removal. 
e. ?To keep full and complete records of the actions of his/her office, including a personnel 
record system in which shall be kept all pertinent information on all department heads and 
employees, to keep necessary accounts, to render to the board of selectmen an itemized 
monthly report showing in detail the disbursements of the preceding month, and to 
maintain an appropriate budget control system. 
f. ?To keep the board of selectmen fully advised as to the needs of the town within the scope 
of the manager's duties; and annually to furnish to them, as prescribed in the Town 
Charter, a detailed budget proposal; and also to furnish to them annually a five-year 
projection of capital improvements for the town. To enable the town manager to make 
estimates of expenditures and receipts, all boards, officers and committees of the town 
shall, upon his/her written request, furnish all information in their possession and submit to 
him/her in writing a detailed estimate of anticipated income and appropriations required for 
the efficient and proper conduct of their respective responsibilities during the next fiscal 
year. 
g. ?To examine or cause to be examined, with or without notice, the affairs of any department 
or division under his/her control, or the conduct of any officer or employee thereof. For that 
purpose he/she shall have access to all books and papers of such departments or divisions 
for the information necessary for the proper performance of his/her duties. 
h. ?To be the general purchasing agent of the town and purchase all supplies for every 
department or division. 
i. ?To supervise all special programs of the town as if the same were a separate department of 
the town, unless otherwise voted by the town. 
j. ?To have charge, control and supervision of the following matters: 
1. ?The police department, including appointment and removal of the chief thereof, with 
the consent of the selectmen. 
2. ?Any town fire department supported by town funds, including the appointment and 
removal of the chief thereof, with the consent of the selectmen. 
3. ?The system of licenses not otherwise regulated by law. 
4. ?The system of sewers and drainage. 
5. ?Lighting of highways, bridges and public places. 
6. ?Construction and maintenance of town highways. 
7. ?Town buildings, and repairs and construction on town buildings. 
8. ?Maintenance of parks, playgrounds, forests and other public lands. 
9. ?Any public water system owned or operated by the town. 
10. ?Operation of any department organized to provide emergency medical services and 
any ancillary duties thereto. 
k. ?To cause duties prescribed for towns and not committed to the care of any particular officer 
to be duly performed and executed. 
l. ?To participate in the discussion of matters coming before the selectmen and its committees, 
but not the right to vote. 
m. ?To perform such other duties which may be required of him/her by vote of the board of 
selectmen, by law or by ordinance, consistent with the Town Charter. 
(b) ?Town attorney. The division of law shall be under the supervision of the town attorney and he shall: 
(1) ?Fulfill the duties prescribed by law for the grand juror and town agent of the town. 
(2) ?Review all forms utilized by the tax collector with him/her and shall develop and update a 
procedure booklet to ensure compliance by the tax collector with the various statutes pertaining 
to the collection of involved taxes. 
(3) ?Perform such other professional duties as may be requested by the selectmen or by any other 
officer or agency of town government with the approval of the selectmen. 
(c) ?Tax collector. The division of tax collection shall be under the supervision of the tax collector and 
he/she shall: 
(1) ?Be responsible for the collection of all real and personal property taxes as provided by state 
law and the Barre Town Charter. All remaining town indebtedness in the nature of sewer, sewer 
assessments, etc., shall be the duty of the town manager. 
(2) ?Meet with the board of selectmen quarterly, or more frequently if requested, to review and 
report to the selectmen the current delinquent accounts held by the tax collector and the 
proposed action to collect same. Such meeting shall be within forty-five (45) days of the tax 
collector receiving a warrant from the town clerk following each quarterly installment of real and 
personal taxes. 
(3) ?Upon appointment the tax collector and the town attorney shall immediately review all forms 
utilized by the tax collector and shall develop and update a procedures booklet to ensure 
compliance by the tax collector with the various statutes pertaining to the collection of the 
involved taxes. 
(4) ?Pursuant to the Town Charter, all sums collected by the tax collector including taxes, fees, 
penalties and interest shall be turned into the town clerk as collected. The fees due the tax 
collector, if any, shall be billed by the tax collector to the town and paid by the town treasurer 
pursuant to the existing selectmen's warrant system. 
(5) ?In his/her discretion may accept partial payment as long as the taxpayer agrees (in writing) that 
the acceptance of same does not waive penalties and interest and remaining taxes due the 
town. 
(6) ?As compensation for the collection of taxes, the tax collector shall be entitled to such 
remuneration as may from time to time be set by the board of selectmen. 
(7) ?In his/her discretion have the authority at any period to turn accounts over to an attorney as 
directed by the board of selectmen. In addition, following review by the selectmen, the 
selectmen retain the authority to order additional accounts turned over to an attorney. 
(d) ?Cemetery commissioners. The division of cemeteries shall be under the charge of five (5) cemetery 
commissioners, one (1) of which shall be elected as chairperson. They shall: 
(1) ?Have full responsibility for the care and management of town burial grounds. 
(2) ?Have the authority to set apart a portion of any burial ground placed under its charge as it 
deems proper, as a place for burial of persons without charge, under such regulation as it 
prescribes. 
(3) ?Lay out lots, with necessary paths, avenues or other reserved places, and may plant and 
embellish places with trees, shrubs and flowers. 
(4) ?In the name of the town, by deed may grant and convey lots in such burial grounds to be used 
for the burial of the dead on which tombs, cenotaphs, and other monuments are to be erected. 
The board of selectmen shall fix the prices for such lots. 
(5) ?Make necessary bylaws and regulations, subject to approval of the board of selectmen, in 
respect to town burial grounds, and interment of the dead not inconsistent with the law, and may 
alter such bylaws and regulations with board approval. 
(6) ?Be responsible for keeping accurate records and maps as to interments. This information will 
be submitted annually to the board of selectmen in writing. 
(7) ?Be responsible for keeping a detailed statement of its receipts and expenditures and the 
amount and disposition of funds in its hands or subject to its control. 
(e) ?Town assessor. The division of assessments shall be supervised by the town assessor who shall: 
(1) ?Prepare all work in connection with the assessments of property and the preparation of all 
assessments and tax rolls and tax notices. 
(2) ?To ensure that each citizen and taxpayer is accorded fair treatment with respect to town 
property taxes and, to explain in detail rights under federal and state laws afforded to certain 
groups (i.e. senior citizens, property tax relief law and veterans). 
(3) ?Other duties as required by the board of selectmen. 
(f) ?Town health officer. The town health officer shall have charge and control of all functions involved in 
protecting and preserving the public health and shall: 
(1) ?Make sanitary inspection when and where he/she has reason to suspect that anything exists 
which may be detrimental to the public health. He/she may enter any house or other building or 
place for the purpose of making such inspection. By written order he/she shall direct the 
destruction or removal within a specified time of unhealthful conditions or causes of sickness. 
(2) ?If he/she so deems that the public health so demands, he/she may order churches, schools, 
and all places of public assemblage to be closed. 
(3) ?Annually, if requested by the board of selectmen, make a sanitary survey of each school 
house, all school lunch facilities and any building used for public purposes. The results of this 
survey are to be reported to the board of selectmen. 
(4) ?If he/she deems necessary, require the isolation of persons and things infected with or exposed 
to contagious or infectious diseases, and may provide suitable places for the reception of same, 
and, if necessary, furnish medical treatment for such sick persons at their expense if they have 
the ability to pay, otherwise at the expense of the town. 
(g) ?Superintendent of public works. The superintendent of public works shall direct the department of 
public works and shall be responsible for construction, management, maintenance and operation of 
the roads, streets, drainage systems, water system, and equipment of the town as follows: 
(1) ?Shall direct the repair and maintenance of all town streets and roads. 
(2) ?Shall maintain and provide for adequate drainage on all streets, roads, and bridges. 
(3) ?Shall be responsible for the cleaning of snow and effectuate the proper disposal of same. 
(4) ?Shall construct, operate and maintain town water distribution and sewage systems. 
(5) ?Shall operate the town garage and shall maintain and provide for town uses all automotive 
equipment owned by the town. 
(h) ?Fire chief. The fire chief shall direct the department of fire and shall be charged with the prevention 
of fires and the protection of life and property and shall: 
(1) ?Report all fire losses over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to the town assessor. 
(2) ?Be responsible for the maintenance and care of all property and equipment used by his 
department. 
(3) ?Be responsible for the inspection of potential fire hazards, the abatement of existing fire 
hazards and the conducting of an educational fire prevention program. 
(i) ?Chief of police. The chief of police is the chief administrative officer of the department and has the 
final departmental authority in all matters of policy, operations, and discipline. He/she exercises all 
lawful powers of his/her office and issues such lawful orders as are necessary to assure the effective 
performance of the department. Through the chief of police, the department is responsible for the 
enforcement of all laws coming within its legal jurisdiction. The chief of police is responsible for 
planning, directing, coordinating, controlling, and staffing all activities of the department. He/she is 
also responsible for its continued and efficient operation, for the enforcement of rules and regulations 
within the department, for the completion and forwarding of such reports as may be required by 
proper authority and for the department's relations with local citizens, the local government and other 
related agencies. The chief is responsible for training all members of the department. The chief shall 
have general charge of the station house and all property of the police department, and shall: 
(1) ?Ensure compliance with all laws which the department or its officers have the authority to 
enforce. 
(2) ?Organize, direct, and control all resources of the department to preserve the peace, protect 
persons and property, and enforce the law. 
(3) ?Develop a professional organizational structure for the department. 
(4) ?Establish a routine of daily duties to be performed by officers. Designate an officer to serve as 
commanding officer in his/her absence. 
(5) ?Assign, detail, or transfer any member or employee of the department to or from any unit or 
assignment whenever he/she shall deem such action to be in the best interest of the efficiency, 
discipline, or morale of the department. 
(6) ?Institute an adequate and progressive program of training for members and employees of the 
department. 
(7) ?Ensure that all members have available to them copies of the department's police manual. 
(8) ?Promulgate all general and special orders of the department and issue on his/her own authority 
orders, written and oral, not inconsistent with his/her powers, duties, and responsibilities. 
(9) ?Provide for investigation into all cases of alleged or apparent misconduct by departmental 
personnel. 
(10) ?Enlist the suggestions of members and employees of the department to ensure maximum 
relevance and acceptance of all departmental personnel. 
(11) ?Keep himself/herself informed as to the affairs of the department, ensuring that the duties and 
responsibilities of members and employees are being properly discharged. 
(12) ?Be responsible for the necessary delegation of authority to those under his/her command, 
commensurate with their duties and responsibilities. 
(13) ?Exercise general supervision and inspection of all licensed public places within the 
community. 
(14) ?Develop or adopt new techniques to improve effectiveness in the discharge of police 
obligations of the department. 
(15) ?Adopt a policy covering the safekeeping of all evidence and any property recovered, found, or 
confiscated. Designate a member of the department as evidence officer. 
(16) ?Submit an annual report to the appointing authority outlining the activities of the department. 
(17) ?Submit crime reports to the Vermont Crime Information Center on the forms prescribed by the 
commissioner of the department of public safety (20 V.S.A. 2054). 
(18) ?Submit arrest reports, fingerprint cards, missing persons reports, stolen property reports, and 
any other reports deemed necessary, to the Vermont Crime Information Center on the forms 
prescribed by the commissioner of the department of public safety (20 V.S.A. 2054). 
(19) ?Notify the department of motor vehicles, on the appropriate forms, the particulars of an 
accident involving a motor vehicle which happens within the limits of this community in which 
any person is killed or injured or where there is damage in excess of the amount specified in 23 
V.S.A. 1129 to any vehicle or other property. 
(20) ?Be responsible for the preparation and justification of the annual departmental budget and for 
the control of all departmental expenditures. 
(21) ?Submit the appropriate data and forms to the F.B.I. for the purpose of compiling the Uniform 
Crime Report. 
(22) ?Maintain a personnel record system in which shall be kept all pertinent information on all 
department members and employees. 
(23) ?Submit such other reports as required by law or as requested by the town manager. 
(j) ?Civil defense director. The division of civil defense shall be under the control of the civil defense 
director who shall be the town manager. The civil defense director shall appoint a town chairman 
(with the consent of the selectmen). Duties and powers of the civil defense director and town 
chairman are: 
(1) ?Civil defense director. 
a. ?The civil defense director may exercise the emergency power and authority necessary to 
fulfill his/her general powers and duties as defined in Chapter 4, Section 21 of the Town 
Charter. The judgment of the civil defense director shall be the sole criteria necessary to 
invoke emergency powers provided in the Town Charter, the Ordinance Code and other 
appropriate authorities. The town selectmen may convene to perform its legislative and 
administrative powers as the situation demands, and shall receive reports relative to civil 
defense activities. Nothing in this Code shall be construed as abridging or curtailing the 
powers or restrictions of the town selectmen as defined in Chapter 3, Section II of the 
Town Charter. 
b. ?During any period when disaster threatens or when the town has been struck by disaster, 
within the definition of this Code, the town manager may promulgate such regulations as 
he/she deems necessary to protect life and property and preserve critical resources. Such 
regulations may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
1. ?Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of vehicles in order to facilitate the 
work of civil defense forces, or to facilitate the mass movement of persons from critical 
areas within or without the town. 
2. ?Regulations pertaining to the movement of persons from areas deemed to be 
hazardous or vulnerable to disaster. 
3. ?Such other regulations necessary to preserve public peace, health and safety. 
4. ?Regulations promulgated in accordance with the authority above will be given 
widespread circulation by proclamations published and uttered by newspaper and 
radio. These regulations will have the force of ordinance when duly filed with the town 
clerk and violations will be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 6, Section 37 
of the Town Charter. 
c. ?The civil defense director shall order civil defense forces to the aid of other communities 
when required in accordance with the statutes of the state, and he/she may request the 
state, or a political subdivision of the state, to send aid to the Town of Barre in case of 
disaster when conditions in the town are beyond the control of the local civil defense 
forces. 
d. ?The civil defense director may obtain vital supplies, equipment and other properties found 
lacking and needed for the protection of health, life and property of the people, and bind 
the town for the fair value thereof. 
e. ?The civil defense director may require emergency services of any town officer or employee. 
If regular town forces are determined inadequate, the director may require the services of 
such other personnel as he can obtain that are available, including citizen volunteers. All 
duly authorized persons rendering emergency services shall be entitled to the privileges 
and immunities as are provided by state law, the Town Charter and ordinances for regular 
town employees and other registered and identified civil defense and disaster workers. 
f. ?The civil defense director will exercise his/her ordinary powers as town manager and all of 
the special powers conferred upon him/her by the Town Charter and the Ordinance Code 
of the town, all powers conferred upon him/her by any statute, or any other lawful authority. 
(2) ?Town chairman of the office of civil defense. 
a. ?The town chairman of the office of civil defense shall be responsible to the director in 
regard to all phases of the civil defense activity. Under the supervision of the director, 
he/she shall be responsible for the planning, coordination and operation of the civil defense 
activity in the town. Under the supervision of the director, he/she shall maintain liaison with 
the state and federal authorities and the authorities of other nearby political subdivisions as 
to ensure the most effective operation of the civil defense plan. His/her duties shall include, 
but not be limited to, the following: 
1. ?Coordinating the recruitment of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the 
personnel and facilities of the town for civil defense purposes. 
2. ?Development and coordination of plans for the immediate use of all of the facilities, 
equipment, manpower and other resources of the town for the purpose of minimizing 
or preventing damage to persons and property; and protecting and restoring to 
usefulness governmental services and public utilities necessary for the public health, 
safety and welfare. 
3. ?Negotiating and concluding agreements with owners or persons in control of buildings 
or other property for the use of such buildings or other property for the civil defense 
purposes and designating suitable buildings as public shelters. 
4. ?Through public informational programs, educating the civilian population as to actions 
necessary and required for the protection of their persons and property in case of 
enemy attack, or disaster, as defined herein, either impending or present. 
5. ?Conducting public practice alerts to ensure the efficient operation of the civil defense 
forces and to familiarize residents with civil defense regulations, procedures and 
operations. 
6. ?Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies engaged in any civil 
defense activity. 
7. ?Assuming such authority and conducting such activity as the director may direct to 
promote and execute the civil defense plan. 
(k) ?Park and recreation commissioners. The division of parks and recreation shall be under the charge 
of seven (7) commissioners, one of whom shall be elected as chairperson. The commissioners shall 
be appointed by the selectboard and shall serve a term of three (3) years. The Barre Town School 
Board may appoint an ex-officio member to the commission for an indefinite term. The school board 
shall inform the town clerk-treasurer of its appointment. The commissioners shall: 
(1) ?Be charged with the control, development, management, operation and maintenance of a 
system of public parks, forestry and recreational areas and facilities, and shall be charged with 
the supervision and maintenance of playgrounds, playfields, bathing beaches, swimming pools, 
recreation centers and other recreation and park activities, areas and facilities. It shall have the 
power to expend for this purpose any funds appropriated by the town for such purpose and any 
funds donated or bequeathed for recreation and/or park purposes by private individuals or 
organizations. It shall be charged with the responsibility of providing an adequate and 
wholesome recreation program for people of both sexes and all ages. 
(2) ?The commission shall have the power to conduct outdoor and indoor recreation activities and 
facilities on the grounds and in the buildings in charge of the school board, subject to its 
consent. 
(3) ?The commission may call upon any other department of the town government for assistance in 
performing its duties as outlined in section 2-23(c). 
(4) ?The commission, with the approval of the town selectmen, shall have the authority to conduct, 
at reasonable charges, such facilities for amusement, entertainment, refreshment or 
transportation of the public as are suitable for park and recreation purposes, and may let 
privileges therefor, but such privileges shall be subject to the supervision and control of the 
commission. 
(5) ?The commission shall be charged with the control, maintenance and development of public 
parks and recreational areas now in existence or that may hereafter be acquired, except narrow 
parkways, boulevard strips and small areas along streets, which shall be under the jurisdiction 
of the department of public works. 
(6) ?The commission may make, with approval of the town manager, all contracts to carry out the 
objectives and purposes of the commission and shall have such other powers and perform such 
other duties as may be necessary for the proper administration of the affairs of the commission. 
(l) ?Director of emergency medical services. The department of emergency medical services shall be 
under the direction of the director of EMS and he/she shall: 
(1) ?Direct the operations of all ambulance related services, facilities, and medical equipment. 
(2) ?Manage the personnel of the department and under the direction of the town manager, recruit, 
hire, direct, assign, train, motivate, discipline, and discharge all personnel of the department. 
(3) ?Develop and deliver emergency and nonemergency medical services, public health education 
programs, and relevant EMS information for public release. 
(4) ?Maintain accurate medical service records and proper financial records for billing and collection 
of patient accounts. 
(5) ?Supervise and administer any special projects and on-going programs assigned by the town 
manager for the benefit of the departmental mission or to support the mission of other town 
departments. 
(6) ?Recruit, train, support, and direct volunteer labor for accomplishment of the departmental 
mission. 
(7) ?Maintain all necessary licenses, certificates, and approvals required for the lawful and proper 
execution of the town's goals in delivery of quality emergency medical services, and assure and 
promote proper certification of employees. 
(8) ?Other related duties and tasks as assigned by the town manager. 
(m) ?Housing advisory committee. Any housing rehabilitation program operated by the town shall be 
under the charge of the housing advisory committee. The committee shall consist of five (5) Barre 
Town residents appointed by the board of selectmen. 
Three (3) members of the committee shall consist of one (1) individual from the banking field, one from 
the real estate sales or appraisal field; and one (1) from the construction field. The other two (2) members 
shall be considered members-at-large. The terms of the members shall be three (3) years, except that for 
the initial appointment one (1) individual shall be appointed to a one-year term, two (2) individuals shall be 
appointed to two-year terms, and two (2) individuals shall be appointed to three-year terms so that in the 
future the terms are staggered. Terms shall begin June 1 of any year and expire on May 31 of any year. If 
a vacancy occurs, a new member shall be appointed by the selectmen to fill the unexpired term. If the 
vacancy occurs in one of the specific seats listed above, the seat shall be filled by a resident with the 
appropriate background. By vote of at least four (4) selectmen, a member may be removed from the 
committee for violation of this subsection. The committee's decisions on either adopting a housing 
rehabilitation policy or approving and disapproving applications are appealable to the board of selectmen. 
Appeal will be initiated by the selectmen or by an applicant. An affirmative vote by four (4) selectmen shall 
be required to overturn a committee decision. The committee shall: 
(1) ?Adopt a written housing rehabilitation policy and may amend the policy as needed; 
(2) ?Review housing rehabilitation applications and application documentation when administered 
by Barre town; 
(3) ?Approve or disapprove housing rehabilitation applications provided the sum of the approved 
applications shall not exceed the sum of money authorized by the selectmen and submit its 
recommendations for action on loan agreements to the selectmen when administered by Barre 
town. 
(4) ?Suggest housing-related amendments to the zoning and subdivision bylaws, when the 
committee believes changes are warranted; 
(5) ?Elect one (1) of its members as chairperson; 
(6) ?Submit to the selectmen housing-related recommendations, as the committee determines 
necessary. Said recommendations may include, but are not limited to, funding for programs, 
public education campaigns, housing needs, and ordinance changes; 
(7) ?Have no authority to obligate the town financially either by, but not limited to, hiring employees 
or retaining professionals; 
(8) ?Refrain from interfering with town employees or in town operations; 
(9) ?Have the flexibility to enter into multiple agreements to effectively disburse Housing 
Rehabilitation Funds. 
    The town manager, pursuant to affirmative vote of the selectmen, shall: 
(1) ?Execute loan agreements; 
(2) ?Acknowledge as paid when appropriate any loans obtained hereunder; 
(3) ?Discharge mortgage deeds; 
(4) ?Subordinate mortgage deeds; 
(5) ?Modify any loan agreements, notes and mortgage deeds; and 
(6) ?Perform any act necessary to carry out intent of these programs. 
(n) ?Town engineer. The engineering department shall be directed by the town engineer who shall: 
(1) ?Plan and design the road, sewer, drainage, and water projects of the town. 
(2) ?Issue all permits for, and inspect the work involved in, the construction of sewer and water 
services, sidewalks, curb cuts, and inspect all work done under the provisions of applicable 
codes of the town. 
(3) ?Maintain an accurate record of engineering drawings. 
(4) ?Provide general engineering assistance to all town departments and divisions. 
(5) ?Advise the town on environmental matters, including regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 109; Ord. of 7-7-92, § 1; Ord. of 11-22-94, §§ 2, 3; Ord. of 1-10-95, § 1; Ord. 
of 7-18-95, § 1; Ord. of 8-26-03, § 1; Ord. of 10-21-14, § 1) 


Secs. 2-28—2-40. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - PERSONNEL POLICY FOR TOWN EMPLOYEES 


Sec. 2-41. - Definitions. 
    [For the purposes of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed 
thereto:] 
    Allocation: The assignment of a position to its appropriate class in relation to duties performed. 
    Appeal: An application for review of an alleged grievance submitted or instituted by an employee to 
higher authority. 
    Appointment: The offer to and acceptance by a person of a position either on a regular or temporary 
basis. 
    Class: A position or positions which are similar in respect to duties, responsibilities, and authority and 
may be designated by the same title. Positions of the same class are equitably compensated from the 
same range of pay in similar employment conditions. 
    Classification: The act of grouping positions in classes with regard to: 
(1) ?Duties and responsibilities; 
(2) ?Requirements as to education, knowledge, experience, and ability; 
(3) ?Tests of fitness; and 
(4) ?Ranges of pay. 
    Classification plan: The official or approved system of grouping positions into appropriate classes 
consisting of: 
(1) ?An index to the class specifications; 
(2) ?The class specifications; and 
(3) ?Rules for administering the classification plan. 
    Compensation plan: The official schedule of pay approved by the board of selectmen assigning one 
(1) or more rates of pay to each class title. 
    Compensation: The standard rates of pay which have been established for the respective classes of 
work, as set forth in the compensation plan. 
    Demotion: Assignment of an employee to a position of a lower class which has a lower maximum 
salary range. 
    Department or division: A major functional or multifunctional unit of the town government. 
    Department or division head: A person appointed by the town manager or board of selectmen who is 
responsible for the administration of a department or division. 
    Employee: Any person working in the regular service of the town, except those specifically exempt. 
    Evaluation: The process of assessing an employee's performance on the basis of the type, difficulty 
and responsibility of work performed in the position, at least on an annual basis or when required by the 
town manager. 
    Grievance: A grievance is a wrong, real or fancied, considered as grounds for complaint, except in 
the case of a personnel action arising out of a position classification, pay, demotion, suspension, and 
dismissal. The adjustment of complaints arising therefrom are separately provided for. 
    Immediate family: That group of individuals the employee's mother, father, stepmother, stepfather, 
sister(s) brother(s), stepchild(ren), grandmother, grandfather. Also considered to be immediate family are 
the mother, father, sister(s), brother(s), and grandparents of the employee's spouse. 
    Job: A position. 
    Layoff: The involuntary nondisciplinary separation of an employee from a position. 
    Leave of absence: An approved type of absence from work as provided for by these rules. 
    Overtime: Authorized time worked by an employee for overtime work performed in accordance with 
these rules. 
    Overtime pay: Compensation paid to an employee for actual time worked in excess of their normal 
work period. 
    Part-time employee: An employee working less than thirty (30) hours per week for the town. 
    Pay range: A minimum and a maximum pay rate assigned to a class of positions as the 
compensation for that class. 
    Pay rate: A specific dollar amount, expressed as either an annual rate, a monthly rate, a 
semimonthly rate, a biweekly rate, or an hourly rate, as shown in the pay plan of the town. 
    Personnel board: Town of Barre Board of Selectmen. 
    Personnel director: Town manager or selectmen's designee. 
    Position: Any office or employment, whether occupied or vacant, full-time or part-time, consisting of 
duties and responsibilities assigned to one individual by competent authority. 
    Probationary period: The working test or trial period of employment beginning with the date of an 
employee's first appointment to the classified service and the next twelve (12) months thereafter. 
    Promotion: Assignment of an employee from one class to another which has a higher maximum rate 
of pay. 
    Reduction in work force: The layoff of employees. 
    Regular employee: An employee who has received an appointment for at least twelve (12) months 
and who has completed his probationary period. Regular employee status normally accrues after 
completion of twelve (12) consecutive months. 
    Removal: Separation of an employee for failure to meet legal requirements of employment. 
    Seniority: The length of time of continuous service as an employee of the town, starting with the first 
day of work of the last date of hire. 
    Suspension: An enforced leave of absence for disciplinary purposes or pending investigation of 
charges made against an employee. 
    Supervisor: Any person responsible to a superior for directing the work of others. 
    Temporary employee: An employee who is appointed for less than six (6) months with the 
anticipated date of termination indicated at the time of appointment. No temporary employment status can 
be extended for a period which would exceed an additional six (6) months. 
    Transfer: A change of an employee from one position, department or division of another having the 
same maximum salary range. 
    Work day: Scheduled number of hours an employee is required to work per day. 
    Unclassified service: All elected officials, persons appointed by any commission or those persons 
who volunteer to serve without pay. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 201) 


Sec. 2-42. - Employee benefits. 
(a) ?Eligibility for employee benefits. Part-time employees (i.e. employees who work less than thirty (30) 
hours per week) and temporary employees receive no fringe benefits. Except for those employees 
described above, all employees will receive each of the employee benefits described herein. 
However, employees who are eligible to receive all employee benefits but who work less than thirty-
seven and one-half (37½) hours per week are entitled to holiday and vacation pay and the various 
leave benefits only in proportion to numbers of hours worked per week. 
(b) ?Bereavement. In addition to time allowed for sick leave or personal leave, an employee is entitled to 
up to three (3) working days with pay as needed in the event an employee suffers the death of 
his/her mother, father, spouse, child, brother, sister, stepmother, stepfather, stepson, or 
stepdaughter and provided further that the funeral and/or arrangements must take place during an 
employee's scheduled workday. In addition to the foregoing, an employee shall be granted one (1) 
day for attending the funeral of an employee's father-in-law, mother-in-law, grandparents of the 
employee or employee's spouse, sister-in-law, and brother-in-law provided the funeral occurs on the 
employee's scheduled work day. 
(c) ?Emergency leave. In the event of serious illness in the immediate family of any employee up to 
three (3) days' leave, if necessary, may be granted with pay to the employee. This leave will be 
charged against the employee's accumulated sick leave. Days in excess of these three (3) days will 
be charged against the employee's accumulated vacation. 
(d) ?Jury duty. It is the civic obligation of each town employee to serve on a jury if called. While on jury 
duty, an employee will receive the difference between his full-time pay from the town and the amount 
received by reason of said court participation. Any employee excused from jury duty by noon of any 
day will report for work for the afternoon portion of the work shift. 
(e) ?Maternity leave. Vermont's Maternity Leave Law covers employers with ten (10) or more employees 
who work an average of thirty (30) hours per week over the course of a year. The employer must 
provide up to twelve (12) weeks of unpaid maternity leave during pregnancy and/or after childbirth for 
qualified workers. A qualified worker is any woman who has worked for the employer an average of 
thirty (30) hours a week for a year. 
    Eligible workers with paid sick leave or vacation leave policies may use up to six (6) weeks of 
accumulated paid time during the maternity leave, which cannot be used to extend the twelve-week 
leave. The employer must provide an employee benefits during the leave period, but may require the 
employee to pay the cost of those benefits. The worker must give written notice of her intention to take 
maternity leave, including the dates the leave will start and end. The employer can require up to six (6) 
weeks' notice. The law requires an employer to offer a returning worker the job she had previously held or 
a comparable one at equal pay, benefits, and seniority. 
(f) ?Military leave. Military duty means training and service performed by an inductee, enlistee, or 
reservist, or any entrant into a component of the armed forces of the United States and time spent in 
reporting for and returning from such training in service, or if a rejection occurs, from the place of 
reporting the service. It also includes active duty training as a reservist in the armed forces of the 
United States or as a member of the National Guard of the United States where the call is for training 
only. 
(1) ?Eligibility. Any permanent employee who has completed the probationary period and who 
leaves the town service for compulsory military duty shall be placed on military leave without 
pay, such leave to extend through a date of ninety (90) days after his/her release from military 
duty. Also, a permanent employee who has completed his/her probationary period shall be 
granted a leave of absence for the purpose of being inducted or otherwise entering military 
service. 
(2) ?Restoration. An employee returning from military leave shall be entitled to restoration to his/her 
former position, provided he/she makes application within ninety (90) days after his/her release 
from duty under conditions other than dishonorable, and is physically and mentally capable of 
performing the duties of the position involved. In the event that the position he/she vacated no 
longer exists at the time he/she qualifies for return to work, such person shall be entitled to be 
reemployed in another existing position of the same class provided such reemployment does 
not necessitate the laying off of another person with greater seniority. 
(3) ?Disposition of vacation and sick leave. A regular employee who leaves the town directly for 
such military leave without pay shall be paid for any accrued vacation as they may be entitled to 
if they were actually separating from the town service. Employees returned to duty under this 
provision shall have unused sick leave credits restored for their use. 
(4) ?Military reserve training or National Guard service; all reserve components. A regular employee 
who has completed his/her probationary period and who is a member of the National Guard or 
any reserve component of the United States armed forces will be allowed leave of absence for 
official training or duty in accordance with state statute and federal law, not to exceed two (2) 
weeks for such activity in any one (1) calendar year. 
(g) ?Sick leave. Employees unable to report to work because of sickness shall notify their supervisor as 
far in advance of their normal work hours as possible. 
    An eligible town employee is entitled to one (1) day leave for every month of completed continuous 
employment. Forty-five (45) days is the maximum amount of sick leave that can be accumulated. If any 
employee runs out of sick leave, he/she may use his vacation time, if authorized by his/her department or 
division head. An employee can accrue, but cannot utilize sick leave until he/she has worked for the town 
for six (6) consecutive months. 
    Emergency medical employees are not considered eligible employees for the purposes of this 
section. 
    Employees absent from work due to illness will usually be allowed to take sick leave up to their 
accumulated amount, and earned vacation time thereafter as provided in the paragraph next above. 
However, his/her department or division head, after consultation with the town manager, may take 
whatever steps deemed necessary as a result of that consultation, including requirement of a statement 
from a licensed physician, to verify the employee's eligibility for sick leave. The town has the right to have 
medical records reviewed along with another examination by a physician picked by the town. 
    Employees are not eligible for sick leave if injured on off-duty hours while in the gainful employment 
of others. 
    Employees who come to work and must leave as a result of sickness will have charged against their 
accumulated leave the number of hours not worked due to illness. 
(h) ?Travel leave. A request for travel must be submitted to the town manager or his/her designees for 
authorization of travel to a convention, meeting or other official town business that takes the 
employee away from his/her normal work. This request is to provide the town manager information 
so that expenses for travel may be approved before the employee leaves. If the employee's private 
vehicle is used for transportation, mileage will be reimbursed at the rate established by the board of 
selectmen. Documentation will be required for travel, lodging, and conference fees. 
(i) ?Leave of absence. An employee with one (1) year or more continuous service, upon prior written 
approval by the town manager and personnel board, may be granted an unpaid leave of absence not 
to exceed one (1) year for good cause. 
(j) ?Personal leave. Employees, excluding emergency medical employees, may have up to two (2) days 
per year for personal leave (paid). Leave may be granted by the manager and must be for pressing 
business that cannot be scheduled during nonworking hours. Unused leave days do not accumulate 
and there will be no pay for unused days. Personal leave days are not holidays or extra vacation 
days. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 202) 


Sec. 2-43. - Holidays. 
(a) ?Legal holidays. The following days are legal holidays for eligible salaried employees excluding 
emergency medical employees: 
New Year's Day 
Veteran's Day 
Memorial Day 
Thanksgiving Day 
Independence Day 
Day After Thanksgiving Day 
Bennington Battle Day 
Christmas Day 
Labor Day 
2 Floater holidays 
Columbus Day 

 
"Floater holidays": One (1) week's notice must be given the department or division head. In case of 
conflicts, the town manager will make final determination. 
(b) ?Weekend holidays. Holidays which fall on Saturday or Sunday are observed on either the preceding 
Friday or the following Monday at the discretion of the town manager. Any other paid holidays must 
be designated by the town board of selectmen. 
(c) ?Working holidays. Should a department or division be required to maintain operation on holidays, 
department or division heads may schedule another day off. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 203) 


Sec. 2-44. - Vacations. 
(a) ?[General.] 
(1) ?Eligibility. All regular employees shall be eligible for the following vacation benefits excluding 
emergency medical employees. 
(2) ?Earned time. Employee vacation time shall be earned on a monthly basis, at the end of each 
month of employment, according to the following schedule: 
a. ?Ten-twelfths of one (1) day for each month of the first through seventy-second month of 
employment only to be taken after six (6) months of employment. 
b. ?Fifteen-twelfths of one (1) day for each month from the seventy-third month through the 
one hundred fifty-sixth month of employment. 
c. ?Twenty-twelfths of one (1) day for each month from the one hundred fifty-seventh month 
through the three hundredth month of employment. 
d. ?Twenty-five-twelfths of one (1) day for each month after the three hundred first month of 
employment. 
(3) ?Accumulated leave. A vacation is for relaxation and to get away from the daily routine. For this 
reason, vacation time must be taken in no less than one (1) week at a time except for five (5) 
days per year which may be taken with one (1) week's notice given to the department or 
division head. In case of conflict, the town manager will make the final determination. Vacation 
requested in one-week blocks must be submitted one (1) month in advance to the department 
or division head. In case of conflict, the town manager will make the final determination. No 
employee may carry accrued vacation time for more than twenty-four (24) months after the time 
it first becomes available. Any accrued vacation time which remains unused after two (2) years 
from the date it first becomes available shall be converted to wages and paid at the then current 
rate of pay. 
(4) ?Termination. Upon termination of employment an employee will be entitled to be paid for all 
accumulated but unused vacation time at the rate of pay the employee is receiving at the time of 
termination. 
(b) ?Emergency medical employees, annual and holiday leave: 
(1) ?Emergency medical personnel of the department of emergency medical services will be 
granted annual paid leave in lieu of vacation leave, sick leave, or personal leave. Annual leave 
for EMS employees assigned a so-called 24/48 work schedule shall be twelve (12) twenty-four-
hour shifts. Annual leave for EMS employees working on a so-called 10/14 work schedule shall 
be eight (8) ten-hour shifts and eight (8) fourteen-hour shifts. Annual leave for other work 
schedule plans shall be calculated as to provide comparable benefit. 
(2) ?Emergency medical personnel shall also be granted additional eight (8) hours of pay at their 
regular base hour rate of pay for each of the following holidays, whether or not the employee 
works on that holiday: 
New Year's Day  
Memorial Day  
Fourth of July  
Labor Day  
Thanksgiving Day  
Christmas Day 
EMS employees are expected to work their normal scheduled shift, whether or not that shift falls 
on a holiday. However, the employee will receive one and five-tenths (1.5) times his/her normal 
rate of pay for all hours worked from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Thanksgiving Day and Christmas 
Day. 
(3) ?Same as section 2-44(a)(3). 
(4) ?Same as section 2-44(a)(4). 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 204) 


Sec. 2-45. - Medical and dental insurance. 
(a) ?At a cost to groups of employees as shall be determined from time to time by the board of 
selectmen, the town will furnish its full-time, permanent employees, excluding emergency medical 
employees, with Blue Cross-Blue Shield Plan J Rider Y, one hundred-twenty-day or an approved 
equal health insurance plan. Any employee requesting dependent or family coverage must pay an 
additional pro-rated share per month of the coverage with the town. This amount shall be determined 
from time to time by the board of selectmen also. 
(b) ?The town will furnish its full-time permanent emergency medical employees with Blue Cross Plan 
Comp. S (FC) or an approved comparable health insurance program. The town will reimburse such 
employees up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) each fiscal year (up to one thousand five hundred 
dollars ($1,500.00) for dependent and family coverages) for medical expenses determined to be 
deductible payments under the health insurance plan. 
(c) ?(1)  
COBRA: Upon termination of employment, an employee has the right to continue his/her 
insurance for a period of eighteen (18) months under the federal law COBRA. The employee 
must pay the full cost of his/her insurance during that period. 
A dependent of the employee may also keep the insurance, provided they were on the 
parent's plan during their employment. The dependent may keep the insurance for thirty-
six (36) months after the parent has left employment. The dependent pays the single rate 
and is fully responsible for the cost during that period. Dependents are no longer eligible 
when they turn nineteen (19) and are out of school, or turn twenty-five (25) while still a 
student, or graduates from college, whichever comes first. This is also under the federal 
law COBRA. 
(2) ?BUYOUT: The Town of Barre agrees to make a lump sum cash payment, in lieu of the 
health insurance benefit, in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per year 
payable on the first pay date in August for any eligible employee who elects no health 
insurance coverage. No employee may elect this option unless he/she shall first certify to 
the town manager that he/she has other health insurance coverage. Election of this 
payment in lieu of premium benefit shall not restrict or limit any of the employee's rights to 
privileges the employee may have for conversion of other health insurances to the town 
supported BC/BS program under COBRA, BC/BS rules, or on the anniversary date of the 
BC/BS policy (July 1). If the employee elects conversion or late coverage under the BC/BS 
health program and has previously accepted the payment in lieu of benefit, a pro-rated 
portion of the cash payment shall be returned to the town by the employee; such pro-ration 
shall be from July 1 to the effective date of the town-supported BC/BS coverage. 
(d) ?The town will furnish its full-time permanent employees, excluding emergency medical personnel, 
with dental insurance. Coverage shall consist of Delta Dental Insurance, Program 3, or a comparable 
program. Dependent and family coverages may be purchased by employees at their own cost. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 205; Ord. of 6-28-94, § 1) 


Sec. 2-46. - Worker's compensation. 
(a) ?The Town of Barre carries Worker's Compensation insurance for all the employees of the town. 
When an employee is disabled while in the performance of their duty, they shall be eligible for such 
Workmen's Compensation benefits as provided by the laws of the State of Vermont. 
(b) ?Injuries. Any injury should be reported immediately by the employee to his/her department or 
division head to insure that he/she may be eligible to receive these benefits from Workmen' s 
Compensation. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 206) 


Sec. 2-47. - Unemployment compensation. 
    Effective January 1, 1978 the Town of Barre is included within the class of employers covered by the 
Unemployment Compensation law. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 207) 


Sec. 2-48. - Social security. 
    Social Security is handled by the federal government and is made up of joint contributions by the 
employee and town, based upon a percentage of the employee's salary deducted from his/her paycheck. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 208) 


Sec. 2-49. - Life insurance. 
    The amount of employee's life insurance benefit is one times annual earnings. If not a multiple of one 
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), rounded to the next one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to a maximum set by 
the board of selectmen. 
(1) ?Waiver of premium feature. If, while insured, an employee becomes permanently and totally 
disabled, before his/her 60th birthday, his/her life insurance will be continued without further 
cost for as long as he/she continues to be disabled provided the employee promptly submits 
evidence of such disability, as explained in his/her certificate of insurance. 
(2) ?Conversion privilege. In the event of termination of employment, the employee may convert all 
or part of his/her life insurance by making written application and paying the first premium 
during the thirty-one-day period following termination. No medical evidence will be required. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 209) 


Sec. 2-50. - Retirement/pension program. 
    The Town of Barre will provide the retirement benefits as provided by its existing plan "Vermont 
Municipal Employees Retirement System—Plan A." 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 210) 


Sec. 2-51. - Personnel policies. 
(a) ?Recruitment. 
(1) ?Whenever a vacancy occurs in any department or division, the department or division head 
shall notify the town manager of said vacancy, stating the date of the vacancy, position, title and 
any other pertinent facts which may be necessary, including statement of need for vacancy to 
be filled. 
(2) ?Whenever a department or division head wishes to establish a new position, they shall notify 
the town manager in writing stating the title, if such a title exists, or a job description when no 
such position exists and the reason for the request. No new position will be established without 
the approval of the board of selectmen. 
(3) ?Announcements for vacancies will be posted by the town manager on the municipal building 
board and public works garage for at least five (5) days and shall specify the position, title, 
salary, qualifications of applicants, closing date for receiving applications, and other information 
as required. 
(b) ?Application. 
(1) ?Application for employment with the town must be filed on forms prescribed by the town 
manager. Such forms may require whatever information is deemed necessary and all 
applications must be signed by the person applying. 
(2) ?Written employment applications may be rejected from any applicants: 
a. ?Whose application clearly indicates that minimum qualifications required are not fulfilled. 
b. ?Whose employment has been terminated from a department or division of the town on less 
than honorable terms. 
c. ?Who has practiced or attempted fraud or deception in any statement of fact pertinent to the 
application. 
(c) ?Appointments; probationary period. All appointments shall be made with a probationary period not to 
exceed twelve (12) months. During the probationary period, the town manager may remove an 
employee who is unable or unwilling to perform the duties of the position satisfactorily or whose 
habits or dependability do not merit continuance in the service. The town manager shall immediately 
report such removal to the employee or his/her representative and shall state his/her reasons. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 211) 


Sec. 2-52. - Transfers and demotions. 
(a) ?Transfers. When a vacancy occurs, the town manager may arrange a transfer if there is an 
interested employee and all concerned concur. 
    Transfer of any employee from one position to another without significant change in level may be 
effective if the employee meets the qualification requirements for the particular position; if it is in the best 
interests of the town; if further training and development of any employee in another position would be 
beneficial to future staffing potential of the town; and if it meets the personal need of the employee as 
consistent with the other requirements of this rule. 
(b) ?Demotions. Employees may be demoted to a position of lower grade for which they are qualified for 
any of the following reasons: 
(1) ?When an employee would otherwise be laid off because the position is being abolished; the 
position is being reclassified to a higher grade; lack of work; lack of funds; or because of the 
return to work from authorized leave of another employee to such a position in accordance with 
the rules on leave. 
(2) ?When employees do not possess the necessary qualifications to render satisfactory service in 
the position they hold, or when removed from probation. 
(3) ?When an employee voluntarily requests such demotion. 
All demotions must receive the approval of the town manager and department or division head or heads 
concerned. The employee must be notified in writing within five (5) days of his/her demotion and of the 
reason for such action. Within ten (10) days of such notice he/she may request a public or executive 
hearing before the board of selectmen, who must hold such hearing not less than ten (10) days nor more 
than twenty (20) days after such request. The board of selectmen may support the action of the town 
manager or may modify it. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 212) 


Sec. 2-53. - Disciplinary actions and separations. 
(a) ?Discipline. Public employees are required to maintain high standards of conduct in dealing with the 
public as well as in the conduct of their personal affairs. The following examples of conduct by 
employees may result in disciplinary action: 
(1) ?Violation of criminal laws of the U.S. and the State of Vermont. 
(2) ?Violation of the Town Charter or town ordinance. 
(3) ?Inattention to duty, carelessness, breakage or loss of property. 
(4) ?Inefficiency or incompetence. 
(5) ?Insubordination or disloyalty. 
(6) ?Lack of integrity. 
(7) ?Claiming sick leave under false pretenses. 
(8) ?Failure to report an accident which involved town properties. 
(9) ?Activity which holds the Town of Barre open to ridicule and public scorn. 
The above examples do not constitute the only basis upon which disciplinary action may be taken. 
Disciplinary action may take any of the following forms: 
(i) ?Oral warning; 
(ii) ?Written warning; 
(iii) ?Suspension from duty without pay; 
(iv) ?Separation. 
Department or division heads may impose disciplinary action upon employees in their department or 
division to include a written warning or suspension, without pay for not more than two (2) days. More 
severe disciplinary action may be imposed only upon the consent of the town manager. 
(b) ?Separations. 
(1) ?Voluntary. An employee who resigns his/her employment with the town shall be deemed 
terminated. A statement of good standing may be provided to the employee. 
(2) ?Involuntary. 
a. ?An appointed officer or a regular employee in the employment of the town for less than 
twelve (12) consecutive months may be removed from employment only by the town 
manager. 
b. ?An officer appointed by the town manager or a regular employee in the employment of the 
town for more than twelve (12) consecutive months may be removed from office or 
removed from their employment only by the town manager. The employee may request a 
hearing within ten (10) days of such removal. The aggrieved party will be granted upon 
their request a public or private hearing by the board of selectmen within thirty (30) days of 
the request. 
c. ?Removal of any employee for reduction in force may be based upon either economic 
necessity or lack of work, or any other valid reason approved by the board of selectmen. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 213) 


Sec. 2-54. - Appeal procedures. 
    A matter arising under section 2-53 (a) or 2-53 (b)(2)a of this article may be appealed to the town 
manager who shall have the ultimate and final responsibility to consider the merits of the appeal, and 
indicate in writing to the employee the basis of his/her determination. A matter arising under section 2-
53(b)(2)b of this article may be appealed to the board of selectmen. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 214) 


Sec. 2-55. - Conduct of employees. 
(a) ?Abandonment. Any employee who is absent without leave from his position and who fails to return 
to duty within three (3) working days or fails to present a satisfactory explanation shall be deemed to 
have resigned, such resignation to be not in good standing. 
(b) ?Coffee breaks. Employees are allowed thirty (30) minutes per work day for coffee/tea, etc. Town 
business should not be interrupted to take the break—finish the project, then take the break. "Coffee 
break" time is not to be accumulated nor used for purposes other than the pause that refreshes on 
the job. 
(c) ?Financial responsibility. Employees are expected to be responsible to pay their debts. The town will 
become involved in individual financial affairs only when the reputation of the town is at stake and 
such town involvement may eventually result in disciplinary action or separation. 
(d) ?General safety. The town must comply with the provisions of the current State of Vermont or federal 
health and safety laws and expects the same of its employees. If an employee is aware of a 
dangerous situation, he/she shall notify his immediate supervisor. 
(e) ?Outside employment. Outside employment that conflicts with or interferes with the town job is 
discouraged. Outside employment should be cleared with the employee's supervisor. 
(f) ?Prompt attendance at work. Prompt attendance at work during the normal shift is expected. The 
employee shall notify his/her supervisor/department head if he/she must be absent from work. 
(g) ?Use of town owned public vehicles. Town vehicles are to be used for approved business only. To 
operate a town vehicle, the employee must possess the appropriate Vermont operator's license. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 215) 


Sec. 2-56. - Records and reports. 
(a) ?Records. Personnel records shall be confidential but available for inspection by the employee 
concerned upon request. 
(b) ?Evaluations. Comprehensive evaluations shall be completed on each employee at least once each 
year by the supervisor, department or division head. Said evaluations shall be made available to the 
employee and the employee shall be given the opportunity to comment upon the evaluation. An 
unfair or unreasonable evaluation, in the employee's opinion, may be the basis of a grievance. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 216) 


Sec. 2-57. - Grievance and arbitration procedures. 
    Any grievance or dispute which may arise between the parties limited to the application, meaning, or 
interpretation of this agreement shall be reported to the supervisor within three (3) working days of its 
occurrence and shall be settled in the following manner: 
Step 1: ?The employee or employees concerned shall endeavor to adjust the matter with the 
supervisor, department, or division head within four (4) working days. 
Step 2: ?If unable to arrive at a satisfactory adjustment the matter shall then be presented to the 
town manager or his designee, and both shall endeavor to adjust the matter within five (5) 
working days. 
Step 3: ?If unable to arrive at a satisfactory adjustment the matter shall then be presented to the 
board of selectmen and the parties shall endeavor to adjust the matter within five (5) working 
days. 
Step 4: ?If the grievance is still unsettled, either party may, within fifteen (15) working days, 
request arbitration. The arbitration proceedings shall be conducted by an arbitrator from the 
American Arbitration Association and pursuant to its rules and regulations. The decision of the 
arbitrators shall be final and binding upon the parties. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 217) 


Sec. 2-58. - Positions covered. 
    Subject to conditions by the Town Charter, the personnel rules and regulations shall apply to all 
appointed employees. If, however, two (2) or more employees are represented by a union or bargaining 
agent recognized by the town, none of the provisions relating to Article III of this chapter shall apply 
automatically to them as such provisions are subject to negotiation as between the employees' 
representatives and the town. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 218) 


Sec. 2-59. - Administration. 
    These rules and regulations shall be administered in conformity with the Town Charter and the 
provisions of state and federal statutes. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 219) 


Sec. 2-60. - Affirmative action/equal employment opportunity. 
    The Town of Barre complies with the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended. In keeping with the law, 
the town has designated an equal employment opportunity officer. The role of the EEO officer is to 
maintain records of reports and documents relating to recruitment, hiring, interviews, disciplinary action, 
promotion, transfer, termination and to prevent unlawful discrimination and to enforce the board of 
selectmen's equal employment opportunity policy. The policy of the town is to not discriminate on the 
basis of race, religion, national origin, age or sex. Also as a part of the town's affirmative action plan, 
fairness must be accorded all town employees in regard to promotion, advancement, hiring, personnel 
matters and disciplinary action. If an employee feels that he/she knows of a situation which is contrary to 
the equal employment mandate of the law or violates the intent of the affirmative action plan, he/she 
should make this known to the town manager. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 220) 


Sec. 2-61. - Severability clause. 
    If any provision of these rules and regulations or the application thereof to any person or 
circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity will not affect other provisions or applications of these rules 
and regulations. Therefore each numbered subprovision is separable. The rules and regulations shall be 
interpreted as consistent with the Town of Barre Charter. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 221) 


Secs. 2-62—2-80. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - FINANCIAL PROCEDURES 


Sec. 2-81. - Purchasing policy. 
(a) ?Town manager duties. The town manager shall be the general purchasing agent for the town and 
shall be responsible for the purchase of all supplies for every department or division. The town 
manager may implement a purchase order system. Purchases in excess of five thousand dollars 
($5,000.00) shall be subject to competitive bidding except if the selectmen shall find that bidding 
shall be of no advantage to the town. In such case, they shall then detail in their minutes the reasons 
for such findings and no bidding shall be required for that particular expenditure. 
(b) ?Departments and agencies. No office, department, or agency shall, during any budget year, expend 
or contract to expend any money or incur any liability, or enter into any contract which by its terms 
involves the expenditure of money for any purpose in excess of the amounts appropriated for the 
general classification of expenditures. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 301) 


Sec. 2-82. - Expenditure of appropriated funds. 
(a) ?Fund expenditure. No expenditure in any fund shall be legal or proper unless appropriations 
adequate to meet that expenditure have been made in the budget. 
(b) ?Approval. The town manager shall have charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the 
town and to that end shall supervise and be responsible for the disbursements of all monies and 
have control over all expenditures to ensure that appropriations are not exceeded. He/she shall 
exercise financial budgetary control over each office, department, and agency and shall cause 
separate accounts to be kept for the items of appropriation contained in the budget, each of which 
shall show the amount of the appropriation, the unpaid obligation against it, and the unencumbered 
balance. The same classification and numbering system used in the budget shall be used. Unless 
he/she shall certify that there is a sufficient unencumbered balance available, no appropriation shall 
be encumbered and expenditure shall be made. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 302) 


Sec. 2-83. - Accounting. 
(a) ?Structure. The following funds may be established and shall be used as necessary to provide for the 
proper accounting of all financial activities of the town: 
(1) ?The general fund to account for the general governmental operations and all financial 
transactions not properly accounted for in another fund. 
(2) ?Special revenue funds to account for the proceeds of special revenue sources other than 
special assessments, or to finance specified activities as required by law. 
(3) ?Debt service funds to account for the payment of interest and principal on long-term debt. 
(4) ?Capital project funds to account for the receipt and disbursement of monies including bond 
funds used for the acquisition of capital facilities other than those financed by enterprise funds. 
(5) ?Enterprise (utility) funds to account for the financing of services to the general public where all 
or most of the cost involved are paid in the form of charges by uses of such services. 
(6) ?Trust and agency funds to account for assets held by the town as trustee or agent for 
individuals, private organizations, and other governmental units. 
(7) ?Internal service funds to account for the financing of special activities and services performed 
by a designated organizational unit within the town for other organizational units within the town. 
(b) ?Fund transfer. No appropriation transfer shall be made from a sinking fund or debt retirement fund 
until all the legal obligations and requirements of such fund have been satisfied. 
(c) ?Unencumbered fund balance. All appropriations which are not obligated, encumbered or expended 
at the end of the fiscal year shall lapse and shall become part of the unencumbered fund balance 
which may be appropriated for the next fiscal year. 
(d) ?Accounts. A complete self-balancing group of accounts shall be established and maintained for 
each fund used. Additional accounts, as follows, shall be maintained: 
(1) ?A fixed asset account for the purpose of accounting for those assets which (1) are of a tangible 
nature; (2) have a life longer than one fiscal year; and (3) have a value greater than ten 
thousand dollars ($10,000.00). General fixed assets shall be recorded at original cost, shall not 
be depreciated and shall be removed from the account when disposed of. Enterprise fund fixed 
assets may be depreciated. 
(2) ?A long-term debt account for the purpose of accounting for a long-term debt and for recording 
and fairly representing the liability for long-term debt at any time from date of issuance until the 
debt is retired. 
(e) ?Basis of accounting. Year-end balance sheets for all funds shall be prepared on the accrual basis of 
accounting. Operating statements may be presented on the cash basis on accounting with the 
exception of enterprise funds which shall be presented on the accrual basis. All receipts and 
disbursements shall be posted promptly and at least on a monthly basis. To the extent possible, all 
interfund transfers shall be cleared by the end of the fiscal year. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 303) 


Sec. 2-84. - Financial reports and audits. 
(a) ?Reports. Financial statements and reports showing the current conditions of budgetary and 
proprietary accounts shall be prepared by the town manager and presented to the board of 
selectmen at least every three (3) months. The reports shall include a tabular statement indicating for 
each appropriation the amount originally appropriated, the amount expended or encumbered to date, 
and the available balance. No later than seventy-five (75) days after the close of the fiscal year, a 
comprehensive annual financial report covering all funds and financial operations shall be prepared. 
A summary of this report, containing at least a statement of revenues and expenditures as of the 
close of the preceding year and the combined balance sheet for all funds and account groups, shall 
be published. Sufficient copies of the report shall be made available for the use of all offices, 
departments and agencies and for the use of interested persons and civic organizations. 
(b) ?Audits. All funds, accounts and financial transactions of the town may be subjected to an annual 
audit by an independent certified public accountant who is selected by the town auditors. 
(Ord. of 6-4-91, § 304) 


Chapter 3 - CIVIL DEFENSE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers and duties of the town manager, § 21. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; public safety, Ch. 5. 
State Law reference— Local organizations for civil defense, 20 V.S.A. § 6. 


Sec. 3-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as "Civil Defense Ordinance of the 
Town of Barre." 
(Ord. of 4-20-76, Art. I, § 1) 


Sec. 3-2. - Intent and purpose. 
(a) ?It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to establish an office that will ensure the complete and 
efficient utilization of all of the town's facilities to combat attacks or other disasters. 
(b) ?The office of civil defense will be the coordinating agency for all activity in connection with civil 
defense; it will be the instrument through which the town manager may exercise the authority and 
discharge the responsibilities vested in him in 20 V.S.A. § 6 and chapter 4, section 21 of the Town 
Charter, as amended, and this chapter. 
(c) ?This chapter will not relieve any town department of the moral responsibility or authority given to it in 
the Town Charter or by local ordinance, nor will it adversely affect the work of any volunteer agency 
organized for relief in disaster emergencies. 
(Ord. of 4-20-76, Art. I, § 2) 


Sec. 3-3. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this chapter: 
    Attack shall mean a direct or indirect assault against the town, its government, its environs, or of the 
nation, by the forces of a hostile nation or the agents thereof, including assault by bombing, radiological, 
chemical or biological warfare or sabotage. 
    Civil defense in its broad meaning is to carry out the basic government functions of maintaining the 
public peace, health and safety during an attack or disaster. This shall include plans and preparations for 
protection from, and relief, recovery and rehabilitation from, the effects of an attack on the town by the 
forces of an enemy nation or the agents thereof, and it shall also include such activity in connection with 
disaster as defined herein. It shall not, however, include any activity that is the primary responsibility of 
the military forces of the United States. 
    Civil defense forces shall mean the employees, equipment and facilities of all town departments, 
boards, institutions and commissions; and, in addition, it shall include all volunteer personnel, equipment 
and facilities contributed by, or obtained from, volunteer persons or agencies. 
    Civil defense volunteer shall mean any person duly registered, identified and appointed by the 
chairman of the office of civil defense and assigned to participate in the civil defense activity. 
    Director shall mean the town manager or his designated alternate duly appointed in accordance with 
chapter 4, section 21 of the Town Charter. 
    Disaster includes but is not limited to actual or threatened enemy attack, sabotage, extraordinary fire, 
flood, storm, epidemic or other impending or actual emergency or calamity endangering or threatening to 
endanger health, life or property or constituted government. 
    Regulations shall include plans, programs and other emergency procedures deemed essential to 
civil defense. 
    Town chairman shall mean the chairman of the office of civil defense, appointed as prescribed in this 
chapter. 
    Volunteer shall mean contributing a service, equipment or facilities to the civil defense organization 
without remuneration. 
(Ord. of 4-20-76, Art. I, § 3) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 3-4. - Organization and appointments. 
(a) ?The town manager is hereby authorized and directed to create an organization for civil defense 
utilizing to the fullest extent the existing agencies within the town. The town manager, as executive 
head of the municipal government, shall be the director of the civil defense forces of the town and 
shall be responsible for their organization, administration and operations. 
(b) ?The organization shall consist of the following: 
(1) ?An office of civil defense within the executive department of the town government and under 
the direction of the town manager. There shall be an executive head of the office of civil 
defense, who shall be known as the town chairman of civil defense, and such assistants and 
other employees as are deemed necessary for the proper functioning of the organization. 
(2) ?The employees, equipment and facilities of all town departments, boards, institutions and 
commissions, will participate in the civil defense activity. Duties assigned to a town department 
shall be the same or similar to the normal duties of the department. 
(3) ?Volunteer persons and agencies offering service to, and accepted by, the town. 
(c) ?The civil defense director (town manager) shall appoint the town chairman of the office of civil 
defense (with the consent of the selectmen) who shall be a person well versed and trained in 
planning operations involving the activities of many different agencies which will operate to protect 
the public health, safety and welfare in the event of danger from enemy action or disaster as defined 
in this chapter. 
(d) ?The civil defense director shall designate and appoint deputy directors to assume the emergency 
duties of the director in the event of his absence or inability to act. (This designation to be compatible 
with the provisions of chapter 4, section 21 of the Town Charter.) The intent being that there will 
always and at all times be a civil defense director in charge of the town. 
(Ord. of 4-20-76, Art. I, § 4) 


Sec. 3-5. - Emergency powers and duties of town manager. 
(a) ?The civil defense director may exercise the emergency power and authority necessary to fulfill his 
general powers and duties as defined in chapter 4, section 21 of the Town Charter. The judgment of 
the civil defense director shall be the sole criteria necessary to invoke emergency powers provided in 
the Town Charter, the Barre Town Code and other appropriate authorities. The town selectmen may 
convene to perform its legislative and administrative powers as the situation demands, and shall 
receive reports relative to civil defense activities. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as 
abridging or curtailing the powers or restrictions of the town selectmen as defined in chapter 3, 
section 11 of the Town Charter. 
(b) ?During any period when disaster threatens or when the town has been struck by disaster, within the 
definition of this chapter, the town manager may promulgate such regulations as he deems 
necessary to protect life and property and preserve critical resources. Such regulations may include, 
but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1) ?Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of vehicles in order to facilitate the work of 
civil defense forces, or to facilitate the mass movement of persons from critical areas within or 
without the town; 
(2) ?Regulations pertaining to the movement of persons from areas deemed to be hazardous or 
vulnerable to disaster; 
(3) ?Such other regulations necessary to preserve public peace, health and safety; 
(4) ?Regulations promulgated in accordance with the authority above will be given widespread 
circulation by proclamations published and uttered by newspaper and radio. These regulations 
will have the force of ordinance when duly filed with the town clerk and violations will be subject 
to the penalties provided in chapter 6, section 37 of the Town Charter. 
(c) ?The civil defense director shall order civil defense forces to the aid of other communities when 
required in accordance with the statutes of the state, and he may request the state, or a political 
subdivision of the state, to send aid to the town in case of disaster when conditions in the town are 
beyond the control of the local civil defense forces. 
(d) ?The civil defense director may obtain vital supplies, equipment and other properties found lacking 
and needed for the protection of health, life and property of the people, and bind the town for the fair 
value thereof. 
(e) ?The civil defense director may require emergency services of any town officer or employees. If 
regular town forces are determined inadequate, the director may require the services of such other 
personnel as he can obtain that are available, including citizen volunteers. All duly authorized 
persons rendering emergency services shall be entitled to the privileges and immunities as are 
provided by state law, the Town Charter and ordinances for regular town employees and other 
registered and identified civil defense and disaster workers. 
(f) ?The civil defense director will exercise his ordinary powers as town manager and all of the special 
powers conferred upon him by the Town Charter and the Barre Town Code, all powers conferred 
upon him by any statute, or any other lawful authority. 
Charter reference— Powers and duties of town manager, § 21. 
Cross reference— Civil defense director, § 2-27(j). 


Sec. 3-6. - Powers and duties of town chairman of the office of civil defense. 
    The town chairman of the office of civil defense shall be responsible to the director in regard to all 
phases of the civil defense activity. Under the supervision of the director, he shall be responsible for the 
planning coordination and operation of the civil defense activity in the town. Under the supervision of the 
director, he shall maintain liaison with the state and federal authorities and the authorities of other nearby 
political subdivisions as to ensure the most effective operation of the civil defense plan. His duties shall 
include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1) ?Coordinating the recruitment of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel 
and facilities of the town for civil defense purposes; 
(2) ?Development and coordination of plans for the immediate use of all of the facilities, equipment, 
manpower and other resources of the town for the purpose of minimizing or preventing damage 
to persons and property; and protecting and restoring to usefulness governmental services and 
public utilities necessary for the public health, safety and welfare; 
(3) ?Negotiating and concluding agreements with owners or persons in control of buildings or other 
property for the use of such buildings or other property for the civil defense purposes and 
designating suitable buildings as public shelters; 
(4) ?Through public informational programs, educating the civilian populations as to actions 
necessary and required for the protection of their persons and property in case of enemy attack, 
or disaster, as defined herein, either impending or present; 
(5) ?Conducting public practice alerts to ensure the efficient operation of the civil defense forces 
and to familiarize residents with civil defense regulations, procedures and operations; 
(6) ?Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies engaged in any civil defense 
activity; 
(7) ?Assuming such authority and conducting such activity as the director may direct to promote 
and execute the civil defense plan. 
(Ord. of 4-20-76, Art. I, § 5) 
Cross reference— Town chairman of the office of civil defense, § 2-27(k). 


Sec. 3-7. - Violation of regulations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter or the regulations or 
plans issued pursuant to the authority contained herein, or to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any 
member of the civil defense organization in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter or any 
regulation or plan issued thereunder. 
(Ord. of 4-20-76, Art. I, § 6) 


Chapter 3.5 - CONDUCT 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 3.5-1—3.5-25. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - TOWN PROPERTIES 


Sec. 3.5-26. - Purpose; definitions. 
(a) ?Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide for the safety, enjoyment, health, and welfare of all 
persons using town owned property including, but not limited to: all municipal buildings and grounds 
(i.e. public works, fire, emergency service, school, cemeteries, etc.) recreational facilities, parks, 
parking lots, recreational pathways, the lawn waste site, and any other publicly owned or operated 
property. This will enable the town to further provide a means of maintenance, operation and 
protection of public areas, and to provide a family oriented atmosphere at an environmentally friendly 
and enjoyable area for residents and landowners of Barre town and their accompanied guests. 
(b) ?Definitions: 
(1) ?"Town" is the Town of Barre, Vermont. 
(2) ?"Property" is any land or building owned, leased, or conveyed to use by the Town of Barre. 
(3) ?"Person" shall include any individual, firm, corporation or group of persons. 
(4) ?"Parks" are all grounds, structures, quarries, and ponds which are or may be located within any 
area dedicated to the public use as a park, parkway, recreation facility or conservancy district in 
the town. This does not include the Wilson Industrial Park or the conservation land abutting 
such. 
(5) ?"Waste" is any glass, cans, garbage, rubbish, waste, building material, slop, noxious liquid or 
other litter or unwholesome substance. 
(6) ?"Debris" is mud, dirt, stones, vehicle fluids and lubricants. 
(7) ?"Town official" is any employee of the Town of Barre. 
(Ord. of 8-26-03, § 1) 


Sec. 3.5-27. - Authority. 
    This chapter is adopted and enacted pursuant to the authority granted to the Town of Barre by all 
relevant state and federal laws, including, but not limited to the following: 
(a) ?The general authority granted by the Constitution of Vermont and the Municipal and County 
Government Code to make and adopt all such ordinances, bylaws, rules, and regulations as 
may be deemed expedient or necessary for the proper management, care, and control of the 
town and its finances and the maintenance of the health, safety, peace, good government, and 
welfare of the town. 
(b) ?The Constitution of Vermont, Chapter I., Article 5, which provides that the people of Vermont by 
their legal representatives have the sole, inherent, and exclusive right of governing and 
regulating the internal police of the same. 
(c) ?The Vermont Statutes, Title 24, Municipal and County Government, Chapter 61, Regulatory 
Provisions; Police Power of Municipalities, section 2291(14), which provides that for the 
purpose of promoting the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience, a town, city, or 
incorporated village shall have the power to define what constitutes a public nuisance and to 
provide procedures and take action for its abatement or removal as the public health, safety, or 
welfare may require. 
(d) ?The Barre Town Charter, Part I, section 37(a), which provides that the board of selectmen shall 
constitute the legislative body of the town, except as otherwise provided herein, to adopt, 
amend, repeal and enforce ordinances. 
(Ord. of 8-26-03, § 1) 


Sec. 3.5-28. - General provisions. 
    No person shall violate any conditions as described in this section. Whenever, in the judgement of a 
Barre town police officer or other designated town official, any of these rules and regulations have been 
violated, that person shall be cited for a violation of this section and be subject to a penalty as provided in 
section 3.5-29. 
(a) ?Holden Road lawn waste and composting site. 
(1) ?The rules and regulations pertaining to the Holden Road lawn waste and composting site 
shall be available at the town municipal office building. Any person using the site shall obey 
the rules and regulations as set forth herein. The highway superintendent and his agents 
are authorized to order any person to leave the facility after gaining license and registration 
information. The police department will then be advised of said violation and information, at 
which time a civil ticket may be issued for violation of any rule or regulation. Registered 
vehicle owners are liable for anyone violating conditions set herein. 
(2) ?The Barre town lawn waste site will be open to Barre town residents, nonresident property 
owners, and their designated haulers (with written permission on hand) for the disposal of 
yard waste which is generated in the Town of Barre. All users, including their designated 
haulers shall furnish upon request of the board of selectmen or their designee credible 
evidence to prove that they are Barre town residents or nonresident property owners. The 
placement of waste shall be in accordance with these regulations: 
a. ?During daylight hours only. 
b. ?Deposit leaves, grass, brush and other vegetative matter in designated areas. 
c. ?Littering and illegal dumping are fineable offenses. 
d. ?No commercial users; town residents' non-commercial use only. 
e. ?Maximum brush size is five (5) inches in diameter. 
f. ?Larger diameter limbs and trunks can be left in firewood area. 
g. ?Prohibited materials: metal, dog manure, animal carcasses, household garbage, 
stumps, kitty litter, tires, large trash items, bags, boxes, rope, string, plastic, dirt, 
stones, bricks, blocks, concrete, asphalt. 
(3) ?Vehicle owner or operator will be responsible for a cleanup charge for any vehicle leaving 
prohibited material at the site, in addition to fines as a result of ordinance violation. All vehicles 
and drivers entering the facility do so at their own risk and are liable for any and all damages 
they may cause to their own vehicles, the facility and/or personnel. 
(b) ?Parks. The following are the rules and regulations that are in effect at town parks or certain parks 
where so named, which shall constitute a violation of ordinance. No person shall: 
(1) ?Willfully mark, disfigure, deface, injure, tamper with, displace or remove any building, bridge, 
table, bench, fireplace, railing, paving, or paving material, water line, or other public utility or part 
or appurtenance thereof, sign, notice or placard whether temporary or permanent, monument, 
stake, post or other boundary marker, or other structure or equipment, facility or park property 
or appurtenance whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(2) ?Dig or remove any sand, shrub, or plant, timber or other wood or material, or make any 
excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means. 
(3) ?Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary 
in character, or run or string any public service utility into, upon, or cross such lands, except on 
special written permission issued hereunder. 
(4) ?Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark, or pick the 
flowers and seeds of any tree or plant. Nor shall any person attach a rope, wire or other 
contrivance to any tree or plant. A person shall not dig in or otherwise disturb grassy areas, or in 
any other way injure or impair the natural beauty of usefulness of any areas except with written 
permission from the town manager or the parks and recreation director. 
(5) ?Climb a tree or walk, stand, or sit upon monuments, vases, railings, fences or upon any other 
property not designated or customarily used for such purposes. 
(6) ?Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pool, 
pond, stream, or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm 
sewer, or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which 
will or may result in the pollution of said waters. 
(7) ?Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. 
(8) ?Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, 
reptile, or bird; nor shall he remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal, or 
the eggs or nest, or young of any reptile or bird. 
(9) ?Ride, walk or diligently maneuver any horse on areas other than roads or designated trails. 
(10) ?Have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, 
boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash 
shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds 
thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; and where 
receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park 
by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(11) ?Fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the state motor vehicles' traffic laws in regard to 
equipment and operation of vehicles together with such regulation as are contained in this and 
other ordinances of the Town of Barre, Vermont. 
(12) ?Fail to obey all traffic officers, such persons being hereby authorized and instructed to direct 
traffic whenever and wherever needed in the parks and on the highways, streets, or roads 
immediately adjacent thereto in accordance with the provisions of these regulations and such 
supplementary regulations as may be issued subsequently. 
(13) ?Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping, or 
parking, and all others posted for proper control and to safeguard life and property. 
(14) ?Ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding fifteen (15) miles per hour, except upon 
such roads designated for higher speed by posted signs. 
(15) ?Drive any motorized vehicle except maintenance/emergency vehicles and snowmobiles on 
any area except the paved park roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may on 
occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking areas. 
(16) ?Stop, stand, or park the same on public property in the town in a space designated for 
handicapped persons, unless the vehicle displays special registration plates or a windshield 
placard issued in accordance with the law. 
(17) ?Stop, stand, or park the same on public property in the town for more than twenty-four (24) 
hours consecutively. 
(18) ?Build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such regulations as may be 
designated. 
(19) ?Enter or remain in an area posted as "Closed to the Public", nor shall any person use, or abet 
the use of any area in violation of posted policies. 
(20) ?Sleep overnight or protractedly lounge on the seats or benches or other areas, or engage in 
loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language, or engage in any 
disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace, or use without 
authorization therefor of loud speakers, sound amplification devices or sound making 
equipment. 
(21) ?Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying any area or participating 
in any activity under sanctioned authority. 
(22) ?Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall he/she station or place any stand, cart, 
or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing except as authorized 
by the Barre town recreation board. 
(23) ?Announce, advertise, or call the public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or 
hire except as authorized by the Barre town recreation board. 
(24) ?Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement, or inscription 
whatsoever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatsoever on any 
public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park. 
(25) ?Have brought, or have in his possession, or set off or otherwise cause to explode or discharge 
or burn, any firearm, firecrackers, torpedo, rocket, or other fireworks or explosives of 
inflammable material, or discharge them or throw them into any such area from land or highway 
adjacent thereto except as may be specifically authorized by the selectboard by permit. This 
prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture, or article that in conjunction with any 
other substance or compound would be dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints. 
(26) ?Expose his person indecently or procure another to so expose himself/herself, or to act 
indecently, or to use indecent language as define in Title 13, chapters 59 and 63 of the Vermont 
Statutes Annotated. 
(27) ?Possess or consume alcoholic beverages at the East Barre Park, Upper Graniteville 
Playground, Upper Websterville Playground, Lower Graniteville Playground, Trow Hill 
Playground, or South Barre Park, nor shall any inebriated person visit, use, or remain in said 
parks. 
(28) ?Enter, pass through or remain in the East Barre Park, South Barre Park, Upper Graniteville 
Playground, Upper Websterville Playground, Lower Graniteville Playground or Trow Hill 
Playground between dusk and dawn. No person shall remain in any area of the Barre Town 
Recreation Area between dusk and dawn, except those people playing under the lights on the 
softball and baseball fields, or on the tennis, basketball and volleyball courts and except people 
watching those playing under the lights, all may be in the park until 11:00 p.m. 
(c) ?Skateboard parks. In addition to the above provisions, no person shall: 
(1) ?Be without helmet and shoes. 
(2) ?Possess glass containers. 
(3) ?Ride bicycles or any other equipment other than skateboards or in-line states in the facility. 
(4) ?Add makeshift items or modifications to existing ramps. 
(d) ?Public works property. No person shall: 
(1) ?Enter the gated area for the purpose of attaining access to sand and salt supplies. The 
department of public works will make sand available outside the yard gate from approximately 
November 15 to April 1 (as regulated by the free winter sand use policy). 
(2) ?Have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, 
cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse or other trash. 
(3) ?Willfully mark, disfigure, deface, injure, tamper with, displace or remove any building, table, 
bench, paving, or paving material, water line, or other public utility or part or appurtenance 
thereof, sign, notice or placard whether temporary or permanent, monument, stake, post or 
other boundary marker, or other structure or equipment, facility, park or public property or 
appurtenance whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(4) ?Be in or about public buildings or premises when such person shall not have been granted 
either the right or permission to be in or about such place. 
(e) ?Fire stations and emergency services building. No person shall: 
(1) ?Willfully mark, disfigure, deface, injure, tamper with, displace or remove any building, table, 
bench, fireplace, railing, paving, or paving material, water line, or other public utility or part or 
appurtenance thereof, sign, notice or placard whether temporary or permanent, monument, 
stake, post or other boundary marker, or other structure or equipment, facility or park property 
or appurtenance whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(2) ?Dig or remove any sand, shrub, or plant, timber or other wood or material, or make any 
excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency. 
(3) ?Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark, or pick the 
flowers and seeds of any tree or plant. Nor shall any person attach a rope, wire or other 
contrivance to any tree or plant. A person shall not dig in or otherwise disturb grassy areas, or in 
any other way injure or impair the natural beauty of usefulness of any areas. 
(4) ?Be in or about public buildings or premises when such person shall not have been granted 
either the right or permission to be in or about such place. 
(5) ?Climb a tree or walk, stand, or sit upon monuments, vases, railings, fences or upon any other 
property not designated or customarily used for such purposes. 
(6) ?Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping, or 
parking, and all others posted for proper control and to safeguard life and property. 
(7) ?Stop, stand, or park the same on public property in the town in a space designated for 
handicapped persons, unless the vehicle displays special registration plates or a windshield 
placard issued in accordance with the law. 
(8) ?Stop, stand, or park a vehicle on public property in the town for more than twenty-four (24) 
hours consecutively. 
(9) ?Enter or remain in an area posted as "Closed to the Public", nor shall any person use, or abet 
the use of any area in violation of posted policies. 
(10) ?Interfere with entrance or exit access to the facility. Public parking at the East Barre fire 
station is allowed only on the south side of the parking lot (all other regulations apply). 
(11) ?Enter or remain in an area posted as "Closed to the Public", nor shall any person use, or abet 
the use of any area in violation of posted policies. 
(12) ?Expose his person indecently or procure another to so expose himself/herself, or to act 
indecently, or to use indecent language. 
(f) ?Route 302 commuter lot parking area. The regulations for the East Barre commuter lot shall rule 
conduct at such area. In addition, no person shall: 
(1) ?Willfully mark, disfigure, deface, injure, tamper with, displace or remove any building, bridge, 
table, bench, fireplace, railing, paving, or paving material, water line, or other public utility or part 
or appurtenance thereof, sign, notice or placard whether temporary or permanent, monument, 
stake, post or other boundary marker, or other structure or equipment, facility or park property 
or appurtenance whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(2) ?Climb a tree or walk, stand, or sit upon monuments, vases, railings, fences or upon any other 
property not designated or customarily used for such purposes. 
(3) ?Have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, 
cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse or other trash. 
(4) ?Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping, or 
parking, and all others posted for proper control and to safeguard life and property. 
(5) ?Announce, advertise, or call the public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or 
hire without town manager approval. 
(6) ?Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement, or inscription whatsoever, 
nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatsoever on any public lands or 
highways or roads adjacent to a park. 
(g) ?Other town property. This area includes all water and sewer facilities, cemetery structures, school 
buildings, and other town property. No person shall: 
(1) ?Willfully mark, disfigure, deface, injure, tamper with, displace or remove any building, bridge, 
table, bench, fireplace, railing, paving, or paving material, water line, or other public utility or part 
or appurtenance thereof, sign, notice or placard whether temporary or permanent, monument, 
stake, post or other boundary marker, or other structure or equipment, facility or park property 
or appurtenance whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(2) ?Have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, 
cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse or other trash. 
(3) ?Enter or remain in an area posted as "Closed to the Public", nor shall any person use, or abet 
the use of any area in violation of posted policies. 
(4) ?Be in or about public or private buildings or premises when such person shall not have been 
granted either the right or permission to be in or about such place. 
(5) ?Stop, stand, or park the same on public property in the town in a space designated for 
handicapped persons, unless the vehicle displays special registration plates or a windshield 
placard issued in accordance with the law. 
(6) ?Stop, stand, or park a vehicle on public property in the town for more than twenty-four (24) 
hours consecutively. 
(Ord. of 8-26-03, § 1; Ord. of 4-24-07, § 1; Ord. of 11-10-15, §§ 1, 2) 


Sec. 3.5-29. - Enforcement; penalties. 
(a) ?The police department of the Town of Barre shall in connection with their duties imposed by law 
enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(b) ?Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be in violation of this civil ordinance. 
Enforcement shall be in accordance with the provisions of 24 V.S.A. 1974(a) and 1977 et seq. Said 
violator may within fifteen (15) days from the date of such violation, waive the issuing of any process 
by voluntarily paying the violation fee as herein prescribed. 
(c) ?(1) ?The violation fee for violating subsections 3.5-28(a) through 3.5-28(b)(10), or 3.5-28(b)(18) 
through 3.5-28(g) of this article shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for a first offense, sixty-five 
dollars ($65.00) for a second offense, and ninety dollars ($90.00) for a third offense. The waiver 
fee shall be set at twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first offense, fifty-five dollars ($55.00) for 
the second offense and eighty dollars ($80.00) for each subsequent offense. Each day the 
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2) ?The violation fee for violating subsection 3.5-28(b)(11) through 3.5-28(b)(17) of this article shall 
be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). In addition, violation of subsection 3.5-28(b)(16) and (b)(17) will 
result in the vehicle so parked to be immediately towed pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(3) ?The town is further authorized to pursue any and all civil remedies available by law, at the 
recipient's expense, for the purpose of collection. These include, but are not limited to, credit 
bureau notification, use of collection agencies, judicial enforcement etc. 
(Ord. of 8-26-03, § 1; Ord. of 4-24-07, § 2) 


Sec. 3.5-30. - Separability. 
    Each separate provision of this article shall be deemed independent of all other provisions of this 
article and if any provisions of this article shall be declared invalid in a court of law, all other provisions of 
this article shall remain valid and enforceable. 
(Ord. of 8-16-03, § 1) 


ARTICLE III. - LITTERING 


Sec. 3.5-31. - Authority. 
    This article is adopted and enacted pursuant to the authority granted to the Town of Barre by all 
relevant state and federal laws, including, but not limited to the following: 
(a) ?The general authority granted by the Constitution of Vermont and the Municipal and County 
Government Code to make and adopt all such ordinances, bylaws, rules, and regulations as 
may be deemed expedient or necessary for the proper management, care, and control of the 
town and its finances and the maintenance of the health, safety, peace, good government, and 
welfare of the town. 
(b) ?The Constitution of Vermont, Ch. I., Art. 5, which provides that the people of Vermont by their 
legal representatives have the sole, inherent, and exclusive right of governing and regulating 
the internal police of the same. 
(c) ?The Vermont Statutes, Title 24, Municipal and County Government, Ch. 61, Regulatory 
Provisions; Police Power of Municipalities, sec. 2291 (14), which provides that for the purpose 
of promoting the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience, a town, city, or incorporated 
village shall have the power to define what constitutes a public nuisance and to provide 
procedures and take action for its abatement or removal as the public health, safety, or welfare 
may require. 
(d) ?The Barre Town Charter, Part I, section 37(a), which provides that the board of selectmen shall 
constitute the legislative body of the town, except as otherwise provided herein, to adopt, 
amend, repeal and enforce ordinances. 
(Ord. of 8-16-03, § 1) 


Sec. 3.5-32. - General provisions. 
    No person shall violate any conditions as described in this section. Whenever, in the judgement of a 
Barre town police officer or other designated town official, any of these rules and regulations have been 
violated, that person shall be cited for a violation of this section and be subject to a penalty as provided in 
Part I, Town Charter, section 37(j). 
    No person, business or corporation shall throw any waste upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks, 
highways, public easements, public parks or other property of the town or upon the surface of any public 
body of water within the town. 
    No person, business or corporation shall operate, park or store a motor vehicle so as to cause debris 
to become deposited upon public property or in any public body of water within the town. 
    In addition to the penalties provided for in the violation of this ordinance, the Town of Barre may 
remove any waste, yard waste or debris deposited on the aforementioned public property or public body 
of water. Any cost incurred by the town in order to remove the materials shall be deemed a special 
charge for current services. Yard waste may be taken to the Holden Road lawn waste and composting 
site. 
(Ord. of 8-26-03, § 1) 


Sec. 3.5-33. - Enforcement; penalties. 
(a) ?The police department of the Town of Barre shall in connection with their duties imposed by law 
diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(b) ?Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be in violation of this civil ordinance. 
Enforcement shall be in accordance with the provisions of 24 V.S.A. 1974(a) and 1977 et seq. Said 
violator may within fifteen (15) days from the date of such violation, waive the issuing of any process 
by voluntarily paying the violation fee as herein prescribed. 
(c) ?(1) ?The violation fee for violating section 3.5-32 of this article shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00) 
for a first offense, sixty-five dollars ($65.00) for a second offense, and ninety dollars ($90.00) for 
a third offense. The waiver fee shall be set at twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first offense, 
fifty-five dollars ($55.00) for the second offense and eighty dollars ($80.00) for each subsequent 
offense. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2) ?The town is further authorized to pursue any and all civil remedies available by law, at the 
recipient's expense, for the purpose of collection. These include, but are not limited to, credit 
bureau notification, use of collection agencies, judicial enforcement etc. 
(Ord. of 8-26-03, § 1) 


Sec. 3.5-34. - Separability. 
    Each separate provision of this article shall be deemed independent of all other provisions of this 
article and if any provisions of this article shall be declared invalid in a court of law, all other provisions of 
this article shall remain valid and enforceable. 
(Ord. of 8-26-03, § 1) 


Chapter 4 - HEALTH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; public safety, Ch. 5; sewage, § 8-81 et seq. 
State Law reference— Local health officers generally, 18 V.S.A. § 601 et seq., authority of municipality 
to compel the cleaning or repair of any premises, 24 V.S.A. § 2291(13); authority of municipality to define 
public nuisances and provide for their abatement, 24 V.S.A. § 2291(14); municipal health services, 24 
V.S.A. § 2601 et seq. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 4-1—4-25. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - ANIMALS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— State control of animals generally, 20 V.S.A. § 3341 et seq.; authority of 
municipalities to regulate the keeping of dogs, 24 V.S.A. § 2291(10). 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 4-26. - Delinquent dog license fee. 
    The town clerk-treasurer shall collect the sum of five dollars ($5.00) plus all state fees for the 
issuance of a delinquent dog license to any dog owner or keeper. 
(Ord. of 2-17-76; Ord. of 10-23-01, §§ 1, 2) 


Secs. 4-27—4-40. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - RABIES CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Public safety, Ch. 5. 
State Law reference— Rabies act, 20 V.S.A. § 3801 et seq. 


Sec. 4-41. - Justification. 
    The justification of this division is to prevent rabies in humans. Rabies is transmitted through the 
saliva of a rabid animal, usually by biting. Rabies preventive measures must be started as soon as rabies 
is detected in the biting animal. Once the symptoms of rabies occur, the disease is fatal. Detection of 
rabies in animals is only possible after death by tests on brain tissue. These procedures will help 
determine if an animal was rabid at the time the bite occurred. 
(Ord. of 11-5-85, § 1) 


Sec. 4-42. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to: 
(1) ?Improve safety of animal bite victims; 
(2) ?Standardize response to animal bites. 
(Ord. of 11-5-85, § 2) 


Sec. 4-43. - Reporting animal bites. 
    All animal bites must be reported immediately to the police department and the town health officer. 
(Ord. of 11-5-85, § 3) 


Sec. 4-44. - Quarantine in veterinary facilities. 
    There shall be a ten-day quarantine in a veterinary facility for the following: 
(1) ?All dogs and cats that cause face or throat bites; 
(2) ?Any animal where quarantine on the owner's or custodian's premises cannot be provided to the 
satisfaction of the health officer or police department. 
(Ord. of 11-5-85, § 4; Ord. of 12-18-01, §§ 1, 2) 


Sec. 4-45. - Quarantine on owner, custodian's property. 
    A quarantine of an animal on the owner's or custodian's property must meet the following guidelines: 
(1) ?Animals shall not leave the property during the quarantine period; 
(2) ?Animals shall be inside a building with controlled human access and shall be either hitched by 
a chain or caged; 
(3) ?A warning sign shall be posted on the owner's or custodian's premises. The sign is to be a sign 
adopted by the board of selectmen and shall be conspicuously posted in a place designated by 
the town health officer or town police department's investigating officer; 
(4) ?The animal may be taken outdoors on a leash for urination or defecation purposes only; 
(5) ?Any change in disposition or manner shall be immediately reported by the owner or custodian 
to the town police department or town health officer. 
(Ord. of 11-5-85, § 4) 


Sec. 4-46. - Charges for quarantine service. 
    The owner or custodian of any animal shall be liable for all veterinary custodial or treatment 
(including destruction) charges. No animal shall be released to its owner or custodian until such charges 
are paid. If upon the termination of the quarantine period the owner or custodian fails to pay the charges 
to the veterinary facility within forty-eight (48) hours of termination, the town is authorized to pay the 
charges and recover same through the town attorney under section 4-50. 
(Ord. of 11-5-85, § 4) 


Sec. 4-47. - Destruction of rabid animals. 
(a) ?When required there shall be the immediate destruction of an animal and transportation of the head 
to the public health laboratory of the state department of health for rabies testing. The animal's brain 
must not be damaged. 
(b) ?The option in subsection (a) will be used for all animal bites except dog or cat bites and other 
animals, such as pets, where in the opinion of the town health officer immediate destruction is not 
warranted. 
(c) ?The option in subsection (a) may be used for all animals if the animal has no owner or custodian, is 
injured or sick, or if quarantine is deemed not practical for any reason deemed reasonable by the 
town health officer. 
(Ord. of 11-5-85, § 4) 


Sec. 4-48. - Precautions. 
    Animals in quarantine shall not be vaccinated for rabies. Rabies vaccination shall not guarantee an 
animal is not rabid nor relieve any owner or custodian of an animal from complying with this division. 
(Ord. of 11-5-85, § 5) 


Sec. 4-49. - Violation and penalty. 
    Any person who directly or indirectly violates the civil provisions of this division or interferes with their 
enforcement shall be in violation of this division. A violation of this division shall be a civil matter enforced 
in accordance with the provisions of 24 V.S.A. sections 1974(a) and 1977 et. seq. The civil penalty for an 
initial violation of this division shall be an amount not less than one hundred ten dollars ($110.00). An 
amount not less than two hundred ten dollars ($210.00) shall be assessed for the second offense within a 
six-month period and an amount not less than four hundred ten dollars ($410.00) for each subsequent 
offense within a six-month period. 
    The waiver fee shall be set at fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense, one hundred ten dollars 
($110.00) for the second offense within a six-month period and two hundred ten dollars ($210.00) for 
each subsequent offense within a six-month period. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a 
separate violation of this article. Nothing in this article shall limit the town attorney's ability to pursue 
alternative and simultaneous legal action, including but not limited to injunctive relief, to ensure 
compliance with this division. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2001, §§ 1, 2) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 4-50. 


Secs. 4-50—4-65. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 18, 2001, repealed former §§ 4-49, Appeals, and 4-
50, Penalties, derived from an ordinance adopted Nov. 5, 1985, §§ 6, 7. 


ARTICLE III. - ON-SITE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEMS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Town manager to have control and supervision over system of sewers and 
drainage, § 21(4). 
Cross reference— Sewage, § 8-81 et seq. 
State Law reference— On-site sewage systems, 24 V.S.A. Ch. 102. 


Sec. 4-66. - Short title. 
    The selectmen of the town hereby ordain this article as "The Health Ordinance for the Town of Barre 
Relating to On-Site Wastewater Disposal Systems." 
(Ord. of 1-6-87, § I) 


Sec. 4-67. - Purpose. 
    This article is adopted under 24 V.S.A. Ch. 102 (On-Site Sewage Systems). The purpose of this 
article is to: 
(1) ?Prevent the creation of health hazards; 
(2) ?Prevent surfacing sewage, the contamination of drinking water, groundwater, and surface 
water; 
(3) ?Ensure adequate drainage related to the proper functioning of on-site sewage disposal 
systems; and 
(4) ?Ensure that facilities are designed, constructed, operated, and maintained in a manner which 
will promote sanitary and healthful conditions. 
(Ord. of 1-6-87, § I) 


Sec. 4-68. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Additional definitions. Unless otherwise defined herein, all terms shall be defined by the Vermont 
Health Regulations. 
    Applicant shall mean the person who owns the premises on which the on-site sewage disposal 
system is or will be constructed. 
    Family shall mean one (1) or more persons living, sleeping, cooking and eating on the same 
premises as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Gray water shall mean domestic wastewater (e.g. from sinks and laundry rooms) that does not 
contain toilet wastes. 
    Municipal systems shall mean water or sewer systems owned and operated by a municipal 
corporation, i.e., a town, city, fire district, etc. 
    Nonpublic systems shall mean water or sewer systems owned and operated privately, serving less 
than ten (10) customers. 
    On-site sewage system shall mean a system for disposal of wastewater using soil as a disposal 
medium, including a tank for collection of solids and leach area for liquids, or any other system which 
disposes of wastewater on-site. 
    Permit shall mean a written permit issued by the board of selectmen or other authorized person. 
Such permit shall become void if not used within eighteen (18) months from date of issue. 
    Proprietor shall mean a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or combination of 
these which may hold any interest in land, whether recorded or not. 
    Public systems shall mean water or sewer systems owned by the same person that serve ten (10) or 
more public, domestic, commercial, or industrial customers, whether or not on a for-profit basis. 
    Single-family dwelling shall mean a building used as living quarters for one (1) family. 
    Subsurface sewage disposal system shall mean any system which handles, treats, or disposes (or is 
intended to handle, treat, or dispose) of domestic sewage underground. 
    Vermont Health Regulations shall mean the Vermont Health Regulations, Chapter 5, Sanitary 
Engineering; Subchapter 10, Wastewater Treatment and Disposal—Individual On-Site Systems, effective 
June 7, 1983, promulgated by the Vermont Department of Health and adopted by the Vermont 
Department of Water Resources and Environmental Engineering, July 1, 1984. These regulations are 
incorporated into this article by reference. 
    Wastewater disposal officer shall mean the legally designated authority of the Town of Barre acting 
under authority of this article. The wastewater disposal officer shall be appointed by the board of 
selectmen. The wastewater disposal officer may be the town health officer, administrative officer or other 
town official. 
(Ord. of 1-6-87, § VIII) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 4-69. - Applicability of article. 
(a) ?Individual sewage disposal system. No individual, private, group, or community sewage disposal 
system, except one operated by the municipality, shall be built, altered, or used except in 
accordance with the provisions of this article and only after a permit has been issued by the 
wastewater disposal officer. Where a municipal sewer main is not available for connection from a 
building as specified in article II of the Town of Barre Sewer Use Ordinance, adopted February 28, 
1985 (see sections 8-84 and 8-85 of this Code), an on-site wastewater disposal system shall be 
constructed and used in accordance with the provisions of this article. If a dwelling unit or other 
structure is to be modified or altered, or if the use of the structure is to be modified or altered, or if the 
use of the structure is to be changed such that there will be additional wastewater discharged, 
except as provided for minor modifications in subsection (b)(1) of this section, the wastewater 
disposal officer shall first inspect the existing on-site system to determine if it is of adequate size, 
design, or repair to accommodate the anticipated additional flows. If the wastewater disposal officer 
shall find that the existing on-site system is not of adequate size, design or repair to accommodate 
the anticipated additional flows, a construction permit may be issued and the on-site system shall be 
improved in design, repair or size prior to the commencement of the alteration or modification of the 
structure or prior to its change of use. 
(b) ?Exceptions. Exceptions to the applicability of this article shall be as follows: 
(1) ?When a minor modification to an existing private sewage disposal system is proposed, the 
wastewater disposal officer may waive the permit requirement on a case-by-case basis. The 
wastewater disposal officer will determine what constitutes a minor modification if he finds that 
such modification shall not: 
a. ?Reduce or limit the disposal capacity of the on-site system; 
b. ?Increase or extend the disposal capacity of the system more than twenty-five (25) percent 
beyond its original design capacity; 
c. ?Allow the discharge of raw sewage, during or after construction of such modifications, in 
any manner contrary to the provisions of this article; 
d. ?Defeat the purposes and intent of this article. 
(2) ?Existing single-family dwelling on-site sewage disposal systems in operation at the time of the 
adoption of the ordinance from which this article derives are approved, provided that such 
systems do not create a health hazard, nuisance or pollute surface water or groundwater. That 
an existing system is causing a health hazard, nuisance or is polluting surface water or 
groundwater shall be determined by the wastewater disposal officer. Existing systems 
determined to be a health hazard, nuisance, or to be polluting surface water or groundwater 
shall be upgraded to the extent possible to meet the standards of this article. 
(3) ?In any case where any other applicable regulation, bylaw, ordinance or statute differs from this 
article, the more strict shall apply. 
(Ord. of 1-6-87, § II) 


Sec. 4-70. - Permit application procedure. 
(a) ?Construction permit. Before any person shall build, replace or alter an on-site sewage disposal 
system, he shall submit an application for a construction permit to the wastewater disposal officer or 
his authorized agent. The application shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the town in an 
amount established by the board of selectmen in accordance with section 4-73. An application for an 
on-site sewage disposal system construction permit shall contain soil and site information as 
required by the Vermont Health Regulations, Chapter 5, Subchapter 10, Wastewater Treatment and 
Disposal—Individual On-Site Systems, effective July 7, 1983, promulgated by the Vermont 
Department of Health and adopted by the Vermont Department of Water Resources and 
Environmental Engineering, July 1, 1984, and incorporated herein by reference and hereafter 
referred to as "Vermont Health Regulations". Individual sewage disposal systems shall be designed, 
built, used and maintained in accordance with the specifications in the Vermont Health Regulations, 
and the basis for the disposal system design shall be a peak flow of one hundred fifty (150) gallons 
per day per bedrooms. Soils and site information and the sewage disposal system design for an 
application shall be prepared either by an on-site specialist of the Vermont Association of 
Conservation Districts, a professional civil or sanitary engineer, or a site technician B certified by the 
Vermont Agency of Natural Resources. A construction permit shall be valid for a period of eighteen 
(18) months from the date of issue. 
(b) ?Occupancy permit. Sewage disposal systems shall not be used until such facilities have been 
certified by the wastewater disposal officer or his agent as being in compliance with this article. The 
designer of the approved on-site sewage disposal system shall submit a final inspection report to the 
wastewater disposal officer. Such report shall certify whether the system has been installed 
according to the approved design. Any variations from the approved design shall be noted in the 
report. The applicant shall notify the wastewater disposal officer or his agent at least forty-eight (48) 
hours in advance of the date the sewage disposal system is to be installed so that the wastewater 
disposal officer or his agent can make an inspection during construction. 
(c) ?Terms and conditions of permits. All permits required by this article run with the land and are binding 
upon each and subsequent owners. At the discretion of the wastewater disposal officer, all permits 
issued under this article, including the conditions of use issued pursuant to this article, may be filed 
in the town land records. 
(Ord. of 1-6-87, § III; Ord. of 6-9-92, § 1) 
Cross reference— Permit required for connection, use, etc., of sewer appurtenances, § 8-86. 


Sec. 4-71. - Alternative sewage disposal systems. 
    Chemical toilets, privies, composting toilets and incineration toilets may be approved on a case-by-
case basis by the wastewater disposal officer or his duly appointed agent. If one (1) of the above toilets is 
used and soil conditions allow, the absorption area of the associated subsurface sewage disposal system 
for gray water may be reduced, provided the wastewater disposal officer finds that sufficient area is 
available to add to the leach field in the event that conventional toilets are used to replace the waterless 
toilets. Full replacement area for a subsurface disposal field is also required. Reduction in the required 
size of any mound system will not be permitted. In allowing a reduction of a subsurface disposal field, the 
wastewater disposal officer shall ensure that subsequent owners of the property are aware of the 
limitations of the reduced disposal field and that the disposal area is increased to normal size prior to 
installation of water-type toilets by notice filed in accordance with section 4-70(c). 
(Ord. of 1-6-87, § IV) 
Cross reference— Use of privies, privy vaults restricted, § 8-83. 


Sec. 4-72. - Enforcement and appeals. 
(a) ?If the wastewater disposal officer or his authorized agent finds a person failing to comply with this 
article he may, in writing, order the person to comply within a specified period of time. Any notice 
under this section will be by certified mail, return receipt, except when any such official believes there 
is a violation which immediately affects the public health. Any written notice will give the violator a 
minimum of seven (7) days in which to correct the violation. The seven (7) days' written notice shall 
commence when the written notice is placed in the United States mail. The seven-day notice may be 
shortened if any such official finds that an emergency situation has occurred and the same affects 
the public health. 
(b) ?A person who neglects or refuses to comply with a written order of the wastewater disposal officer 
shall be in violation of this civil ordinance. Enforcement shall be in accordance with the provisions of 
24 V.S.A sections 1974(a) and 1977 et seq. with a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per 
offense. 
    The waiver fee shall be set at fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense, sixty-five dollars ($65.00) for 
the second offense within a six-month period and eighty-five dollars ($85.00) for each subsequent offense 
within a six-month period. Each week the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c) ?Upon the refusal or neglect of the person whose legal duty it was to comply with the written order of 
the wastewater disposal officer, the board of selectmen may prevent, remove or destroy, or cause to 
be prevented, removed or destroyed, any unhealthful conditions or causes of sickness, at the 
expense of the town; such expenses may be recovered in a civil action against the person whose 
legal duty it was to comply with such order. 
(d) ?Any person who attempts to hinder the work of the wastewater disposal officer shall be fined not 
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation of this civil ordinance. Enforcement shall be in 
accordance with the provisions of 24 V.S.A. sections 1974(a) and 1977 et. seq. 
(1) ?Waiver fees shall be set at two hundred sixty dollars ($260.00) for the first offense, three 
hundred ten dollars ($310.00) for the second offense within a six-month period and four 
hundred ten dollars ($410.00) for each subsequent offense within a six-month period. Each day 
the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2) ?The wastewater disposal officer may call upon sheriffs, constables and police officers to assist 
him in the discharge of his duties. Any such officer who neglects or refuses to render such 
assistance shall be fined two hundred ten dollars ($210.00) for the violation of this civil 
ordinance. Enforcement shall be in accordance with the provision of 24 V.S.A. sections 1974(a) 
and 1977 et. seq. 
    Waiver fees shall be set at not less than one hundred ten dollars ($110.00) for the first offense, one 
hundred thirty-five dollars ($135.00) for the second offense within a six-month period and one hundred 
sixty dollars ($160.00) for each subsequent offense within a six-month period. Each day the violation 
occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e) ?Nothing herein shall be deemed to abridge, annul, modify or reduce any rights, authorities, 
responsibilities or powers of local health officials pursuant to 18 V.S.A. Chapter 11. 
(Ord. of 1-6-87, § V; Ord. of 10-30-2001, §§ 1, 2) 


Sec. 4-73. - Fee schedule. 
(a) ?The board of selectmen may, from time to time, establish a schedule of fees for construction permits 
issued under section 4-70. Such a schedule, adopted by majority vote of the board of selectmen, 
after public notice and hearing, shall become a part of this article and incorporated herein by 
reference. 
(b) ?When the board of selectmen shall have failed or neglected to establish a fee for any construction, 
use or activity requiring a construction permit under section 4-70, the fee shall be established at ten 
dollars ($10.00). 
(Ord. of 1-6-87, § VI) 


Secs. 4-74—4-89. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - NUISANCE CONTROL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, § 4-26 et seq. 


Sec. 4-90. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect the comfort, health, repose, property, safety and general 
welfare of the citizens of the town. In order to accomplish the foregoing purpose, it is deemed necessary 
to establish a standard for unacceptable animal behavior and care, provide for procedures for 
enforcement, appeal, and establish penalties for violations of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-19-89; Ord. of 2-20-07) 


Sec. 4-91. - Duty of maintenance of property and control of animals. 
    No person owning, leasing, occupying or having control of any premises in the town and no person 
owning, keeping, harboring or maintaining any animal shall allow such premises or animal(s) to become 
or remain a public nuisance as herein defined. 
(Ord. of 9-19-89) 


Sec. 4-92. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the terms are defined as follows: 
    Animal control officer: The person or persons appointed by the town manager to police and enforce 
this article in cooperation with appropriate law enforcement agencies and shall include, without limitation, 
sworn officers of the Barre Town Police Department. 
    Dog: Any animal of the canine species. 
    At large: At large shall mean not under the control of the owner, or another individual either by leash, 
cord, chain or other similar means of physical restraint. 
    Owner(s): Any person or group of persons who own, harbor or permit any animal to be or remain in 
or about a building or premises owner or occupied by them. 
    Nuisances enumerated: 
(1) ?Animal nuisances. Animals are hereby declared a public nuisance under the following 
circumstances or conditions: 
a. ?An animal that injures a member of the general public; or kills or severely injures a 
domestic animal or pet; or 
b. ?An animal that repeatedly disturbs the rights, or threatens the safety of members of the 
public; or interferes with the ordinary use and enjoyment of property; or is allowed or 
permitted to damage the property of anyone other than its owner, including, but not limited 
to, turning over garbage containers or damage to gardens, flowers or vegetables or 
defecating upon the property of another, or injury or worrying domestic animals and pets; 
or 
c. ?Animals maintained in an environment of unsanitary conditions or lack of cleanliness, or in 
otherwise inhumane care, which results in offensive odor or is dangerous to the public 
health, welfare or safety of the animal or general population, or which substantially 
increases the probability of the transmission of disease; or 
d. ?Property that is offensive, annoying or dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare of 
the community because of the number, type, variety, density or location of the animals on 
the property; or 
e. ?An animal repeatedly, continuously or habitually allowed or permitted to bark, whine, howl, 
crow, cackle or make loud noises in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion so as to 
interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of neighboring premises; or 
f. ?An animal that is diseased and dangerous to the public health; or 
g. ?An animal that habitually or repeatedly chases, snaps at, attacks or barks at pedestrians, 
joggers, dogs walked on a leash by owners, bicycles or vehicles; or 
h. ?A female dog while in an oestrus cycle unless confined in a building or secure enclosure in 
such a manner that she cannot come into contact with another dog or create a nuisance by 
attracting other animals; provided this section shall not be construed to prohibit the 
intentional breeding of animals within an enclosed area on the premises of the owner of an 
animal which is being bred; or 
i. ?A dog permitted to be at large as defined in section 4-92 or to trespass upon the property of 
another, public or private, except: 
1. ?On the premises of the dog's owner(s); 
2. ?On the premises of the person whose control the dog is under; 
3. ?On the premises of another person as long as that person has given permission for 
the dog to be at large; 
4. ?In an area designated by the selectboard for dogs to be at large. 
j. ?An animal kept or maintained contrary to the conditions of a lawful order issued by the 
selectboard under section 4-97 of this article. 
(2) ?Other nuisances. (Reserved). 
(Ord. of 9-19-89; Ord. of 2-20-07) 


Sec. 4-93. - Licensing of dogs. 
    It shall be the duty of every person within the town owning, keeping or harboring any dog over six (6) 
months of age to procure a license therefor in accordance with Chapter 193, Title 20, of the Vermont 
Statutes Annotated, as amended. 
(Ord. of 9-19-89) 


Sec. 4-94. - Animal control officer designated duties generally. 
    The Barre Town Police Department Law Enforcement Officers and the Barre Town Animal Control 
Officer are designated to act as animal control officers to enforce the provisions of this article. It shall be 
the duty of the animal control officer to investigate complaints of animal nuisances and to enforce the 
provisions of this article. The town manager shall designate the names of persons and their locations to 
receive animals for confinement under the terms of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-19-89; Ord. of 2-20-07) 


Sec. 4-95. - General violation. 
    Any animal allowed to become or remain a nuisance as herein defined, or a dog that is not licensed 
shall be in violation of this civil ordinance and may be impounded. The owner of any animal impounded, if 
such owner can be identified, shall be guilty of a violation of this civil ordinance and subject to the 
penalties hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. of 9-19-89; Ord. of 2-20-07) 


Sec. 4-96. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a) ?The animal control officer may seize or impound any animal which is deemed to be in violation of 
this civil ordinance if such nuisance, condition or act occurs in the presence of the officer. The animal 
control officer shall notify the owner or keeper of such animal, if known, of the location where and the 
person with whom the animal is confined. If an animal so confined is a licensed dog, or the animal's 
owner is immediately known, the animal control officer shall forthwith give notice in writing to the 
owner, mailed to the owner's last-known address by certified mail with return receipt requested, 
stating that the animal may be reclaimed within six (6) business days from the mailing of said notice. 
If the dog or animal is not claimed, the dog or animal shall be relinquished to the Central Vermont 
Humane Society or similar organization to be cared for and disposed of in accordance with their 
policies. The owner shall be liable for all costs incurred for said care. 
(b) ?If an unlicensed dog, or animal whose owner is unknown, is impounded by virtue of this article, the 
animal control officer shall confine such dog or animal for up to six (6) business days. If, after six (6) 
business days it has been impossible to determine the owner of such dog or animal, the dog or 
animal shall be relinquished to the Central Vermont Humane Society or similar organization to be 
cared for and disposed of in accordance with their policies. If the owner of an unlicensed dog or 
animal is located, and the owner wishes to reclaim the dog or animal, the animal control officer shall 
not release the dog or animal until all required licenses have been obtained and evidence of 
antirabies inoculation is shown. The owner shall also pay to the town a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) 
plus any charge incurred by the town for the impoundment of the dog or animal. If the dog or animal 
has been disposed of or destroyed, the owner shall be liable for all costs incurred. 
(c) ?Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be in violation of this civil ordinance. 
Enforcement shall follow the procedures and requirements described in 24 V.S.A. § 1974 (a) and 
1977 et seq. Said violator may, within fifteen (15) days from the date of such violation, waive the 
issuing of any process by voluntarily paying the violation (waiver) fee as herein prescribed: 
Offense 
Civil Penalty 
Waiver Fee 
First Offense 
$75.00 
$50.00 
Second Offense 
$115.00 
$75.00 
Third Offense 
$300.00 
$200.00 
Fourth and subsequent offenses 
$500.00 
$300.00 
 
Each day a violation continues may constitute a separate offense. 
(d) ?In addition to or in lieu of impounding an animal found to be a nuisance animal as defined in section 
4-92 of this article, the animal control officer may issue to the known animal owner a notice of 
complaint. A copy of the notice of complaint shall be filed with the selectboard. The selectboard shall 
proceed with a hearing in accordance with section 4-97 of this article; 
(e) ?Failure to pay any fine assessed, obey an order of the selectboard issued under section 4-97, or file 
an appeal thereof in a timely manner shall be deemed a violation of this civil ordinance. The penalty 
for failing to pay any fine or obey an order of the selectboard, under section 4-97, shall be punishable 
by a five hundred dollar ($500.00) civil penalty or three hundred dollar ($300.00) waiver fee. For the 
purpose of collection, the town may pursue any and all civil remedies available by law. 
(f) ?The animal control officer is hereby authorized and empowered to enter into private lands, seize and 
impound animals and take all reasonable and necessary measures to abate a public nuisance which 
shall occur in his or her presence. 
(Ord. of 9-19-89; Ord. of 2-20-07) 


Sec. 4-97. - Procedure for complaints and action. 
    Complaints and hearings. 
(1) ?The animal control officer, in accordance with subsection 4-96(d), or three (3) legal residents of 
the town not satisfied with the action of the animal control officer who, upon knowledge that an 
animal constitutes a public nuisance under this article, may file a written complaint with the 
selectboard. The complaint shall contain the names and addresses of the three (3) complaining 
residents, the nature and basis of the complaint, the name and address of the victim or victims 
and any other facts that may assist the selectboard in conducting their investigation required by 
subsection (2) of this section. 
(2) ?The selectboard, within twenty-one (21) days from receipt of the complaint, shall investigate the 
charges and hold a hearing on the matter. If the owner or keeper of the animal which is the 
subject of the complaint can be ascertained with due diligence, said owner or keeper shall be 
provided with a written notice of the time, date and place of the hearing and the facts of the 
complaint. 
(3) ?If the animal is found (upon hearing) to be a nuisance under this article, the selectboard may 
make findings of fact and such order for the abatement of such nuisance as the facts and 
circumstances of the case may require, including, without limitation, that the animal be disposed 
of in a humane way, muzzled, chained or confined; and the owner or keeper of such animal 
may be assessed damages and/or a fine as outlined in subsection 4-96(c) not to exceed five 
hundred dollars ($500.00). The order shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, or 
served personally upon the owner or keeper of the animal. 
(4) ?Notwithstanding subsection (1) above, the selectboard may initiate a complaint and hearing 
upon their own knowledge and action. 
(Ord. of 9-19-89; Ord. of 2-20-07) 


Sec. 4-98. - Appeals. 
(a) ?Actions of the animal control officer. 
(1) ?Any owner or keeper of an animal found to be in violation of this article by the animal control 
officer may appeal to the selectboard the action, findings, impoundment charges or boarding 
fees by filing written notification to the town clerk within fifteen (15) days of delivery to the 
owner, or date of mailing of notice, of any such charges, fees or fines. 
(2) ?The selectboard shall convene a hearing on the appeal in accordance with the procedures 
under section 4-97 of this article. The selectboard, after notice and hearing, may determine to 
uphold or reverse any or all findings, action, charges, fees or fines and may direct the town 
treasurer to return any amounts paid as they deem appropriate. 
(b) ?Actions of the selectboard. Any owner or keeper of any animal found to be in violation of this article 
may appeal any decision, order, action or finding of the selectboard to the Washington County 
Superior Court. Any appeal from the decision of the selectboard under this article must be filed within 
thirty (30) days of the rendering of such decision. 
(Ord. of 9-19-89; Ord. of 2-20-07) 


Sec. 4-99. - Savings clause. 
    Nothing herein shall be construed to limit, supersede, repeal or annul any other law, ordinance or 
regulation related to nuisances generally or to animals, including dogs, in particular. 
(Ord. of 9-19-89) 


Sec. 4-100. - Separability. 
    Each separate provision of this article shall be deemed independent of all other provisions of this 
article and if any provisions of this article shall be declared invalid in a court of law, all other provisions of 
this article shall remain valid and enforceable. 
(Ord. of 9-19-89) 


Secs. 4-101—4-109. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE V. - HEALTH AND TOBACCO 


Sec. 4-110. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to enact a law that will prohibit persons under the age of eighteen (18) 
from entering any place of business engaged primarily in the sale of tobacco products and tobacco-
related products. 
(Ord. of 8-21-07) 


Sec. 4-111. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the terms are defined as follows: 
    Commercial tobacco establishment: A place of business that holds a valid State of Vermont Tobacco 
License and is engaged primarily in the sale of tobacco products and tobacco-related products. 
    Commercial tobacco establishment sign: A clearly marked sign informing the general public of the 
provisions of the health and tobacco article of the Barre Town Code. 
    Tobacco products: Cigarettes, cigars, cheroots, stogies, periques, granulated, plug-cut, crimp-cut, 
ready-rubbed, and other smoking tobacco, snuff, snuff flour, Cavendish, plug and twist tobacco, fine-cut 
and other chewing tobaccos, shorts, refuse, scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco, and 
other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in a manner suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or 
otherwise, or both for chewing and smoking. 
(Ord. of 8-21-07) 


Sec. 4-112. - Health control officer designated duties generally. 
    The Barre Town Police Department's law enforcement officers are designated to act to enforce the 
provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-21-07) 


Sec. 4-113. - Prohibitions, requirements. 
(a) ?No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall enter a commercial tobacco establishment at 
any time. 
(b) ?All commercial tobacco establishments shall post a commercial tobacco establishment sign at each 
point of public entry for the general public. 
(Ord. of 8-21-07) 


Sec. 4-114. - Violations. 
(a) ?Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who enters a commercial tobacco establishment 
that has a commercial tobacco establishment sign posted at the public entry, shall be in violation of 
this civil ordinance. Persons under the age of eighteen (18) years who are participating in 
compliance checks for the Department of Liquor Control as authorized by state statute are exempt 
from operation of this article. 
(b) ?Any commercial tobacco establishment that fails to post a commercial tobacco establishment sign at 
each point of public entry for the general public, shall be in violation of this civil ordinance. 
(Ord. of 8-21-07) 


Sec. 4-115. - Enforcement and penalties. 
    Any person or organization failing to comply with the provisions of this article shall be in violation of 
this civil ordinance. Enforcement shall follow the procedures and requirements described in 24 V.S.A. §§ 
1974(a) and 1977 et seq. Said violator may, within fifteen (15) days from the date of such violation, waive 
the issuing of any process by voluntarily paying the violation (waiver) fee as herein prescribed: 
Offense 
Civil Penalty 
Waiver Fee 
First offense 
$250.00 
$200.00 
Second offense 
$375.00 
$300.00 
Third and subsequent offenses 
$500.00 
$400.00 
 
Each incident shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 8-21-07) 


Chapter 5 - PUBLIC SAFETY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; civil defense, Ch. 3; health, Ch. 4; streets, sidewalks and other 
public places, Ch. 6; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 7. 
State Law reference— Ambulance services, 24 V.S.A. Ch. 71; internal security and public safety, Title 
20, V.S.A. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 5-1. - Building numbering—Required. 
(a) ?All buildings, except accessory buildings, shall be numbered. The town engineer shall assign 
building numbers using the following as a guide: 
(1) ?Building numbers shall start on the end of a road closest to the geographic center of the town; 
an exception can be made for dead-end roads where the dead end is closer to the center of 
town; 
(2) ?The sequence of numbers shall continue along a road even where the name of the road 
changes; 
(3) ?Odd numbers shall be assigned to the north side of roads with an east-west course and to the 
east side of roads with a north-south course; 
(4) ?Even numbers shall be assigned to the south side of roads with an east-west course and to the 
west side of roads with a north-south course; 
(5) ?The direction of roads not clearly following a north-south course or an east-west course shall 
be determined by: a road in a northeast to southwest direction will be considered a north-south 
road; a road in a northwest to southeast direction will be considered a north-south road; a road 
in an east-northeast to west-southwest direction will be considered an east-west road; a road in 
a west-northwest to east-southeast direction will be considered an east-west road; 
(6) ?The frontage of each side of every road shall be marked off in fifty-foot segments or smaller 
segments when the density of development requires more numbers for numbering buildings; 
(7) ?A number shall be reserved for every fifty-foot segment (or smaller segment); buildings, except 
accessory buildings, shall be assigned the number of the segment within which the building lies. 
(b) ?The town engineer shall keep a record of building numbers and the proper building number of every 
segment in the town. 
(c) ?The owner of every building shall place the building number in four-inch high numerals on the 
building, a post or a sign so that the building number is clearly visible from the road. 
(Ord. of 11-10-92, § 1) 


Sec. 5-2. - Same—Compliance officer. 
    The town manager, or his/her designee, shall act as a compliance officer to enforce the provisions of 
sections 5-1 through 5-6 of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-10-92, § 1) 


Sec. 5-3. - Same—Enforcement. 
(a) ?Notice of violation. 
(1) ?The compliance officer shall issue to any person (as defined in section 1-2 of this Code) who 
violates the provisions of section 5-1(c) of this article a notice of violation, which shall contain, 
as a minimum, the following information and shall have attached thereto a copy of this article: 
a. ?Name of property owner; 
b. ?Street number; 
c. ?Date of violation; 
d. ?Compliance date; 
e. ?Amount of maximum fine. 
(2) ?The notice of violation shall be served on a person by certified mail or by service, in 
accordance with Rule 4, Vermont Rules of Civil Procedure, if certified mail is refused or 
otherwise undelivered. 
(b) ?Compliance date. The compliance date is the date after which a person shall be subject to a fine for 
failure to display their street number as required by section 5-1(c) of this article. The compliance date 
shall be thirty (30) days following the date the notice of violation is dated. 
(c) ?Any person who neglects or refuses to comply with the compliance officer's written notice of 
violation shall be in violation of this civil ordinance. Enforcement shall be in accordance with the 
provisions of 24 V.S.A sections 1974(a) and 1977 et. seq. with a civil penalty not to exceed five 
hundred dollars ($500.00) per offense. 
    The waiver fee shall be set at sixty dollars ($60.00) for the first offense, one hundred ten dollars 
($110.00) for the second offense within a six-month period and two hundred ten dollars ($210.00) for 
each subsequent offense within a six-month period. Each month the violation continues shall constitute a 
separate offense, where one (1) month is defined as thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. of 10-30-2001, §§ 1, 2) 


Sec. 5-4. - Effect on other laws regulating building numbering. 
    Nothing within Chapter 5, Article 1, shall be construed to limit, supercede, repeal or annul any other 
law, ordinance or regulation related to structure numbering. 
(Ord. of 10-30-2001, §§ 1, 2) 


Secs. 5-5—5-25. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - AMBULANCES 


DIVISION 1. - BOARD OF AMBULANCE COMMISSIONERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 


Sec. 5-26. - Established. 
    The selectmen of the town shall constitute a board of ambulance commissioners. 
(Ord. of 5-14-74, Art. 1) 


Sec. 5-27. - Duties. 
    The board of ambulance commissioners shall have the supervision of ambulance service within the 
town shall make and establish all needful rates for charges and rules and regulations for ambulance 
control and operation. The board of ambulance commissioners may appoint or remove a superintendent 
at their pleasure. The charges and the receipts of such ambulance service within the town and collected 
by the board of ambulance commissioners or persons appointed by them shall be used and applied to 
pay the interest and principal of any indebtedness entered into by the town in providing ambulance 
service in the town, as well as the expenses of maintenance and operation of any ambulance service and 
all other necessary expenses of the service, including the establishment and development of a 
contingency fund to provide for the replacement or expansion of such service. 
(Ord. of 5-14-74, Art. 2) 


Secs. 5-28—5-40. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - FINANCES 


Sec. 5-41. - Generally. 
(a) ?The town, through its board of selectmen, as its board of ambulance commissioners, may from time 
to time by resolution establish charges to be paid by persons receiving ambulance service in the 
town. 
(b) ?All persons receiving municipal ambulance service, either emergency service or service by request, 
from the town, shall pay all assessed charges to the town clerk-treasurer, within thirty (30) days of 
the billing date. 
(c) ?Any bill not paid within the required thirty (30) days shall be assessed a five (5) percent late fee. If 
compensation is not received within thirty (30) days of the late fee assessment, an eight (8) percent 
collection fee and one (1) percent simple monthly interest charge shall be assessed against the 
original amount due. The town is further authorized to pursue any and all civil remedies available by 
law, at the recipient's expense, for the purpose of collection. These include, but are not limited to, 
credit bureau notification, use of collection agencies, judicial enforcement etc. 
(Ord. of 5-14-74, Art. 3; Ord. of 10-23-2001, §§ 1, 2) 


Sec. 5-42. - Statute of limitations. 
    There shall be no statute of limitations on any indebtedness due the town for the provision of 
ambulance services. 
(Ord. of 10-23-2001, §§ 1, 2) 


Secs. 5-43—5-55. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - SPECIAL EVENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 6. 


Sec. 5-56. - Purpose. 
    The town is charged with the task of protecting the lives and property of all persons within the town. 
From time to time there are special events held within the town which draw large crowds of people. These 
events place an additional responsibility upon the police and fire departments in terms of traffic control, 
crowd control and protection of life and property. In order to provide the added protection necessitated by 
these special events, the town may require that special officers be hired for these events by the promoter. 
(Ord. of 11-3-81, § 1; Ord. of 5-24-88) 


Sec. 5-57. - Categories. 
    Special events are hereby designated by category and include the following: 
(1) ?Motor vehicle races; 
(2) ?Circuses; 
(3) ?Fairs or carnivals; 
(4) ?Other shows or activities which require a permit from the board of selectmen; 
(5) ?Any event described in 24 V.S.A. Ch. 2291(11). 
(Ord. of 11-3-81, § 2; Ord. of 5-24-88) 


Sec. 5-58. - Requirements of sponsoring agencies; contracts. 
(a) ?Notice to city; permit; assurance of compliance. The requirements of sponsoring agencies regarding 
special events are as follows: 
(1) ?The agency must notify the police department, fire department, and town manager in writing of 
coming events no more than ninety (90) days nor less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the 
event. Such written notice shall include as a minimum the following: 
a. ?Type of event. 
b. ?Location of event 
c. ?Date and time of event. 
d. ?Estimated attendance. 
e. ?Physical layout of event including but not limited to: 
1. ?Parking. 
2. ?Location of exhibits, booths and concessions and their number. 
3. ?Location of entrances and exits. 
4. ?Areas where money will be collected and held. 
f. ?Such other information, in writing, within twenty-four (24) hours of request, as requested by 
either the chief of police, fire chief, or town manager. 
(2) ?The agency must obtain a special events permit. 
(3) ?The agency must post a sum of money in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day 
with the town clerk to assure compliance with all conditions of any permit issued by the board of 
selectmen pursuant to this chapter. The unexpended portion of such sum shall be returned 
within ten (10) days following the event. The foregoing sum may be lowered or waived at the 
discretion of the board of selectmen. 
(b) ?Contracts. If the board of selectmen establishes a security and control plan or a fire protection and 
emergency response plan which utilize the services of the police department or the fire department 
in part or in whole, such deployment and staffing shall be authorized by written contract by and 
between the town and the promoter and filed with the town clerk. In the case of seasonal events, the 
contract will be negotiated for the season prior to the first event of the season. If services of other 
agencies or corporations are to be utilized in part or in whole to meet the minimum conditions of the 
security and control or the fire protection and emergency response plans, the promoter shall file 
copies of any contracts or service agreements with the town clerk. Filing of such contracts shall 
become a condition of any permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. of 11-3-81, § 3; Ord. of 5-24-88) 


Sec. 5-59. - Security and control. 
(a) ?Security and control plan. The board of selectmen, with the advice of the chief of police and the 
special event promoter shall establish a minimum security staffing and deployment plan for each 
special event. Such plan shall provide for reasonable and adequate crowd control and public safety 
as well as crime prevention. The plan shall consider the number of police or security personnel to be 
assigned, their training, qualifications, arrest authority, the location, layout, date, and time of event, 
the number of people anticipated to be in attendance or participating, and any other relevant 
conditions. The plan may also require other reasonable provisions for public safety such as fencing, 
lighting, or signage. Adherence to such security and control plan shall become a condition of any 
permits issued hereunder. 
(b) ?Functions of plan. The security and control plan will assure the following: 
(1) ?Vehicle traffic to and from the special event shall be orderly, safe, and efficient. 
(2) ?The lives and property of all spectators, participants, officials, and others are safeguarded at all 
times and the surrounding areas and roadways are not subjected to crime or disorder as a 
result of the special event. 
(3) ?Public order is maintained. 
(4) ?The sponsoring agency, vendors, and the public are protected against the commission of 
crimes. 
(Ord. of 11-3-81;, § 4, Ord. of 12-10-85; Ord. of 5-24-88) 


Sec. 5-60. - Fire protection and emergency response. 
(a) ?Fire protection and emergency response plan. The board of selectmen with the advice of the fire 
chief and the special events promoter shall establish a minimum fire protection and emergency 
response plan for each special event. Such plan shall provide for reasonable and adequate 
firefighting, rescue, and emergency response. Adherence to such fire protection and emergency 
response plan shall become a condition of any permits issued hereunder. 
(b) ?Functions of the plan. The fire protection and emergency response plan will assure the following: 
(1) ?Adequate fire response capability shall be available and stationed to respond to foreseeable 
fire emergencies. 
(2) ?Adequate emergency medical response capability shall be available and stationed to respond 
to foreseeable medical emergencies. 
(3) ?That lives and property of spectators, participants, officials, and others are safeguarded at all 
times and no unreasonable fire risks are created for nearby properties. 
(4) ?That fire and emergency response vehicles, equipment and personnel are not subjected to 
unnecessary risks, hindrance, or inconvenience. 
(Ord. No. 11-3-81, § 5; Ord. of 5-24-88; Ord. of 5-23-89) 
State Law reference— Fire protection generally, 20 VSA § 2481 et seq. 


Sec. 5-61. - Form of permit. 
    The permit for special events shall be in the following form: 
TOWN OF BARRE, VT 
SPECIAL EVENTS PERMIT 
TO: _____ 
    Pursuant to Title 24 (Chapter 61), Title 31 (Chapter 9), and Title 31 (Chapter 7) VSA, the Town of 
Barre hereby grants to  
_____ 
for the following date(s): _____ 
a permit to exhibit in the Town of Barre any show mentioned in Section 2291(11) of Title 24, Sections 
9905 and 9906 of Title 32, and Section 301 of Title 31 VSA, (specifically, ____________ ). 
    This permit is issued upon payment by the owners or operators thereof, for the use of the Town, of 
not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for every day on which such events are given in the Town of 
Barre. 
    This permit is further subject to the right of the Seclectmen of the Town of Barre to revoke said 
permit upon the Selectmen being satisfied that such events are disturbing the peace and/or in violation of 
the Security and Control Plan of the Fire Protection and Emergency Response Plan or any other 
conditions of this permit. 
    This permit is further conditioned and shall not become effective until the owner or operator of said 
event first secures from the Secretary of State of the State of Vermont the permit required by Title 32, 
Chapter 235 VSA, or Title 31, Chapter 7 VSA and further has secured from the Commissioner of Public 
Safety of the State of Vermont the permit required by Title 20, Chapter 201 VSA. If any of the 
aforementioned public agencies do not have jurisdiction over such event, then the Town of Barre Board of 
Selectmen reserve the right to independently impose such regulations as above cited. 
    This permit is further conditioned and shall not become effective until the owner or operator of said 
exhibition first complies with and secures a "Notice of Compliance" order from the Town of Barre Police 
and Fire Departments. Said "Notice of Compliance" shall be issued when, and only when, the permittee 
has demonstrated that all applicable permit conditions have been satisfied. 
    This permit is further issued subject to the owner or holder hereof agreeing to hold harmless the 
Town of Barre from any and all claims of any persons arising from the holding of said event and the 
utilization of the instant permit. 
    This permit shall not issue or become effective until a copy of all of the above required permits are 
on file with the Town Clerk of the Town of Barre. 
    This permit must be applied for from the Town of Barre Town Clerk at least ten (10) days prior to the 
date of said event. This provision may be waived upon payment to the Town of Barre of the sum of 
$50.00. 
Date _____ 
_____ 
Owner or Operator 
 
Granted this ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
TOWN OF BARRE  
By _____ 
Town Clerk and Duly Authorized Agent 
(Ord. of 5-24-88) 


Secs. 5-62—5-69. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - REGULATION OF JUNK 


Sec. 5-70. - Definitions. 
(a) ?Abandon means leave without claimed ownership for thirty (30) days or more. 
(b) ?Abutting property owner means any person or persons, corporation or other entity that owns, 
leases, or in any other way uses or controls the real property abutting any portion of the property of 
another. A public highway shall not be a barrier with regard to abutting properties. 
(c) ?Automobile hobbyist means a race car enthusiast who is not primarily engaged in the business of: 
(1) ?Selling motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts; or 
(2) ?Accepting, storing, or dismantling junk motor vehicles. 
(d) ?Automobile graveyard means a yard, field, or other outdoor area on a property owned or controlled 
by a person and used or maintained for storing or depositing four or more junk motor vehicles. 
"Automobile graveyard" does not include: 
(1) ?An area used by an automobile hobbyist to store, organize, restore, or display motor vehicles 
or parts of such vehicles, provided that the hobbyist's activities comply with all applicable 
federal, state, and municipal law; 
(2) ?An area used for the storage of motor vehicles exempt from registration under [V.S.A.]chapter 
7 of Title 23; 
(3) ?An area owned or used by a dealer registered under 23 V.S.A. § 453 for the storage of motor 
vehicles; or 
(4) ?An area used or maintained for the parking or storage of operational commercial motor 
vehicles, as that term is defined in 23 V.S.A. § 4103(4), that are temporarily out of service and 
unregistered but are expected to be used in the future by the vehicle operator or owner. 
(e) ?Enforcement officer means the zoning administrator or the chief of police. 
(f) ?Hazard-free condition means a condition which shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the 
following: 
(1) ?Vehicles stored with tires in place, or with adequate blocking under the vehicle frame to secure 
the vehicle so as to not be a danger. 
(2) ?Vehicles stored without leaking gas or without any other leaking automotive fluids. 
(3) ?Vehicles stored without any exposed sharp metal or glass edges. 
(g) ?Household appliance means any range, stove, refrigerator, washing machine, clothes dryer, water 
pump, power tool and the like. 
(h) ?Junk means old or scrap copper, brass, iron, steel and other old or scrap or nonferrous material, 
including but not limited to rope, rags, batteries, glass, rubber debris, waste, trash or any discarded, 
dismantled, wrecked, scrapped or ruined motor vehicles or parts thereof. 
(i) ?Junk motor vehicle means a discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped or ruined motor vehicle or 
parts thereof, or a motor vehicle, other than an on-premises utility vehicle, which is allowed to remain 
unregistered or uninspected for a period of ninety (90) days from the date of discovery. 
(j) ?Motor vehicle shall include all vehicles propelled or drawn by power other than muscular power, 
except functional vehicles and equipment used for agricultural and construction operations. 
(k) ?Race car enthusiast means the owner or person having control of a yard, field, or other outdoor area 
used to store up to two (2) motor vehicles used for racing and one (1) motor vehicle considered to be 
a "parts" car for said race car(s) as long as said race cars have been registered and raced at a 
facility with an official sanctioning body within the last twelve (12) months or will be raced in the next 
racing season. Burden of proof with regard to whether the cars are or will be used for racing falls to 
the owner or person having control of the property. 
(l) ?Road, public highway , or public road shall include all parts of any bridge, culvert, roadway, street, 
square, fairground or other place open temporarily or permanently to public or general circulation of 
motor vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians and shall include a way laid out under authority of law. 
(m) ?Salvage yard means any place of outdoor storage or deposit for storing, keeping, processing, 
buying, or selling junk or as a scrap metal processing facility. "Salvage yard" also means any outdoor 
area used for operation of an automobile graveyard. It does not mean a garage where wrecked or 
disabled motor vehicles are stored for less than 90 days for inspection or repairs. 
(n) ?Stream/brook means a watercourse having a source and a terminus, banks, and channel through 
which water flows at least periodically at a rate of more than one and one-half (1.5) cubic feet per 
second or approximately six hundred seventy-three (673) gallons per minute. 
(o) ?Traveled way means that portion of a public highway designed for the movement of a motor vehicle, 
shoulders, and roadside parking, rest, observation areas, and other areas immediately adjacent and 
contiguous to the traveled portion of the roadway. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10, § 1) 


Sec. 5-71. - Requirements. 
(a) ?Any motor vehicle stored for any purpose shall be kept in a hazard-free condition at all times. 
(b) ?Any vehicle classified as a junk motor vehicle, including cars used by race car enthusiasts, shall 
maintain a minimum setback of fifty (50) feet from the high-water mark of all streams and brooks. 
(c) ?It shall be unlawful to place, discard or abandon junk or two (2) or more junk motor vehicles in a 
place where any such item is visible from the traveled way of a road, or visible to an abutting 
landowner. Any such item so placed, discarded or abandoned, except if considered an automobile 
hobbyist, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(d) ?It shall be unlawful to place, discard or abandon junk or junk motor vehicles upon the land of 
another with or without the consent of the owner, where any such item is visible from the traveled 
way of a road, or visible to an abutting landowner. Any such item so placed, discarded or 
abandoned, except if considered an automobile hobbyist is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(e) ?A person who wishes to operate a salvage yard within the town is required to: 
•?Obtain a certificate of approved location for the site of the salvage yard, and 
•?Obtain a certificate of registration for a salvage yard from the state. 
(1) ?Certificate of approved location. Application for a certificate of approved location shall be made 
in writing to the selectboard of the town. The application shall contain a description of the land 
to be included within the salvage yard, which description shall be by reference to so-called 
permanent boundary markers. The procedures to be followed after an application has been 
made are those specified in 24 V.S.A. § 2252—2256, as from time to time amended. Any 
person(s) seeking a certificate of approved location shall obtain site plan and conditional use 
approval in conformance with the town zoning bylaw, article 4, section 4.19. A salvage yard may 
not be considered if it is proposed to be located in a location within town that is not allowed by 
zoning. 
(2) ?Certificate of registration. The procedures for obtaining a certificate of registration from the 
state are those specified in 24 V.S.A. § 2261—2264, as from time to time amended. 
(f) ?All salvage yards, scrap yards, and places of outdoor storage of junk shall be effectively screened 
from public view by a fence and/or vegetation at least eight feet in height. Any fence shall be of 
sound construction and of solid vertical board or "stockade"-type construction, and shall be 
maintained neatly and in good repair. Such a fence shall not be used for advertising signs or other 
displays which are visible from the traveled way of a public highway. Any vegetation used for 
screening shall be of sufficient density so that it effectively screens the area from view. Failure to 
provide and maintain screening as required herein shall be considered a violation of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10, § 1) 


Sec. 5-72. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a) ?[Notification of violation; compliance.] Upon receiving written notice from the enforcement officer by 
certified mail or by service in accordance with Rule 4, Vermont Rules of Civil Procedure, if certified 
mail is refused or otherwise undeliverable, the owner of any junk or junk motor vehicle discovered in 
violation of section 5-71 shall come into compliance with this article. If the owner of the junk or junk 
motor vehicle(s) does not come into compliance within thirty (30) days from the date of mailing of the 
written notice by the enforcement officer, the enforcement officer may issue a civil citation. 
(b) ?Additional provisions for junk motor vehicles. 
(1) ?If the owner of the land on which a junk motor vehicle is discovered in violation of section 5-71 
does not hold title or disclaims title to the vehicle, and the true owner of the vehicle is known or 
can be ascertained, the true owner shall move, screen or dispose of the vehicle upon receiving 
written notice from the enforcement officer. 
(2) ?If the last known registered owner fails or refuses to reclaim the vehicle upon receiving said 
written notice, or if after an investigation the owner of the vehicle cannot be ascertained, the 
Selectboard may notify the appropriate state agency. 
(3) ?Procedures for taking title to unclaimed motor vehicles are specified in 24 V.S.A. § 2272. 
(c) ?A violation of this article shall be a civil matter which shall be enforced in the Vermont Judicial 
Bureau or if so approved by the legislative body in Washington County Superior Court. 
(1) ?Violations enforced in the Judicial Bureau shall be in accordance with the provisions of 24 
V.S.A. §§ 1974a and 1977 et seq. Violators shall be issued the following fines as a civil penalty 
in the following amounts. 

Fine 
Waiver fee 
1st offense 
$?100.00 
$?50.00 
2nd offense?* 
$?150.00 
$?100.00 
3rd offense?* 
$?200.00 
$?150.00 
??*?if occurring within six (6) months of the previous offense 
 
For each subsequent offense within a six-month period of the previous offense, the fine and 
waiver shall increase by fifty dollars ($50.00). Each day that the violation continues shall 
constitute a separate violation of this article, and shall be subject to a fine of not less than five 
dollars ($5.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) per day. 
a. ?Municipal ticket will be issued thirty (30) days after written notification of the violation is 
mailed by the enforcement officer, if the violation has not been corrected in accordance 
with this article. 
b. ?For purposes of enforcement in the Judicial Bureau, the town zoning administrator or chief 
of police shall be the designated enforcement officer. Said designee shall issue tickets and 
may be the appearing officer at any hearing. 
(2) ?Violations enforced in the Superior Court shall be in accordance with the Vermont Rules of Civil 
Procedure. At the direction of the legislative body, the enforcement officer may pursue all 
appropriate injunctive relief. In addition, a civil penalty of not more than five hundred dollars 
($500.00) per violation may be imposed for violation of this article. A civil action may be initiated 
thirty (30) days after written notification of violation is mailed by the enforcement officer if the 
violation has not been corrected in accordance with this article. Each day that the violation 
continues shall constitute a separate violation of this article, and shall be subject to a fine of not 
less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) per day. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10, § 1) 


Sec 5-73. - Severability. 
    If any section of this article is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such finding shall 
not invalidate any other part of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-6-10, § 1) 


Chapter 6 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Public safety, Ch. 5; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 7, utilities, Ch. 8; zoning, App. A; 
municipal plan, App. B; subdivision, App. C; any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, 
locating, etc., any street, alley or other public way saved from repeal, § 1-5(4). 
State Law reference— Authority to set off portions of public highways for sidewalks and to regulate their 
use, 24 V.S.A. § 2291(1); authority to establish rules for pedestrian traffic on public highways and to 
establish crosswalks, 24 V.S.A. § 2291(5); authority to regulate utility poles, wires, etc., upon, under or 
above public highways, 24 V.S.A. § 2291(6); authority to regulate signs, posters, etc., on or above any 
public highway, sidewalk, lane or alleyway, 24 V.S.A. § 2291(7). 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 6-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of sections 6-1 through 6-3 is to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety and 
welfare of the citizens of the town through the proper disposal of snow and/or ice from private and/or 
public property. 
(Ord. of 11-11-75, § 1; Ord. of 8-25-87, § 1; Ord. of 12-10-91, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 11-27-2001, §§ 1, 
2) 
Cross reference— Hours of parking restricted during the winter, § 7-26. 
State Law reference— Power to require snow and ice removal, 24 VSA 2291(2). 


Sec. 6-2. - Prohibited acts. 
    The deposit of snow and/or ice from driveways, parking lots, roadside parking spaces, lawns and/or 
any other residential, commercial, agricultural and/or industrial properties within the right-of-way of any 
town road, highway or public sidewalk is prohibited. The term deposit shall include, but is not limited to, 
the unintentional leaving of snow and/or ice within the right-of-way of any town road, highway or public 
sidewalk regardless of the means of transfer. 
    An exception shall be granted to those depositing and/or leaving snow, whether intentionally or 
unintentionally, within the town right-of-way when that snow is alongside or upon the face of any 
snowbank, created by the town or state, opposite the traveled portion of the highway and said snowbank 
is not transferred toward the center of the right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 11-27-2001, § 2; Ord. of 11-24-2009) 


Sec. 6-3. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a) ?Whenever, in the judgment of any Barre Town police officer, such actions prohibited under section 
6-2 are deemed to have occurred the owner of the property from which the snow and/or ice was 
deposited shall be in violation of this section. 
(b) ?A violation of this ordinance shall be a civil matter enforced in accordance with the provisions of 24 
V.S.A. sections 1974(a) and 1977 et. seq. A written warning shall be issued for the initial violation of 
this civil ordinance followed by a civil penalty of sixty dollars ($60.00) for the second offense within a 
six-month period. The penalty for the third offense within a six-month period shall be one hundred 
ten dollars ($110.00) and the penalty for each subsequent offense within a six-month period shall be 
two hundred ten dollars ($210.00). The waiver fee shall be set at thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for the 
second offense within a six-month period, sixty dollars ($60.00) for the third offense within a six-
month period and one hundred ten dollars ($110.00) for each subsequent offense within a six-month 
period. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 11-27-2001, § 2) 


Secs. 6-4—6-20. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Excavations for building sewers, § 8-113. 


Sec. 6-21. - Permit for working in town highway rights-of-way. 
    The permit form for working in town highway rights-of-way shall be as follows: 
    NOTICE: This permit is issued in accordance with Title 19, Section 43, V.S.A. relative to all highways 
within the control and jurisdiction of the Town of Barre. The issuance of this permit does not release the 
applicant from any requirements of statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations administered by other 
governmental agencies. The permit will be effective upon compliance with such of these requirements as 
are applicable and continue in effect for as long as the present land use continues. Any change from the 
present land use will require a new permit. This permit is issued subject to the directions and conditions 
contained herein and on the reverse of this form and any attachments hereto and covers only the work 
described in this application and then only when the work is performed as directed. Violations are subject 
to the penalties set forth in section 37(j) of the Charter. 
Permission is hereby requested by _____ 
to perform the work described as follows, on the highway known as _____ 
____________ , the location of this work being _____ 
Description of the work to be performed (attach sketch) _____ 
_____ 
_____ 
_____ 
_____ 
Permit to extend from _____ , 20 ____________ to _____ , 20 ____________ . 
    The undersigned, in consideration of the approval of this permit, having duly read all the 
contents herein, expressly agrees to the directions and to the restrictions and conditions listed below 
and printed on the reverse side of this sheet. 
Witness _____ 
Permit Holder _____ 
Witness _____ 
By _____ 
Address _____ 
 
_____
_____
_____
_____ Application to Complete _____ 
_____
APPROVAL 
This permit is issued with the following directions, restrictions and conditions, and covers only the 
work described hereinafter, and then only when the work described is performed as directed, and 
subject to the following special conditions: _____ 
_____ 
_____ 
_____ 
Dated at _____ this _____ day of _____ , 20 ____________ . 
_____ 
Town Engineer 
By _____ 
ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS 
    No work shall be done under this permit until the party or parties to whom it is granted shall have 
communicated with and received instructions from the town engineer. No work involving excavation in a 
town highway right-of-way shall be allowed between November 1 and April 15, inclusive, except if during 
November the town engineer determines weather conditions are favorable for excavating, backfilling and 
compacting, he/she may allow work in the road right-of-way with the following conditions: 1) the town 
engineer or other qualified town representative must be present during excavation, backfilling, and 
compaction; 2) no work will be permitted during a snow or ice storm; 3) the applicant must restore 
trenches the next spring and if required by the town engineer re-excavate, backfill, and compact the 
trench; 4) the applicant must comply with the engineer's orders for soil erosion, seeding and mulching, 
including returning the next Spring to seed and mulch. 
(Ord. of 5-16-78; Ord. of 12-21-10, § 1) 


Sec. 6-22. - Restrictions and conditions. 
(a) ?Generally. The restrictions and conditions listed in this section shall apply to all excavation work 
requiring a permit under section 6-21. 
(b) ?Definitions. The following words when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them 
in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Board shall mean the board of selectmen. 
    Department shall mean the department of highways of the Town of Barre. 
    Engineer shall mean the authorized agent of the town manager. 
(c) ?Compliance with state and federal regulations. A permit required by this article is granted subject to 
compliance with all federal and state statutes or regulations controlling occupancy of public highways 
and adherence to all governing local or national codes, unless specific conditions quoted herein are 
more restrictive. 
(d) ?Protection against damage or injury. During the progress of the work all structures underground 
shall be properly protected from damage or injury; such barrier shall be erected and maintained as 
may be necessary for the protection of the traveling public; the same shall be properly lighted at 
night; and the party or parties to whom this permit is issued shall be responsible for all damages to 
person or property due to or resulting from any work done under this permit. 
(e) ?Excavations, obstacles within town highways limited. Except as authorized in this section, no 
excavation shall be made or obstacle, including but not limited to trees, shrubs, hedges, fences or 
other structures, shall be placed within the limits of the town highway. 
(f) ?Interference with drainage system. If any grading or sidewalk work done under the permit required 
by this article interferes with the drainage of the town highways in any way, such catch basins and 
outlets shall be constructed as may be necessary, in the opinion of the engineer, to take proper care 
of the drainage. 
(g) ?Restoration of roadway surface. Wherever the hardened surface of the roadways is disturbed and 
the engineer may consider it necessary or advisable to do so, the surface will be restored by the 
employees of the department at such time as the department may direct, and the expense thereof 
shall be borne by the party or parties to whom the permit is issued, who shall purchase and deliver 
on the road the materials necessary for the work as directed by the engineer. All payments to 
laborers, inspectors, etc., employed by the department for or on account of the work herein 
contemplated shall be made by the party or parties forthwith on the receipt of written orders, payrolls, 
or vouchers approved by the department. 
(h) ?Reimbursement to town for expense of correcting work. If the party or parties to whom a permit is 
issued does work contrary to the orders of the engineer and, after due notice, fails to correct such 
work or to remove such structure or material as he or they may be ordered to remove, the 
department may, with or without notice, correct such work or remove such structure or material; and 
the party or parties to whom the permit is issued shall reimburse the town for any expense incurred 
in correcting the work or removing the structure or material. 
(i) ?Supervision. All of the work contemplated under the provisions of this article shall be done under the 
supervision and to the satisfaction of the department of highways, and the entire expense thereof 
shall be borne by the party or parties to whom the permit is issued. 
(j) ?Removal of rubbish, debris. On the completion of the work herein contemplated all rubbish and 
debris shall be removed and the roadway and roadsides shall be left neat and presentable and 
satisfactory to the engineer. 
(k) ?Right of board to order changes. The board hereby reserves the right to order the change of location 
or the removal of any structure or structures authorized by the permit at any time; such change or 
removal to be made by and at the expense of the party or parties to whom the permit is granted, or 
their successors or assigns. 
(l) ?Modification, revocation of permit. The permit required by this article may be modified or revoked at 
any time by the department without rendering the department or the town liable in any way. Any 
party whose permit is modified or revoked may appeal such action to the board at its next regular 
meeting, but the revocation or modification shall remain in effect until changed by the board. 
(m) ?Applicability of conditions. All of the conditions of this section shall be applicable to the work 
authorized by this article, unless the same are inconsistent with the conditions on the face of the 
permit, in which case the conditions written or printed on the face of the permit shall apply. 
(n) ?Acceptance of permit constitutes agreement. The acceptance of the permit required by this article or 
the doing of any work thereunder shall constitute an agreement by the party or parties to whom the 
permit is granted to comply with all of the conditions and restrictions printed or written herein. 
(o) ?Erection of pole lines. In the erection of pole lines, unless otherwise herein provided, no trees within 
the limits of the town highway shall be cut or trimmed. No guy wires shall be attached to trees 
without a special permit from the town, and in no event shall they be attached as to girdle tie trees or 
in any way interfere with their growth. The wires shall be so protected at all times and places that 
they shall not interfere with or injure the trees inside or outside the location of the highway. 
(p) ?Cutting or trimming trees. Where the cutting or trimming of trees is authorized by permit, only such 
cutting and trimming shall be done as may be designated by the engineer. All debris resulting from 
such cutting and trimming shall be removed from the highway limits. 
(q) ?Backfilling. After any pipes, conduits, drains or other underground structures are laid, or any 
excavation is made in the roadway, the trenches or openings shall be properly backfilled with 
suitable approved material; the backfill shall be completed to the satisfaction of the engineer, and the 
surface of the road over said structures shall be left even with the adjoining ground. If the work is 
done in cold weather, no frozen material shall be used for backfilling. 
(r) ?Replacement of road materials. Whenever the hardened surface of the roadway, gutter or any part 
of the surface of the highway is disturbed it shall be replaced in as good condition as before it was 
disturbed, and if new materials are required they shall correspond with those already in place on the 
road. 
(s) ?Maintenance. The party or parties to whom the permit required by this article is granted shall 
maintain the surface of the roadway over the structures as long as the department may deem 
necessary, until all signs of the trench shall have been eliminated. 
(t) ?Prohibiting work in highway rights-of-way during winter. No work in a town highway right-of-way will 
be done between November 1 and April 15, inclusive, except as stated under additional conditions, 
in section 6-21. 
(Ord. of 5-16-78; Ord. of 12-21-10, § 2) 
Cross reference— Waterline or water service work in public right-of-way, § 8-26. 


Secs. 6-23—6-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - ROADS AND HIGHWAYS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Mar. 19, 1991, enacted provisions pertaining to roads and 
highways. Secs. 2.01—2.10, 3.01—3.10, 4.00—4.24 have been codified by the editor as Art. III, §§ 6-
31—6-40, 6-51—6-60, 6-71—6-95. Sec. 1.01, enactment, of the ordinance has been deleted from 
codification. Illustrative material attached to such ordinance has not been included in the article, but is on 
file and available for inspection in the office of the town clerk. 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 6-31. - Modification of regulations; compensation for damages. 
(a) ?The selectmen may, at their discretion or upon favorable report of the planning commission, modify 
the requirements contained herein if their strict enforcement would cause undue hardship due to 
unusual conditions, or that such modification would serve the best interests of the Town of Barre, 
provided the general objectives of these requirements are satisfied. 
(b) ?Compensation for damages to town highways caused by acts of noncompliance with this article 
shall be assessed against violators by the selectmen. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 2.01) 


Sec. 6-32. - Road classification. 
    Town roads are classified as Class 1, Class 2, Class 3 or Class 4 highways in accordance with 19 
VSA Chapter 17. An official town highway map supplied by the state agency of transportation shall be 
available for inspection in the Barre Town Municipal Building. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 2.02) 


Sec. 6-33. - Road reclassification. 
    The selectmen shall periodically review the town highway classifications, taking into consideration 
increasing highway need, changing traffic patterns and growing population, including identification of key 
roads that link towns and major arteries. Selectmen may also discontinue certain highways, either 
classifying them as trails while retaining a right-of-way or abandoning any claim to a right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 2.03) 


Sec. 6-34. - Highway construction and maintenance. 
(a) ?Road and related improvements shall be constructed or installed in accordance with sound 
engineering practice and these highway regulations. 
(b) ?The selectmen may institute and periodically review and update a town road management system in 
making decisions about preventative maintenance and road improvements. The plan may include 
but not be limited to considerations of scenic areas and places of local historical significance, signs, 
bridges, recent and historical developments and land uses, the town plan, traffic and pedestrian 
safety hazards, and roadway conditions. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 2.04) 


Sec. 6-35. - Class 4 roads and trails. 
(a) ?Class 4 roads and trails shall be defined as per Title 19, Chapter 3 and as shown on the official 
town highway map of the Town of Barre. 
(b) ?Existing Class 4 highways, as of the date of adoption of this article, shall be retained by the town for 
the purposes of public travel. Class 4 roads and trails may be downgraded to trail status, 
discontinued, or upgraded to Class 3 or higher status, only upon findings by the board of selectmen 
that the public interests will be substantially advanced by such change in status and that reasonable 
measures are taken to replace, substitute, or avoid the loss of public travel, intrinsic, aesthetic and 
recreational value, or other public interests afforded by the existing Class 4 road or trail. 
(c) ?At a minimum, no Class 4 highway or trail shall be upgraded in status or discontinued, except upon 
provision of an alternative travel easement or right-of-way of a minimum width of twenty-five (25) 
feet, replacing the travel route upgraded or discontinued. 
(d) ?Class 4 highways and trails proposed for upgrading to Class 3 or higher status shall be subject to 
the prior approval of the board of selectmen and the Barre Town Planning Commission. Approvals 
shall be subject to all provisions of this article as for laying out, application, construction, inspection, 
warranty, design standards, and other applicable standards for new highways. 
(e) ?New structures on lots fronting on a Class 4 highway are subject to the requirements of the Town 
Zoning Ordinance, section 3.02 unless upgraded as provided above. 
(f) ?Maintenance. The town shall not provide any maintenance or upkeep on trails. The town shall not 
provide any summer maintenance of Class 4 highways except as required by necessity, such as 
culverts, ditches to control erosion of highways or runoff to adjacent property, and removal of 
obstructions. 
(g) ?The town shall not provide any winter maintenance on Class 4 roads and trails. Plowing by private 
parties shall not damage rights-of-way and paths used for recreational activities. 
(h) ?Control. Selectmen may exercise control of Class 4 highways and trails to ensure their integrity as a 
public right-of-way and for recreational use by means which may include but are not limited to the 
following: 
(1) ?Establishment of vehicle weight limits; 
(2) ?Prohibition or restriction of wheeled vehicle use during mud and snow season; signs and gates 
may be utilized to accomplish this purpose; 
(3) ?Requirements for temporary permits for logging or heavy equipment access may be imposed 
with stipulations that any road damaged will be repaired by or at expense of the user; posting of 
bond or other security to guarantee that repairs are made may be required as a condition of any 
permits. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 2.05) 


Sec. 6-36. - Right-of-way access. 
(a) ?Selectmen shall control access into the road right-of-way for the installation or repair of utilities and 
for access of driveways, entrances and approaches. 
(b) ?Notwithstanding the above, nothing herein shall be deemed to negate or repeal the effect of Articles 
I and II of this chapter relating to permit requirements for working in or adjacent to town highway 
rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 2.06) 


Sec. 6-37. - Overweight vehicles. 
(a) ?Pursuant to 23 VSA, Chapter 13, Subchapter 15, vehicular use of town highways and bridges is 
subject to limitation and regulation regarding gross vehicle weights, tire and axle weights, and overall 
length and width. 
(b) ?Written approval of the board of selectmen, or their authorized agent, may be granted for use or 
travel over town highways and bridges in excess of legal weight, size, or length limitations may be 
issued pursuant to 23 VSA, Section 1400(a). Notwithstanding any written agreements entered into 
by and between the selectmen and applicant for compensation for wear and tear on highways 
anticipated or caused by use of highways in excess of the legal weight and size limitations, the fee 
for such approval if granted shall be five dollars ($5.00). 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 2.07) 


Sec. 6-38. - Posting. 
    No town road of any class may be intentionally closed by a gate or other obstruction except upon 
approval of the board of selectmen. Selectmen may post a road in accordance with 19 V.S.A., Section 
1110. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 2.08) 


Sec. 6-39. - Compliance with other regulations. 
(a) ?This article is written to establish and clarify standards of construction, authorities of the selectmen 
and their agents, and to provide a clarification of the role of the planning commission in highway 
development matters. 
(b) ?All other ordinances and regulations adopted by the town shall remain in full force and effect, 
including without limitation: "Town of Barre, Vermont, Subdivision Regulations" (Barre Town Code 
Appendix C); "Town of Barre, Vermont, Zoning Regulations" (Barre Town Code Appendix A); "An 
Ordinance Prohibiting the Deposit of Snow Within the Right-of-Way of Town Roads" (Barre Town 
Code Chapter 6, Article I); an ordinance entitled "Permit System to Control the Town of Barre's 
Rights-of-Way as Described Under Title 19, Section 43, of the Vermont Statutes Annotated" (Barre 
Town Code Chapter 6, Article II); any ordinances relating to the construction and use of utilities 
(Barre Town Code Chapter 8); "Traffic Safety Ordinance" (Barre Town Code Chapter 7, Article III); 
and any ordinance relating to traffic and motor vehicles in the Town of Barre (Barre Town Code 
Chapter 7). 
(c) ?Whenever uncertainty or contradiction exists, this article shall supersede any ordinances and 
regulations in conflict, only to the extent necessary to resolve such conflict, except where selectmen 
consider another ordinance/regulation to better provide for the well-being of the town. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 2.09) 


Sec. 6-40. - Compensation for damages. 
(a) ?The registered owner of any vehicle operating in the town shall be responsible for any and all 
damages caused by such vehicle to town highways, bridges, culverts and related public facilities. 
(b) ?This section shall not apply to customary wear and tear not caused by a discrete and identifiable 
incident, action, or cause except as provided in section 6-36 of this article. 
(c) ?All persons responsible for damages, as outlined in subsection (a), shall pay all assessed charges 
to the town clerk-treasurer, within thirty (30) days of the billing date. 
(d) ?Any bill not paid within the required thirty (30) days shall be assessed a five (5) percent late fee. If 
compensation is not received within thirty (30) days of the late fee assessment, an eight (8) percent 
collection fee and one (1) percent simple monthly interest charge shall be assessed against the 
original amount due. The town is further authorized to pursue any and all civil remedies available by 
law, at the recipient's expense, for the purpose of collection. These include, but are not limited to, 
credit bureau notification, use of collection agencies, judicial enforcement, etc. 
(e) ?There shall be no statute of limitations on any indebtedness due the town for subsection (a) 
damages. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 2.10; Ord. of 12-18-01, § 1) 


Sec. 6-41. - Continuing violation. 
    Those continuing to be in violation of section 6-40 after the expiration of one (1) full calendar year, 
initiated from the billing date, shall be subject to civil enforcement in accordance with the provisions of 24 
V.S.A. sections 1974(a) and 1977 et seq. A five hundred dollar ($500.00) civil penalty and waiver fee 
shall be assessed upon the date of expiration and upon that same date each year the violation continues 
unabated. 
(Ord. of 12-18-01, § 1) 


Secs. 6-42—6-50. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - ROAD ACCEPTANCE POLICY 


Sec. 6-51. - General. 
(a) ?It is the policy of the selectboard of the town to entertain application for the acceptance of public 
highways and roadways and to adopt and adhere to an orderly procedure for the receipt of and 
acting upon such applications. The decision on an application for acceptance of a highway is 
reserved to the sole and absolute discretion of the selectboard who will consider the grant or denial 
of an application on the basis of the best interest of the inhabitants of the town. 
(b) ?An applicant shall secure all other necessary governmental permits for a land subdivision or for road 
construction as a condition precedent to the acceptance of a highway. 
(c) ?All questions arising during road construction relative to construction methods, materials or 
specifications shall be answered by reference to this article and to the most recent edition of the 
Vermont Standard Specifications for Construction. 
(d) ?The selectboard shall have final decision-making authority over all questions arising during 
construction of new roads, and all field changes must receive prior approval by the selectboard or 
their designated representative. 
Definitions: 
Provisional acceptance: Shall only be granted once all improvements required by the approved 
plans and the developer agreement have been completed and the base pavement or final 
gravel has been applied depending on what the final surface of the road is approved to be. See 
section 6-58 for other considerations. 
Final acceptance: Shall be granted once the one-year warranty period has expired and all 
outstanding issues have been taken care of. Final acceptance shall constitute full and official 
acceptance. The one-year warranty period begins once the final paving or gravel surface, 
depending on what the final surface of the road is approved to be, has been applied. This shall 
mean all issues have been resolved. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 3.01; Ord. of 2-27-07) 


Sec. 6-52. - Application, plans and plats. 
(a) ?All plans, proposals and plats for new streets or major changes in the location, alignment, or 
changes in the classification of a roadway shall be submitted to the town planning commission for 
review and comment. The proposal should be consistent with the municipal plan and subdivision 
regulations, if applicable. If a new street is submitted as part of a subdivision, the developer must 
submit a written request with one (1) 24 inches × 36 inches and seven (7) 8½ inches × 14 inches 
copies of the survey to the selectboard for conceptual approval of the proposed new street. 
Conceptual approval from the selectboard shall be done between preliminary and final subdivision 
review. 
(b) ?No construction of roadways or improvements of town roads or proposed roads shall be 
commenced without express written notification to the selectboard, at least thirty (30) days prior to 
commencement of construction. The developer having negotiated a developer agreement shall be a 
prerequisite. A preconstruction meeting shall be held within the thirty (30) days prior to the 
commencement of construction but no later than seven (7) days before. At a minimum, the 
developer, the developer's contractors involved with construction of the proposed new street, the 
town engineer and the town planning director shall attend. The preconstruction meeting shall take 
place at least in part at the site, and all boundary markers must be set and stakes showing the center 
line of the road and the limits of the right-of-way delineated. Final grades on the stakes shall also be 
shown. 
(c) ?No approval shall be granted by the selectboard until all other required town and state permits and 
approvals are received. 
(d) ?Along with the written request as noted in (b) above, that requires a survey in a form acceptable by 
the selectboard for accuracy, thoroughness and legibility, a draft of a legal deed of the land to be 
conveyed for highway purposes shall also be submitted. The survey must show the grade line and 
minimum radii of all curves. Upon request for final acceptance, a fully executable deed shall be 
submitted to be accepted and recorded only upon final acceptance of the highway. 
(e) ?Applicant may, in initial application, propose a name for the road, subject to decision of the 
selectboard. Road numbers shall be as assigned by the state agency of transportation after formal 
acceptance by the town. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 3.02; Ord. of 2-27-07) 


Sec. 6-53. - Signs, markers, and monuments. 
(a) ?The applicant shall pay for all street signs and property markers. The applicant shall coordinate sign 
installation with the town. The town will install all signs in accordance with the approved plans or 
town code. Marker installation is the responsibility of the applicant. Standards for sign and marker 
design, installation, and location shall be governed by the U.S. Department of Transportation Federal 
Highway Administration's Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as amended (MUTCD). 
(b) ?All monuments shall be of granite or concrete and meet specifications of subdivision regulations 
[section] 301 B.9. Where feasible, monuments shall be "tied" by survey to other objects of a 
permanent nature, and the "ties" shall be shown on said map. The map shall show approximate 
location of any property line within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 3.03; Ord. of 2-27-07) 


Sec. 6-54. - Zoning permits. 
(a) ?All streets shown on a plat filed or recorded shall show approval approved through town code, but 
shall be considered to be private streets until such time as it has been given provisional acceptance 
by the town. 
(b) ?No zoning permits shall be issued until provisional acceptance of the streets and other 
improvements by the selectboard, or an adequate performance guarantee has been agreed upon by 
the selectboard and the developer has agreed to one of the following: 
(1) ?As long as an adequate performance guarantee is in place, zoning permits may be issued. 
However, certificates of occupancy shall not be issued until such time as a new street has been 
provisionally accepted and utilities have been fully accepted by the town or certification from a 
professional engineer or site technician that on-site septic systems meet necessary standards 
and all requirements as required by this code and the developer agreement are met. No 
occupancy shall be allowed! All prospective purchasers for any lots affected shall be shown this 
policy. All purchasers shall sign an acknowledgement of these requirements, and such 
acknowledgement shall be recorded in the land records and given to the Zoning Department. 
(2) ?As long as an adequate performance guarantee is in place, zoning permits may be issued. 
Certificates of occupancy may be issued as long as the street is partially constructed enough to 
access a lot subject to the certificate of occupancy, and is constructed to town standards, and 
as part of the developer agreement, the developer has agreed to be responsible for all 
maintenance until provisional acceptance is granted. Other utilities shall be fully accepted by the 
town or in the case of on-site sewer, a certification by a professional engineer or site technician 
that the septic system meets necessary standards. It shall be understood that the road 
temporarily remains private, and the developer maintains the responsibility of maintaining the 
street as the town would. These maintenance responsibilities include but are not limited to 
plowing, sanding, salting, and other routine maintenance. Security to ensure private 
maintenance occurs shall be incorporated into the performance guarantee. However, unless an 
extension is agreed to, the private status shall not exceed the completion date agreed to in the 
developer agreement. 
(3) ?Zoning permits may be issued if a developer agrees in writing (probably in the developer 
agreement) that they will not convey any lot accessed by a proposed new street or any structure 
constructed thereafter. The developer must understand that no lot or structure shall be 
conveyed or occupied until such time as the new street is given provisional acceptance and 
required utilities have been granted final acceptance. If a developer chooses this method, 
he/she may proceed to subsection 6-55(b) and follow the requirements set forth. 
(Ord. of 2-27-07) 


Sec. 6-55. - Performance guarantee. 
(a) ?As a condition for approval of an application for roadway construction or acceptance and zoning 
permit applications are anticipated, the selectboard shall require a performance guarantee which 
shall be either a letter of credit, an escrow account, a bank check or a bond for the benefit of the 
town to cover the cost of roadway completion, performance and/or restoration, administrative and 
legal expenses. In this case, restoration shall mean the reproduction of conditions prior to 
commencement of disturbance on the land. 
(b) ?If zoning permits are not anticipated or a developer chose [subsection] (3) in section 6-54 at a 
minimum, the selectboard shall require that a performance guarantee for the benefit of the town be 
secured in an amount sufficient to provide for erosion control, repair of existing town highways, and 
damages in the event the applicant fails to complete the improvements within three (3) years of 
planning commission approval. This amount shall be verified by the town engineer. If this method is 
chosen, the developer must understand that no zoning permits shall be issued unless upgraded to 
(1) or (2) in the previous section. 
(c) ?The selectboard shall require a performance guarantee for the benefit of the town in an amount 
sufficient to cover the cost of all improvements necessary to meet the standards of this article for 
acceptance as a Class 3, or better, town highway. This amount shall be verified by the town 
engineer. A time frame for completion of the improvements shall be determined but shall not exceed 
three years per phase. Such guarantee may consist of separate portions covering required 
improvements and maintenance. 
(d) ?In the event of the failure of an applicant to construct any improvements as agreed to in the 
developer agreement, (which shall be determined by the town engineer) the performance guarantee 
or part thereof shall be considered forfeited to the town in its full face amount after thirty (30) days' 
written notice from the town manager. 
(e) ?The selectboard, upon receipt of such proceeds, shall establish an escrow account and draw on it 
as is necessary to pay for improvements. The selectboard may complete only such improvements as 
they deem necessary to prevent erosion, repair existing town highways, and to prevent damages to 
adjoining properties, and thereafter declare the roadway project abandoned prior to completion. In 
lieu thereof, the selectboard, after consulting with the planning commission, may determine that the 
best interests of the public health, safety and welfare are served by completion of the proposed 
roadway and related improvements in their entirety. If this is the case, the selectboard shall cause 
the proposed roadway and related improvements to be completed and shall proceed to dedicate a 
public highway and issue a certificate of completion in accordance with Title 19, V.S.A. Chapter 7. 
(f) ?All unused proceeds of the performance guarantee after deducting such sums as are necessary for 
completion or abandonment, including legal fees and collection charges, shall be returned to 
whatever entity held the performance guarantee or as otherwise provided by the developer 
agreement. If the performance guarantee turns out to be insufficient, the developer will remain liable 
for reimbursing the town for the balance. As used herein, developer shall mean other legal entities 
owned or controlled by the same individual(s). 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 3.05; Ord. of 2-27-07) 


Sec. 6-56. - Inspection.[4] 
(a) ?All highway designs, including cut and fill plans, gravel pit plans, surveys, layouts, rights-of-way, 
utility locations, road construction site, preparation and construction, shall be inspected by the town 
engineer. 
(b) ?The developer shall keep the engineer informed of the construction process so that the above 
inspections can be performed in a timely manner. 
(c) ?The developer shall have stakes set on centerline with finish grades marked on them at least every 
one hundred (100) feet for the entire length of the street or the street side staked with distance and 
grades marked before each inspection. 
(d) ?The town engineer or his representative shall inspect the road site as follows: 
(1) ?Before clearing; 
(2) ?Before stumping; 
(3) ?After rough grading; 
(4) ?Upon completion of subgrading; 
(5) ?During graveling; 
(6) ?Before and during paved surface treatment; 
(7) ?Inspection prior to provisional and final acceptance. 
(e) ?Before final inspection (#7), the developer shall remove all trash from the right-of-way and the 
center of the turnaround and shall repair any damage done to the roadway, shoulders, drainage 
structures, and related road items. All slopes will be seeded and mulched. 
(f) ?Various material sampling and testing (i.e.: gravel sampling, asphalt mixture analysis, and 
compaction testing) shall be conducted during the construction process. This work shall be 
conducted under the direction of the town engineer or his/her designee and the results found to be in 
conformance of VTRANS Standards 2005 or as revised before final acceptance. All cost incurred 
shall be the responsibility of the developer. 
(g) ?All construction and materials must comply with Vermont Agency of Transportation Standard 
Specifications for Construction, as revised. 
(h) ?If weather conditions preclude adequate adherence to the street construction standard as 
determined by the town engineer, he/she may suspend construction until such time as weather 
conditions improve. Disputes shall be settled in accordance with section 6-60. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 3.06; Ord. of 2-27-07) 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Minimum standards, § 6-71 et seq. 


Sec. 6-57. - Completion deadline. 
(a) ?No roads will be reviewed for provisional acceptance by the selectboard after October 31 and 
before May 1. 
(b) ?Roadways approved for construction or improvement under section 6-52 must be completed, 
inspected, and ready for provisional acceptance within the time frame determined as part of the 
developer agreement but no longer than three (3) years of the date of such approval unless a longer 
completion period is expressly approved in writing by the planning commission. 
(c) ?Road specifications in effect at the time of final planning commission approval will be applicable for 
a period of three (3) years from that date after which time any new road specifications will apply. The 
only exception will be if the road in question at the end of the three-year period in section 6-58 is 
under the 12-month maintenance warranty period. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 3.07; Ord. of 2-27-07) 


Sec. 6-58. - Acceptance and warranty period. 
(a) ?Any highway or improvement proposed for acceptance as an official town highway shall be 
inspected by the selectboard upon completion. The selectboard must schedule a warned inspection 
of the street being requested for takeover. Before the inspection, the town engineer will submit an 
up-to-date report (via the town manager) twenty-four (24) hours before the inspection. The public 
warning [notice] must be published in the newspaper at least twenty-four (24) hours before the 
inspection. In order to ensure the public warning is published on time, developers must request an 
inspection no less than five (5) days before the inspection date. If the selectboard determines that all 
applicable conditions and standard specifications for construction have been met, and that the public 
good will be advanced, they may grant provisional acceptance of the highway. 
(b) ?During the one-year warranty period, the developer shall be responsible for the satisfactory 
performance of materials, workmanship, and construction related to such highway. Provisional 
acceptance shall not be considered until all the following are met: 
(1) ?If the road is approved as a paved road, the base course of pavement must be applied; or if the 
road is approved as a gravel road, the final gravel must have been applied. 
(2) ?Planned underground utility main line extensions are complete and stubbed-out to every 
building lot. Provisional acceptance of a section of roadway may be requested; but all main line 
extensions for underground utility work must be completed, tested and accepted, complete with 
deeds suitable for recording. 
(3) ?All known fees (signs, sewer extensions, etc.) must be paid before provisional acceptance is 
granted. 
(4) ?The developer must submit adequate documentation indicating all required State permits are 
current and valid. The town will decide what is adequate for documentation. 
(5) ?The project has been completed in accordance with the approved plans and all conditions or 
requirements set forth in the developer agreement. 
(c) ?Upon successful completion of such one year warranty period, all performance guarantees shall be 
released. 
(d) ?In the event that the roadway or improvements thereto fail to perform satisfactorily and the 
developer fails or neglects to correct all deficiencies during the one-year warranty period, proceeds 
of any performance guarantee default to the town in accordance with section 6-55. 
(e) ?After provisional acceptance, the only maintenance to be performed by the town shall be the 
plowing and sanding or salting of the new street. All other maintenance such as erosion control shall 
be the developer's responsibility until final acceptance is granted. The town will maintain other 
infrastructure that has been fully accepted such as water and sewer line. The town will not take 
responsibility of stormwater drainage systems, permits, reporting duties, ponds, or other such items 
until final acceptance. 
(f) ?This policy describes a process. Nothing herein shall be interpreted as a construction standard. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 3.08; Ord. of 2-27-07) 


Sec. 6-59. - Conveyance. 
(a) ?All roadway parcels and/or rights-of-way, slope rights, and drainage easements shall be conveyed 
to the town by warranty deed and free of all encumbrances. Deeds shall include an accurate survey 
description or reference to a recorded survey plat of the subject land or rights in land and shall be 
based upon an as-built survey which shall accompany such deed. 
(b) ?Unresolved disputes between the town engineer and the developer shall be referred to the 
selectboard as outlined in the developer agreement. The selectboard shall make such findings and 
decisions as they determine are in the best interests of the public and carries out the objectives of 
this article. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 1, 3.09; Ord. of 2-27-07) 


Sec. 6-60. - Defects in design, materials, performance. 
(a) ?In the event of a dispute between the town engineer and the developer as to construction practices, 
materials used, interpretation or defects in the design, or the satisfactory performance of materials or 
workmanship, the engineer shall have the authority, by written notice, to suspend construction or to 
reject materials until such dispute can be resolved. The engineer is not authorized to revoke, alter, 
enlarge, relax, or release any requirements of these specifications or performance goals except by 
mutual consent of the developer and selectboard. 
(b) ?Unresolved disputes between the town engineer and the developer shall be referred to the 
selectboard as soon as practical. The selectboard shall act as referee and may make such findings 
and decision as they determine is in the best interests of the public and carries out the objectives of 
this article. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 3.10; Ord. of 2-27-07) 


Secs. 6-61—6-70. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - MINIMUM STANDARDS 


Sec. 6-71. - Established. 
(a) ?Roads and streets vary in their functional use. The standards by which a highway is constructed are 
important to its proper functioning. As the quantity of traffic in a road increases, so must the 
standards change. Consequently, the standards which follow are considered minimum standards 
and are subject to modification by the selectmen after a study of local conditions requiring changes. 
(b) ?Requests for waiver of any portion of these standards shall be made in writing to the board of 
selectmen. 
(c) ?Unless otherwise directed by the town engineer or established by specific standard, ordinance, 
bylaw, or regulation by the town, all applicable highway construction standards, practices, 
specifications and conditions shall be in accordance with the State of Vermont, Agency of 
Transportation, Standard Specifications for Construction, (1986 edition, as amended); Division 100, 
Sections 101, 107; Division 200; Division 300; Division 400; Division 600; and Division 700. 
(d) ?Whenever there is a conflict between the above referenced Standard Specifications for Construction 
and the express specifications of this article, this article shall control. 
(e) ?Whenever there is doubt, conflict, or confusion as to the intent, meaning, or applicability of any local 
ordinance, bylaw, or regulation or the above referenced Standard Specifications for Construction, the 
Town Engineer shall rule on the intent, meaning, and/or applicability of such ordinance, bylaw, 
regulation, or standard. 
(f) ?In addition, Vermont Agency of Transportation Standards A-76 (as modified by town engineer, 
January 1991) and B-71A regarding development roads and residential driveways are hereby 
established and adopted as supplemental standards under this section. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 4.0) 


Sec. 6-72. - Right-of-way width. 
(a) ?The right-of-way shall be a minimum of sixty (60) feet for principal streets and fifty (50) feet in width 
for minor streets with wider slope and drainage rights if deemed by the planning commission. The 
centerline of the road is to be located in the center of the right-of-way. The right-of-way conveyed 
shall intersect at least one existing Class 1, 2, 3 or state highway. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 4.01) 


Sec. 6-73. - Travelled way width. 
    The minimum travelled way width of a road shall be twenty-two (22) feet not including shoulders. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 4.02) 


Sec. 6-74. - Clearing. 
    Right-of-way is to be cleared a minimum of twenty (20) feet from its centerline of all trees, brush and 
stumps. Burning shall be done in accordance with state and town fire regulations. No fallen trees shall 
remain in the right-of-way. All stumps shall be removed, so that base of road is on hardpan, gravel, ledge 
or properly compacted fill. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 4.03) 


Sec. 6-75. - Subgrade. 
(a) ?Ledge and boulders shall be removed to at least eighteen (18) inches below subgrade and replaced 
with sand or bankrun gravel. One hundred (100) percent of gravel must pass the four-inch sieve. 
(b) ?All loam, muck, stumps and other improper foundation material shall be removed from within the 
limits of the fully extended road shoulders. In embankment areas, suitable foundation material shall 
be placed in one-foot layers and compacted to form a stable subgrade. 
(c) ?The subgrade surface shall conform exactly in cross section and grade to the finished road surface. 
Crowning and banking of curves shall be as required by the engineer. Compaction is required on any 
portion of the subgrade which has been disturbed by excavation or which has been filled during the 
construction of the subgrade. All ditches and drains will be constructed so that they effectively drain 
the subgrade prior to the placement of any base material. Six (6) inches of sand cushion shall be 
placed over all subgrades. Fabric matting, as approved by the engineer, will be required in areas of 
poor drainage as determined by the engineer. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 4.04) 


Sec. 6-76. - Wet area. 
    If the proposed road is in a wet area, the engineer may require additional gravel plus sand cushion 
and underdrain to ensure a stable road. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 4.05) 


Sec. 6-77. - Subbase. 
    The subbase shall be composed of twelve (12) inches of compacted gravel installed in two (2) six-
inch lifts with maximum stone size of four (4) inches conforming to Vermont Standard Specifications for 
Construction, most recent edition, 704.04A—Gravel For Subbase. The cross section and grade of the 
subbase shall conform to those of the finished surface. Compaction testing will be required. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 4.06; Ord. of 2-27-07) 


Sec. 6-78. - Upper base. 
    All streets will receive a six-inch upper base course of compacted crushed gravel as defined by the 
Vermont Standard Specifications for Construction, 1986, 704.05A—Fine Crushed Gravel for Subbase, or 
current revision. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 4.07) 


Sec. 6-79. - Shoulders. 
    Shoulders shall be a minimum of three (3) feet in width on a side and shall be constructed to the 
same specifications as the subgrade, subbase and base. Shoulders shall be a minimum of four (4) feet at 
guardrail sites. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 4.08) 


Sec. 6-80. - Paving. 
    The roadway is to be paved with the wearing surface within one (1) year after construction and after 
one (1) winter season has passed with hot bituminous concrete mix meeting all of Vermont Standard 
Specifications for Construction, most recent edition (Division 400) for hot asphalt bituminous concrete 
mix. This requirement, in whole or part, may be waived by the planning commission in Residential C Zone 
only. The bituminous concrete is to be laid and rolled by experienced crews in two (2) layers; the first, the 
binder course or base pavement, to a depth compacted to one and three-quarter (1¾) inches of Type II—
three-quarter inch size, and the second application compacted, wearing surface to a depth of one and 
one-quarter (1¼) inches of Type III—one-half inch size hot bituminous concrete, surface mix. All work 
shall be done in a professional manner. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 4.09; Ord. of 2-27-07) 


Sec. 6-81. - Crown. 
    The street shall have a cross slope from centerline to the edge of shoulder of one-quarter-inch per 
foot and from the edge of street to edge of shoulder of five-eighths-inch per foot. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 4.10) 


Sec. 6-82. - Ditches, culverts and headers. 
(a) ?Drainage ditches. Drainage ditches shall be provided where necessary and shall be constructed to 
prevent infiltration of water into the gravel subbase and to conduct storm drainage to waterways and 
absorption areas. Accordingly, drainage ditches adjacent to roads are normally to be at least six (6) 
inches below the gravel subbase or eighteen (18) inches below finished grade to minimize spring 
break-up conditions. 
    Ditches shall be shaped to prevent excessive erosion on both shoulder and right-of-way or bank 
sides of the ditch cross section. 
    Open drainage ditches in excess of five (5) percent grade shall be paved with Type I (Spec. 706.04 
twelve-inch minus) stone. Four-inch minus stone may be allowed if approved by the engineer. 
    Underdrain will be required where soil and water conditions make it necessary. 
(b) ?Culverts. Culverts shall be installed during the construction of the highway and prior to highway 
subbase and surface preparation and placement. Backfill in excavations for culverts shall be 
compacted to prevent or minimize settling in surface, shoulders or slopes. Culverts should be 
covered with a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches of material. 
    Culverts shall be installed in all low spots and be of sufficient size to handle the anticipated runoff but 
shall not be less than eighteen (18) inches in diameter and shall extend at least one (1) foot beyond all fill, 
measured at the bottom of the culvert. 
    Culverts shall be spaced no greater than three hundred (300) feet apart in one continuous ditch line. 
(c) ?Headers. Headers shall be installed at the inlet of all culverts and may be either reinforced concrete 
eight (8) inches thick, large flat rock tightly placed, large cemented rock, or Type I riprap. The inside 
edge of headers shall be at least eight (8) feet from the outside edge of the shoulder. Marker posts 
four (4) to six (6) inches in diameter shall be installed at both ends of the culvert. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 4.11) 


Sec. 6-83. - Slopes and banks. 
    Vertical or sharp cut faces, excepting ledge, shall not be permitted. Slopes and banks shall not be 
steeper than one (1) vertical to one and one-half (1½) horizontal. Soil stability of banks shall be a design 
consideration. Slopes or banks shall be designed and constructed to prevent instability, slides, washes, or 
other disturbance to the slope or bank surface or subsurface. Banks shall not interfere with snow removal. 
After construction and final grading of banks, banks will be seeded and mulched to minimize surface 
erosion. Cribbing or riprap shall be provided where necessary. 
Maximum Allowable Slopes
Gravel, hardpan 
1 ½ 
Sand, silts, loam 
1 to 2 
Clays 
1 to 3 
 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 4.12) 


Sec. 6-84. - Guard rails. 
    Approved types of guard rails and posts will be provided to meet essential traffic control and safety 
needs, and shall not interfere with snow removal. Normally, any highway with a slope or bank falling away 
on a steep slope steeper than one (1) to three (3) from the road surface shall be protected with guard rail 
unless such requirement is waived by the town in approving the road plan and application. Guard posts 
and rails shall also be provided to warn and protect traffic from ledge or other obstructions where 
necessary in consideration of traffic volume, road width, and safety. Installation shall conform with 
Vermont Agency of Transportation requirements. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 4.13) 


Sec. 6-85. - Grades. 
    Highway grades shall be at least five-tenths (0.5) percent but not more than eight (8.0) percent for 
principal streets nor more than twelve (12) percent for minor streets. Finished grades (transverse and 
longitudinal) shall be smoothed to eliminate sharp dips in traveled surface and, as may be necessary, to 
permit efficient snow removal and proper drainage. 
    The maximum grade within fifty (50) feet of an intersection shall be four (4) percent. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 4.14) 


Sec. 6-86. - Curves. 
    Radius of curves shall be long enough to permit easy flow of traffic, including trucks, graders, and 
fire engines, with at least a one hundred-foot radius in all cases, measured on the centerline. Trees and 
boulders shall be removed to permit adequate sight on all curves. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 4.15) 


Sec. 6-87. - Driveways, entrances and approaches. 
(a) ?Before construction of a driveway, the property owner must obtain a driveway permit (permit for 
working in or adjacent to town highway rights-of-way). 
(b) ?Driveways cannot interrupt the natural or ditch line flow of drainage water. In some cases where 
shallow ditch lines or natural drainage courses exist, driveways may be swaled at a point beyond the 
road shoulder to accommodate the flow of storm water. In all other cases, driveways must have 
sufficiently sized culverts installed and forever maintained by the property owner. 
(c) ?In no case shall the culvert pipe under the driveway be less than a fifteen-inch diameter pipe. 
(d) ?Adequate all-season safe sight distance in each direction must be present for a driveway permit to 
be issued. 
(e) ?Driveways shall intersect the roadway at a preferred angle of ninety (90) degrees but in no case 
shall the intersecting angle be less than fifty (50) degrees. 
(f) ?No driveway will be permitted to be constructed within fifty (50) feet of an intersecting street and one 
hundred fifty (150) feet is desirable if sufficient roadway frontage permits. 
(g) ?Under no circumstances shall a driveway permit allow construction which will result in drainage or 
washing directly onto a town highway right-of-way. 
(h) ?In the event a driveway causes damage to a town highway through improper construction, 
maintenance, or grading, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to make necessary 
repairs upon notification in writing by the town. In the event such repairs as are required are not 
made, the town shall take whatever steps are necessary to repair and restore the roadway in 
accordance with the interests of the town and shall bill the property owner for any expenses involved. 
The property owner shall be liable for said expenses. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 4.16) 


Sec. 6-88. - Intersections. 
(a) ?Intersections shall be as nearly as possible at right angles (ninety (90) degrees) with a minimum 
allowable intersection angle of sixty (60) degrees. 
(b) ?The centerline of no more than two (2) accepted rights-of-way shall intersect at any one point. 
(c) ?Any intersections of two (2) highways with a third highway shall be separated by a distance of not 
less than one hundred fifty (150) feet between centerlines. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 4.17) 


Sec. 6-89. - Cul-de-sacs and deadend streets. 
(a) ?Deadend streets are discouraged. Cul-de-sacs will be permitted but not on roads of greater length 
than one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet or the frontage of eight (8) lots per side, whichever is 
less, and must have a turnaround with a minimum radius of fifty (50) feet built to subgrade, subbase 
and upperbase specifications. Provisions shall be made at the perimeter for snow removal. 
(b) ?Streets shall be arranged to provide for extension to or connection of eventual street systems 
necessary to develop abutting land in future subdivisions. The planning commission may in their 
discretion provide exceptions to deadend street length limitations if the Town is deeded a fifty-foot 
right-of-way from the cul-de-sac to abutting property or from the deadend road to the existing Class 3 
or better highway. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 4.18) 


Sec. 6-90. - Turnoffs. 
    Turnoffs with adequate elevation, surface, drainage ditches, and culverts will be provided to permit 
safe passing under summer and winter conditions, and shall be dimensioned and constructed to enable 
effective and efficient snow removal. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 4.19) 


Sec. 6-91. - Roadsides. 
(a) ?At completion of the project, excess debris not covered shall be removed from the right-of-way. 
(b) ?All disturbed portions of the roadsides shall be loamed, seeded and mulched in accordance with 
"Vermont Handbook for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control on Construction Sites", 1982 or latest 
revision. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 4.20) 


Sec. 6-92. - Utilities. 
(a) ?All electric, telephone and cable TV distribution systems within subdivisions shall be placed 
underground where feasible as determined by the planning commission. 
(b) ?The developer shall coordinate designs with the appropriate utility companies to ensure adequate 
and suitable area for underground installations. 
(c) ?The developer shall be responsible for providing for water mains, manholes, sanitary sewers, and 
catch basins if required. 
(d) ?Easements across lots or centered on rear of side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where 
necessary and shall be at least thirty (30) feet wide. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 4.21) 


Sec. 6-93. - Curbs and sidewalks. 
    These regulations do not require construction of sidewalks or curbs or the setting of edgestones. 
When required, however, such as near schools and designated activity areas, they shall be constructed 
or set in accordance with the policy and specifications agreed upon with the planning commission. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 4.22) 


Sec. 6-94. - MUTCD. 
    All signals, lane markings, and traffic and pedestrian control devices shall be in conformance with the 
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) and paid for by the developer. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 4.23) 


Sec. 6-95. - Bridges. 
    Plans for bridges must be submitted for review prior to construction. Construction will be authorized 
only after a review by the state agency of transportation indicates that the bridge will meet all applicable 
Vermont Agency of Transportation specifications. 
(Ord. of 3-19-91, § 4.24) 


Chapter 7 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Public safety, Ch. 5; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 6; any ordinance 
prescribing traffic regulations for specific streets or locations saved from repeal, § 1-5(9). 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate traffic, 24 V.S.A. § 2291(4); authority to make special 
regulations applicable to state highways, 23 V.S.A. § 1008. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 7-1. - Sterling Hill Road designated one-way road. 
    Sterling Hill Road, so-called, is hereby established as a one-way road down the hill (in a westerly 
direction), from the former Watson farm to School Street by the J. Bouffard property. 
(Ord. of 11-11-75, § 3; Ord. of 8-25-87, § 3) 


Secs. 7-2—7-19. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 6; off-street parking requirements, 
App. A, § 3.6. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or exclude the parking of all vehicles, 24 VSA § 2291(4). 


Sec. 7-20. - Purpose; definitions. 
(a) ?This article is enacted to promote the safe and orderly parking of vehicles within the Town of Barre. 
(b) ?Definitions: 
(1) ?Public road as used herein shall include all town roads, and state or federal highways to the 
extent allowed by state and federal law. 
(2) ?Vehicle as used herein shall include all motor vehicles and teams, carts or other conveyances. 
(Ord. of 1-13-98, § 2) 


Sec. 7-21. - General provisions. 
(a) ?No operator or driver of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the same in any of the following places 
except when it is necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the direction of a 
police officer, fire fighter, emergency medical technician, or employee of the public works 
department: 
(1) ?Within thirty (30) feet of an intersection. 
(2) ?On a crosswalk. 
(3) ?In front of a driveway to public or private property, unless said property is owned, rented, or 
controlled by the owner of the vehicle and said vehicle is registered to that address. 
(4) ?On any sidewalk. 
(5) ?Abreast of any vehicle on a public street. 
(6) ?On any bridge. 
(7) ?On the side of any public road such that the vehicle is facing oncoming traffic. 
(8) ?Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant. 
(9) ?In a designated fire lane. 
(b) ?No person shall park a vehicle on a public street for the purpose of selling or renting said vehicle, or 
for the purpose of displaying or advertising said vehicle for sale or rent. 
(c) ?No person shall park an unregistered vehicle on any public street. 
(d) ?No person shall park any vehicle on any public street for more than seventy-two (72) hours. 
(e) ?No person shall park or stop any vehicle in or upon any property under the jurisdiction of the division 
of cemeteries from one (1) hour after sunset until one (1) hour after sunrise on the following day 
without the permission of the chairperson of the commission of cemeteries or other authorized 
person. If given, said permission must be in writing and said writing must be displayed in clear view 
on the dashboard of said vehicle. 
(Ord. of 1-13-98, § 2) 


Sec. 7-22. - Parking prohibited. 
    No operator or driver of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park the same in any of the following places 
except when it is necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the direction of a 
police officer, fire fighter, emergency medical technician, or employee of the public works department: 
Highway Name 
Side 
Extent 
Allen Street 
East 
Rear lot line of 149 Bridge Street to driveway of 212 Allen Street 



Allen Street 
West 
320 feet beginning along the northerly side of the 1996 storage addition to the 
transformer pedestal on the southerly side of the main building 



Church Hill 
Road 
West 
From Green Mountain Power pole #24 (79214) to Green Mountain Power pole 
#28 (79238) 



Pitman Road 
Both 
Entire length 



Robin Drive 
North 
Windywood Road to the east end of the Skylark Terrace Intersection 



Violette Street 
Both 
Entire length 



Websterville 
Road 
North 
200 feet in both directions from Bombardier's driveway across from Barre Town 
Elementary and Middle School 
 
(Ord. of 1-13-98, § 2; Ord. of 6-30-98, § 1; Ord. of 8-29-00, § 1; Ord. of 12-19-00, § 1; Ord. of 
10-23-01, § 1; Ord. of 12-18-01, § 1; Ord. of 9-16-08; Ord. of 6-29-10, § I) 


Sec. 7-23. - Special events. 
    The town manager may, by executive order, prohibit parking within the right-of-way of specified 
public roads for non-emergency purposes such as, but not limited to, special events, construction or 
maintenance, provided the affected road(s) are posted as follows: 
(1) ?If no parking period begins from 10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., said road(s) must be posted at least 
two (2) hours before the no parking time begins. 
(2) ?If no parking period begins from 8:01 p.m. to 9:59 a.m., then said road(s) must be posted 
before 6:00 p.m. 
(3) ?The temporary no parking signs must state the time during which the parking prohibition is in 
effect. 
(Ord. of 1-13-98, § 2) 


Sec. 7-24. - Winter parking ban. 
    The parking of vehicles within the right-of-way of public roads between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 
7:00 a.m. is prohibited between November 1 and April 1 of each and every year. The public shall be 
notified of this section each year by news releases issued to the local news media by the town manager's 
office; said news releases to commence in October of each year. The town manager may, by executive 
order, prohibit parking at any other times of the year if emergency road conditions exist. 
(Ord. No. 1-13-98, § 2) 


Sec. 7-25. - Emergencies. 
    An officer or agent of the police, fire, or emergency medical departments may create an emergency 
no parking zone to prohibit parking on public road(s) within a distance of up to five hundred (500) feet of 
the scene of a fire or other public emergency which said department is attending, when said officer or 
agent deems that parking or stopping interferes, or will interfere, with the emergency duties of said 
department. Said officer or agent shall cause signs to be erected on such roads at the outer limits of the 
no parking zone as fixed by said department, and shall cause them to be removed when the need of said 
department no longer requires them. No person shall cause a vehicle to enter, stop, or park in any such 
emergency zone. 
(Ord. of 1-13-98, § 2) 


Sec. 7-26. - Handicapped spaces. 
    No operator or driver of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park the same on public property in the town 
in a space designated for handicapped persons, unless the vehicle displays special registration plates or 
a windshield placard issued in accordance with the law. 
(Ord. of 1-13-98, § 2) 


Sec. 7-27. - Reserved. 


Sec. 7-28. - Enforcement; penalties. 
(a) ?The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the town police department and any other law 
enforcement agency authorized by the Vermont Legislature to enforce vehicular laws. 
(b) ?Any person who violates the provisions of this article may, within fifteen (15) days from the date of 
such violation, waive the issuing of any process by voluntarily paying the violation fee as herein 
prescribed. 
(c) ?(1) ?The violation fee for violating sections 7-21(a)(1) through (7), 7-21(b) through (e) or 7-22 
through 7-25 of this article shall be ten dollars ($10.00). 
(2) ?The violation fee for violating sections 7-21(a)(8) or (9) or 7-26 of this article shall be 
twenty-five dollars ($25.00). In addition, the vehicle so parked may immediately be towed 
pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(d) ?Any person who violates the provisions of this article may, within fifteen (15) days from the date of 
such violation, contest the matter before the selectboard by filing notice with the town clerk. Said 
notice shall set forth the party's name, the date the ticket was issued, the ticket number, and a brief 
statement why that party believes the ticket should not have been issued. The selectboard shall 
consider the written statement, and may, but shall not be required to, hear and consider oral 
evidence. After considering the matter, the selectboard shall either dismiss the violation, or order that 
the violation fee be paid within fifteen (15) days of the mailing of its decision to the contesting party. 
Said decision shall be mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address to which the 
ticketed vehicle is registered. 
(1) ?Any violation not paid within fifteen (15) days of its date of issuance, in the case of uncontested 
violations, or fifteen (15) days from the mailing date of the selectboard's order, as stated in 
subsection (d), for contested violations, shall be assessed a ten dollar ($10.00) penalty per 
violation. 
(2) ?Any violations or penalties remaining unpaid after thirty (30) days from the issuance date of the 
original uncontested violation or thirty (30) days from the mailing date of the selectboard's order, 
as stated in subsection (d), for contested violations, shall incur an additional five (5) percent late 
fee on the original amount due. If compensation is not received within thirty (30) days of the late 
fee assessment, an eight (8) percent collection fee and one (1) percent simple monthly interest 
charge shall be assessed against the original amount due. 
(3) ?The town is further authorized to pursue any and all civil remedies available by law, at the 
recipient's expense, for the purpose of collection. These include, but are not limited to, credit 
bureau notification, use of collection agencies, judicial enforcement etc. 
(Ord. of 1-13-98, § 2; Ord. of 12-18-2001, §§ 1, 2) 


Sec. 7-29. - Towing. 
(a) ?Any vehicle illegally parked upon a town highway or public property for which there are two (2) or 
more outstanding tickets issued under this article, or which is in violation of section 7-21(a)(3), (4), 
(6), (8), or (9), section 7-21(e), or sections 7-23 through 7-26 of this article, may, at the discretion of 
the enforcing officer, be towed and stored at the owner's expense. Said vehicle shall not be released 
until all violation fees and costs for towing and storage have been paid. 
(b) ?From time to time the selectboard may designate a towing service to be utilized by all town 
departments. Nothing in this subsection (b) shall obligate the selectboard to designate a private 
towing company. Before designating a private towing company, the selectboard shall receive written 
quotations from companies interested in providing the towing service. Furthermore, the selectboard 
shall be required to obtain from the selected company evidence of insurance, proper towing 
equipment, and safe storage area. 
(Ord. of 1-13-98. § 2; Ord. of 12-18-2001, §§ 1, 2) 


Secs. 7-30—7-39. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 


Sec. 7-40. - Purpose. 
    This article is enacted to provide certain regulations for the use of motor vehicles on town highways 
which promote public safety and provide for the orderly and efficient flow of motor vehicles on the town 
highways. 
(Ord. of 6-27-89) 


Sec. 7-41. - Authority. 
    This article is enacted pursuant to Title 23 V.S.A., Section 1008, and Title 24 V.S.A., Section 
2291(4). 
(Ord. of 6-27-89) 


Sec. 7-42. - Obedience to traffic control devices. 
(a) ?The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable to 
him placed in accordance with this article, unless otherwise directed by an enforcement officer. 
(b) ?No provision of this article for which signs are required may be enforced if, at the time and place of 
the alleged violation, an official sign is not in approximately proper position and sufficiently legible to 
be seen by an ordinarily observant person. 
(c) ?Whenever official traffic control devices are placed in positions approximately conforming to this 
article the devices are presumed to have been placed by the official act or direction of lawful 
authority, unless the contrary is established by competent evidence. 
(d) ?An official traffic control device placed pursuant to this article and purporting to conform to the lawful 
requirements pertaining to the device is presumed to comply with this article, unless the contrary is 
established by competent evidence. 
(Ord. of 6-27-89) 


Sec. 7-43. - Traffic safety advisory committee. 
(a) ?There is hereby established a traffic safety advisory committee for the town, which shall be 
comprised of five (5) citizens of the town appointed by the board of selectmen, with each member 
serving a staggered term of three (3) years. 
(b) ?The traffic safety advisory committee shall meet as appropriate and required and in accordance with 
the Open Meeting Laws of the state (Title 1 V.S.A., Section 310-314). 
(c) ?The traffic safety advisory committee shall hold public hearings, investigate matters of public safety 
relating to the town highways, parking areas, public rights-of-way, sidewalks, and travel; make 
recommendations to the board of selectmen and citizens of the town on matters relating to safe and 
efficient travel; and shall perform the duties established under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-27-1989) 


Sec. 7-44. - Stops signs; yield signs. 
(a) ?The traffic safety advisory committee shall conduct at least one (1) public hearing prior to making 
any recommendations relating to stop and yield signs and shall file a statement of their findings and 
recommendations with the town clerk. No recommendation of the traffic safety advisory committee 
shall be binding upon the board of selectmen. The board of selectmen shall follow the ordinance 
adoption described in the Town Charter Section 37 to add to, delete from, or in any way amend 
subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(b) ?Stop intersections: 
Stop Street 
Direction  
of Travel 
Intersecting Street 
Airport Road 
E 
Miller/Airport 
Allen 
S 
Morrison 
Al Monty Drive 
W 
Richardson Road 
Alnita Lane 
N 
Lamay Drive 
Apple Blossom 
NE 
Cheney 
Balsam 
S 
Hill 
Balsam 
E 
Osborne 
East Balsam 
NW 
Osborne Road 
Baptist 
N 
Graniteville Rd. 
Benoit 
N 
East Barre Rd. 
Bianchi 
NW 
Washington Rd. 
Birchwood Park 
SE 
Miller 
Bolster 
S 
Websterville Rd. 
Bridge 
SE 
So. Barre Rd. 
Brule 
W 
Phelps 
Buena Vista Circle 
E 
Beckley Hill Rd. 
Camire Hill 
W 
Plainfield-Brook 
Camire Hill 
E 
Camp 
Carnes 
W 
Washington Rd. 
Cassie 
S 
Camp 
Cedarbrook 
S 
Graniteville Rd. 
Cheney 
S 
Access 
Cherrywood 
N 
Quarry Hill 
Cherrywood 
S 
Sterling Hill 
Chris Path Way 
E 
Beckley Hill Rd. 
Chris Path Way 
N 
School Rd. 
Christie 
W 
So. Barre Rd. 
Church Hill 
SW 
Graniteville Rd. 
Church Street 
W 
Websterville Rd. 
Clark Road 
SW 
East Montpelier Rd. 
Curtis Road 
W 
Barclay Road 
East Cobble Hill 
NW 
Nuissel/W. Cobble Hill 
West Cobble Hill 
N 
Hill 
Cogswell 
NE 
Graniteville Rd. 
Compo 
S 
Graniteville Rd. 
Conti Circle (North) 
E 
Quarry Hill Rd. 
Conti Circle (South) 
E 
Quarry Hill Rd./Beede Circle 
Countryside Drive 
E 
Windywood Rd. 
Countryside Drive 
S 
Smith Farm Rd. 
Crest 
N 
Graniteville Rd. 
Cummings 
S 
Sunset 
Denison Drive 
N 
Waterman Street 
Dodge 
S 
Graniteville Rd. 
Don Camp Drive 
W 
South Barre Rd. 
Donahue 
SW 
Graniteville Rd. 
Farwell 
N 
Pine Hill/Nichols 
Farwell 
S 
Pine Hill/Nichols 
Fieldstone Lane 
N 
Countryside Drive 
Fieldstone Lane 
S 
Smith Farm Rd. 
Fisher 
SW 
Quarry Hill 
Garden Street 
W 
High Street 
Garden Street 
E 
Mill Street 
Goldsbury Woods Road 
E 
Richardson Road 
Granview 
S 
Ledge 
Granview Drive 
S 
Richardson Road 
Grand View Farm 
E 
Cassie 
Graniteville Rd. 
S 
Middle 
Gregoire 
SW 
Church Hill 
Hickory Way 
E 
Windywood Road 
High Street 
S 
Websterville Rd. 
Highland Crofts 
N 
Orchard Terrace 
Higuera 
S 
Sunset 
Hillcrest 
E 
Cassie 
Holden 
W 
South Barre Rd. 
Holden 
E 
Graniteville Rd. 
Jackson 
W 
So. Barre Rd. 
Jensen 
SE 
Airport 
Kelley Road 
S 
Websterville Rd. 
King's Row 
W 
So. Barre Rd. 
Leo 
W 
So. Barre Rd. 
Little John 
SE 
Waterman/Donahue 
Little John 
NW 
Church Hill 
Lower Usle 
W 
Miller 
Lower Usle 
E 
Morrison 
Lowery 
NW 
Waterman/Donahue 
Lucio 
SE 
McLeod Hill 
Maplewood 
E 
Cassie 
McLaughlin 
W 
East Barre Rd. 
Meadowcrest 
W 
Cobble Hill 
Mekkelsen Rd. 
E 
Farwell 
Mill 
NE 
Washington Rd. 
Mill 
SW 
Websterville Rd. 
Mill 
NE 
Websterville Rd. 
Miller 
S 
Access 
Miller Rd. Ext. 
N 
Access 
Miller Woods Rd. 
E 
Birchwood Park Dr. 
Millstone Boulevard 
S 
Websterville Road 
Mitchell Nursery 
S 
Mitchell 
Mitchell Road 
E 
Plainfield Brook Road 
Morgan Lane 
N 
Swift Rd. 
Morin 
W 
So. Barre Rd. 
Morrison 
W 
Airport 
Nichols 
W 
Beckley Hill 
Nichols 
E 
Farwell 
Oak 
W 
Windywood 
Old 302 
E 
Washington Rd. 
Old 302 
NW 
East Barre Rd. 
Orchard Terrace 
E 
Graniteville Rd. 
Parker Road 
N 
Pitman Rd. 
Parker Road 
S 
Pitman Rd. 
Patch 
SW 
Quarry Hill 
Pearl 
N 
Graniteville Rd. 
Peloquin 
S 
Orchard Terrace 
Peloquin 
NW 
Holden 
Perry 
E 
Miller 
Phelps 
N 
Cutler Corner 
Phelps 
N 
Sunset Road 
Phelps 
S 
Cutler Corner 
Phelps 
S 
Sunset Road 
Philbrook 
W 
Cobble Hill 
Pierce 
S 
Nuissel 
Pine Hill 
W 
Farwell 
Pine Hill 
E 
East Montpelier Rd. 
Pitman 
S 
Websterville Rd. 
Plainfield Brook 
SW 
East Montpelier Rd. 
Pleasant 
SW 
Washington Rd. 
Prospect Street 
S 
Washington Rd. 
Richardson Rd. 
E 
Granview 
Ridgewood (both locations) 
NE 
Cobble Hill 
Robin Dr. 
E 
Windy Wood Rd. 
Sabbett 
W 
Brook 
School 
E 
Beckley Hill 
Seager 
W 
So. Barre Rd. 
Short Street 
SE 
Donahue Road 
Sierra-Lavin 
W 
Osborne 
Silver Circle (both locations) 
N 
Sterling Hill 
Smith Farm Road 
E 
Windywood Rd. 
Smokehouse Lane 
E 
So. Barre Rd. 
Snowbridge 
E 
So. Barre Rd. 
Sparrow 
S 
Hill 
Sparrow 
NE 
Robin 
Sparrow 
SW 
Robin 
Spruce Mt. View 
N 
Mitchell 
Sterling Hill 
W 
So. Barre Rd. 
Sterling Hill 
E 
Graniteville Rd. 
Stevens 
E 
So. Barre Rd. 
Sugarwoods Road (both locations) 
W 
Windywood Road 
Summer Street 
W 
High Street 
Summer Street 
E 
Mill Street 
Sunbay 
E 
East Montpelier Rd. 
Sunnyside Drive 
NE 
Taplin Road 
Sunnyside Drive 
SW 
East Cobble Hill Road 
Swift 
W 
Country Club 
Tamarack (both locations) 
N 
Cobble Hill 
Taplin 
S 
Cobble Hill 
Upper Usle 
E 
Usle 
Upper Usle 
W 
Miller 
Valley View Circle (both locations) 
E 
Cassie Street 
Washington Road 
N 
East Barre Rd. 
Waterman 
NE 
Washington Rd. 
Waterman Farm 
W 
Waterman 
Websterville Rd. 
W 
Graniteville Rd. 
Websterville Rd. 
SE 
Waterman 
West Road 
W 
Miller Road Ext. 
Wildersburg 
NE 
Cobble Hill 
Willow 
W 
Windywood 
Wilson 
W 
So. Barre Rd. 
Windywood 
N 
Sunset 
Windywood 
S 
Hill 
Woodland 
NE 
LaGue 
 
(c) ?Yield Intersections: 
Yield Street 
Direction  
of Travel 
Intersecting Street 
East Barre Road 
E 
Washington Rd. 
Carnes Road 
NE 
Bianchi Street 
Barre View 
N 
Cherrywood 
East Cobble Hill Road 
S 
East Barre Road 
Graniteville Road. 
N 
Graniteville Rd. 
Gregoire 
NE 
Websterville Rd. 
Hillside Avenue 
NW 
E. Cobble Hill Road 
Jalbert 
SW 
Anderson 
LePage Road 
W 
Averill Road 
Platinum Plain 
S 
Silver Circle 
Teja Street 
E 
Websterville Road 
Teja Street 
W 
Websterville Road 
Washington Road 
N 
East Barre Rd. 
Websterville 
W 
Church Hill 
Websterville Road 
W 
Quarry Hill Rd. 
 
(d) ?Enforcement. The provisions of this section 7-44 shall be enforced by the town police department 
and any other law enforcement agency authorized by the Vermont Legislature to enforce vehicular 
laws. 
(e) ?Penalty. Any person who violates the provisions of section 7-44 and upon receipt of a uniform traffic 
ticket from an authorized law enforcement officer shall either: 
(1) ?Pay a fine to the Vermont Traffic Ticket Center in an amount established by the State of 
Vermont; or 
(2) ?Request a hearing before the Vermont Traffic Hearing Officer or its successors. 
(f) ?Designation. This section may be referred to as the Barre Town Stop and Yield Intersection 
Ordinance and in a prosecution hereunder a copy of such ordinance, certified by the town clerk, shall 
be prima facie evidence thereof. An allegation that the act constituting the offense charged is 
contrary to a specified provisions of this article [section] shall be sufficient reference hereto. 
(Ord. of 6-27-89; Ord. of 11-22-94, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 1-10-95, § 1; Ord. of 7-18-95, § 1; Ord. of 1-
23-96, § 1; Ord. of 3-25-97, § 1; Ord. of 3-17-98, § 1; Ord. of 6-30-98, § 2; Ord. of 12-15-98, § 
1; Ord. of 2-1-00, § 1; Ord. of 6-22-00, § 1; Ord. of 4-23-02, § 1; Ord. of 12-17-02, § 1; Ord. of 
1-28-03, § 2; Ord. of 2-3-04 § 2; Ord. of 1-25-05 § 1; Ord. of 1-31-06, § 2; Ord. of 3-28-06, § 2; 
Ord. of 8-31-06, § 2; Ord. of 4-15-08, § 1; Ord. of 10-13-09, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 11-17-09, § 1; Ord. 
of 9-20-11, § 1; Ord. of 10-23-12, § 1; Ord. of 4-21-15, § 1; Ord. of 9-27-16, § 1) 


Sec. 7-45. - Signs and cautions generally. 
(a) ?Unless otherwise provided by law, charter or ordinance, the traffic safety advisory committee may 
recommend to the board of selectmen to erect such travel cautionary or advisory signs that they 
deem appropriate to promote efficient flow of traffic, promote greater safety for highway users, 
pedestrians and property owners, and are in the best interest of the community. Such signs may 
include without limitation the following types of signs: "slow," "children playing," "stop ahead," "yield 
ahead," "steep grade," street name signs, directional signs to public places and places of interest 
and to route locations, "blind drive," "dangerous intersection," "school bus stop," and other similar 
signs, markers, symbols, and signals. 
(b) ?The traffic safety advisory committee may, on its own initiative, or upon the request of the board of 
selectmen, investigate any and all matters relating to traffic and highway safety, and may make such 
reports and recommendations as they may deem appropriate. 
(c) ?No recommendation of the traffic safety advisory committee shall be binding upon the board of 
selectmen, and the board of selectmen may erect travel cautionary or advisory signs on their own 
initiative and without the review or comment of the traffic safety advisory committee. 
(Ord. of 6-27-89) 


Sec. 7-46. - Standards. 
    The United States Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration's manual on 
uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways, as amended, shall be the standards for all traffic 
control signs, signals and markings within the town. Existing signs, signals and markings shall be valid 
and enforceable until such time as they are replaced or reconstructed. 
(Ord. of 6-27-89) 


Sec. 7-47. - Enforcement; penalties. 
    Enforcement of this article and penalties assessed for violations thereof shall be in conformance to 
the procedures and penalties established generally under Title 23 V.S.A. 
(Ord. of 6-27-89) 


Secs. 7-48—7-59. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - SPEED LIMITS 


Sec. 7-60. - Purpose. 
    This article is enacted to control the unreasonable or unsafe speed of vehicles on public streets, 
roads and said highways in the town. 
(Ord. of 8-9-94, § 1) 


Sec. 7-61. - Speed limits established; violation to exceed. 
    It shall be a prima facie violation of this section for any person to drive a vehicle at any speed in 
excess of the speed limits established below: 
(a) ?Reserved. 
(b) ?Reserved. 
(c) ?25 miles per hour speed limit: 
Highway Name 
Extent 
Allen Street 
Entire street 
Al Monty Drive 
Entire street 
Alnita Lane 
Entire street 
Apple Blossom Road 
Entire street 
Balsam Drive 
Entire street 
Baptist Street 
Graniteville Road to #46 
Barclay Quarry Road 
Entire street 
Barre Gun Club Road 
Entire street 
Barre View Street 
Entire street 
Beckley Hill Road 
Town line to intersection with School/Nichols 
Beede Circle 
Entire street 
Belding Road 
Entire street 
Benoit Drive 
Entire street 
Bianchi Street 
Entire street 
Birchwood East 
Entire street 
Birchwood Park Drive 
Entire street 
Bolster Road 
Entire street 
Bonnie Lane 
Entire street 
Booth Road 
Entire street 
Breer Road 
Entire street 
Bridge Street 
Rt. 14 to Allen Street 
Brook Street 
Entire street 
Buena Vista Circle 
Entire Street 
Buick Street 
Entire street 
Burnside Avenue 
Entire street 
Camel's Hump Drive 
Entire street 
Camp Street 
City line to #401 
Cano Drive 
Entire street 
Cardinal Circle 
Entire street 
Carnes Road 
Entire street 
Casanova Street 
Entire street 
Cassie Street 
Town line to #190 
Cedar Cliff 
Entire street 
Cedar Street 
Entire street 
Cedarbrook Avenue 
Entire street 
Central Street 
Entire street 
Cherrywood Drive 
Entire street 
Chris Path Way 
Entire street 
Christie Street 
Entire street 
Church Hill Road 
Top of hill to Websterville Road 
Church Street 
Entire street 
Clermont Street 
Entire street 
Clover Lane 
Entire street 
Clyde Street 
Entire street 
Cobble Hill Meadows 
Entire street 
Cogswell Street 
Entire street 
Colonial Drive 
Entire street 
Compo Street 
Entire street 
Conti Circle 
Entire street 
Countryside Drive 
Entire street 
Crab Apple Lane 
Entire street 
Crescent Lane 
Entire street 
Crest Street 
Entire street 
Cross Street 
Entire street 
Daniels Drive 
Entire street 
Deerfield Avenue 
Entire street 
Dianne Lane 
Entire street 
Denison Drive 
Entire street 
Dodge Avenue 
Entire street 
Donahue Road 
Short Street to Graniteville Road/Drury Hill 
Don Camp Drive 
Entire street 
Drury Hill Road 
Entire street 
East Balsam Drive 
Entire street 
East Street Extension 
Entire street 
Ellenwood Street 
Entire street 
Ferris Street 
Entire street 
Fieldstone Lane 
Entire street 
Fisher Road 
Entire street 
Garden Street 
Entire street 
Gauthier's Drive 
Entire street 
Goldsbury Woods Road 
Entire street 
Gold Spur 
Entire street 
Goodhue Lane 
Entire street 
Grace Avenue 
Entire street 
Grandview Farm Road 
Entire street 
Graniteville Road 
Middle Road to Donahue Road 
Granview Drive 
Entire street 
Graniteville Road 
Middle Road to Donahue Road 
Gregoire Street 
Entire street 
Green Mountain View Street 
Entire street 
Green Street 
Entire street 
Hebert Drive 
Entire street 
Henry Street 
Entire street 
Hickory Way 
Entire street 
High Street 
Entire street 
Highland Crofts 
Entire street 
Higuera Road 
Entire street 
Hill Street 
City line to Sierra-Lavin Hill 
Hillside Avenue 
Entire street 
Holden Road 
Entire street 
Hunt Road 
Entire street 
Hutchins Circle 
Entire street 
Irving Street 
Entire street 
Isabelle Road 
Entire street 
Jackson Street 
Entire street 
Judy Lane 
Entire street 
Kelley Road 
Entire street 
King's Row 
Entire street 
Lague Lane 
Entire street 
Ledge Drive 
Entire street 
Lemay Street 
Entire street 
Leo Avenue 
Entire street 
Libercent Street 
Entire street 
Lisa Drive 
Entire street 
Little John Road 
Church Hill Road to Sabbett Street 
Lucia Street 
Entire street 
Maple Street 
Entire street 
Maplewood Avenue 
Entire street 
McHugh Road 
Entire street 
McLaughlin Road 
Entire street 
McLeod Hill Road 
Entire street 
Meadow Lane 
Entire street 
Meadowbrook Road 
Entire street 
Meadowcrest Lane 
Entire street 
Meadowood Drive 
Entire street 
Meadows Drive 
Entire street 
Mekklesen Road 
Entire street 
Milano Hill 
Entire street 
Mill Street 
Entire street 
Miller Wood Drive 
Entire street 
Millstone Boulevard 
Entire street 
Misty Mountain Drive 
Entire street 
Moonlight Drive 
Entire street 
Morgan Lane 
Entire street 
Morin Road 
Entire street 
Neddo Road 
Entire street 
Norris Street 
Entire street 
North Colonial Drive 
Entire street 
Oak Drive 
Entire street 
Old Quarry Hill Road 
Entire street 
Orchard Terrace 
Graniteville Road to Peloquin Road 
Osborne Road 
Hill Street to #80 
Owen Drive 
Entire street 
Panther Drive 
Entire street 
Park Street 
Entire street 
Parker Road 
Entire street 
Patch Road 
Entire street 
Pearl Street 
Entire street 
Perry Road 
Entire street 
Philbrook Street 
Entire street 
Phil Street 
Entire street 
Pine Ridge Road 
Entire street 
Pitman Road 
Entire street 
Platinum Plain 
Entire street 
Pleasant Street 
Entire street 
Prospect Street 
Entire street 
Richardson Road 
City line to #160 
Ridgewood Terrace 
Entire street 
Robin Drive 
Entire street 
Rudd Farm Road 
Entire street 
Sabett Street 
Entire street 
Scenic View Drive 
Entire street 
Seager Lane 
Entire street 
Sesame Street 
Entire street 
Sherman Drive 
Entire street 
Short Street 
Entire street 
Sierra-Lavin Road 
Hill Street to #383 
Silver Circle 
Entire street 
Skylark Terrace 
Entire street 
Smith Farm Road 
Entire street 
Smokehouse Lane 
Entire Street 
Snowbridge Road 
Rt. 14 to end of blacktop 
Sparrow Drive 
Entire street 
Spring Hollow Lane 
Entire street 
Spruce Lane 
Entire street 
Spruce Mountain View Drive 
Entire street 
Sugarwoods Road 
Entire street 
Sunbay Road 
Entire street 
Sunrise Road 
Entire street 
Sterling Hill Road 
Entire street 
Stevens Lane 
Entire street 
Summer Street 
Entire street 
Sunnyside Drive 
Entire street 
Swift Road 
Entire street 
Tamarack Lane 
Entire street 
Tanglewood Drive 
Entire street 
Teja Road 
Entire street 
Terry Court 
Entire street 
Valley View Circle 
Entire street 
Velie Avenue 
Entire street 
Violet Street 
Entire street 
Wark Street 
Entire street 
Waterman Farm Road 
Entire street 
Waterman Street 
Waterman Farm Road 200' south of Route 110 
Websterville Road 
Route 110 to Church Street 
Wendell Terrace 
Entire street 
West Cobble Hill Road 
Hill Street to Ridgewood Terrace 
West Skylark Terrace 
Entire street 
Wildersburg Common 
Entire street 
Wildwood Drive 
Entire street 
Willow Drive 
Entire street 
Wilmuth Street 
Entire street 
Wilson Street 
Entire street 
Windridge Drive 
Entire street 
Windywood Road 
Hill Street to Oak Drive 
Woodland Drive 
Entire street 
 
(d) ?30 miles per hour speed limit: 
Highway Name 
Extent 
Cassie Street 
#190 to Plainfield Brook Road 
Cheney Road 
Entire street 
Middle Road 
Rt. 14 to #140 
Mitchell Road 
Entire street 
Nuissle Road 
Entire street 
Partridge Road 
Entire street 
 
(e) ?35 miles per hour speed limit: 
Highway Name 
Extent 
Anderson Road 
Entire street 
Averill Road 
Entire street 
Barclay Road 
Entire street 
Beckley Hill Road 
School/Nichols intersection to LePage Rd. 
Camire Hill Road 
Entire street 
Clark Road 
Entire street 
Curtis Road 
Entire street 
Cutler Corner Road 
Entire street 
Donahue Road 
From the intersection of Lowery and Littlejohn to the intersection with Short 
Street 
East Cobble Hill Road 
Route 302 to #269 
Farwell Street 
City line to end of blacktop 
Jalbert Road 
Entire street 
Jensen Road 
Entire street 
Ladd Road 
Entire street 
LePage Road 
Entire street 
Littlejohn Road 
Waterman/Donahue Rd. to Sabetto St. 
Lower Usle Road 
Entire street 
Lowery Road 
Entire street 
Lyman Road 
Entire street 
Maplecrest Road 
Entire street 
McLeod Road 
Peloquin Road to Williamstown line 
Miller Road Extension 
Route 63 to Williamstown line 
Mitchell Nursery Road 
Entire street 
Morrison Road 
Allen Street to Upper Prospect Street 
Old Route 302 
Entire street 
Osborne Road 
#80 to Phelps Road 
Peloquin Road 
Entire street 
Phelps Road 
Entire street 
Pierce Road 
Entire street 
Pine Hill Road 
Entire street 
Richardson Road 
#160 to School Road 
School Road 
Entire street 
Sierra-Lavin Road 
#383 to Pierce Road 
Snowbridge Road 
End of black top to Williamstown line 
South Barre Road (Rt. 14) 
City line to Snowbridge Road 
Sunset Road 
Windywood to Camp St. 
Sunset Road 
Windywood to Phelps Road 
Taplin Road 
Entire street 
Upper Usle Road 
Entire street 
Washington Road (Rt. 
110) 
Prospect Street to Route 302 
Waterman Street 
From 200' south of Waterman Farm Road to intersection of Lowery and 
Littlejohn 
Websterville Road 
Church Street to Wilson Cemetery 
West Cobble Hill Road 
Ridgewood Terrace to East Cobble Hill/Nuissle Road 
West Road 
Entire street 
Windywood Road 
Oak Drive to #216 
 
(f) ?40 miles per hour speed limit: 
Highway Name 
Extent 
Airport Road 
Entire street 
Baptist Street 
#46 to Williamstown line 
Camp Street 
#401 to Sunset Road 
Cummings Road 
Entire street 
East Barre Road (Rt. 302) 
City line east to a point 0.23 ± mile east of the US 302/VT 110 roundabout 
East Cobble Hill Road 
West Cobble Hill/Nuissle Road to #269 
East Montpelier Road (Rt. 14) 
City line to Clark Road 
Farwell Street 
End of blacktop to East Montpelier line 
Middle Road 
#140 to Graniteville Road 
Miller Road 
Airport Road to Route 63 
Nichols Road 
Entire street 
Plainfield-Brook Road 
Entire street 
Quarry Hill Road/  
Graniteville Road 
City line to Middle Road 
South Barre Road (Rt. 14) 
Snowbridge Road to Williamstown town line 
Sunset Road 
Windywood to Phelps Road 
Upper Prospect Street 
Entire street 
Windywood Road 
#216 to Sunset Road 
 
(g) ?Reserved. 
(h) ?50 miles per hour speed limit: 
Highway Name 
Extent 
East Barre Road (Rt. 302) 
Orange town line west to a point 0.23 ± mile east of the US 302/VT 110 
roundabout 
East Montpelier Road (Rt. 
14) 
Clark Road to East Montpelier town line 
Washington Road (Rt. 110) 
Prospect Street to Orange town line 
 
(Ord. of 8-9-94, § 1; Ord. of 4-4-95, § 1; Ord. of 1-23-96; Ord. of 8-28-96, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 3-
17-98, § 2; Ord. of 6-30-98, § 3; Ord. of 12-15-98, § 2; Ord. of 2-1-00, §§ 3—5; Ord. of 1-30-01, 
§ 1; Ord. of 10-23-01, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 11-13-01, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 4-23-02, § 2; Ord. of 1-28-03, § 
1; Ord. of 6-17-03, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 2-3-04, § 1; Ord. of 1-31-06, § 1; Ord. of 3-28-06, § 1; Ord. 
of 8-31-06, § 1; Ord. of 1-30-07, § 1; Ord. of 4-15-08, § 2; Ord. of 1-26-10, § 1; Ord. of 4-13-10, 
§ 1; Ord. of 6-22-10, § 1; Ord. of 5-24-11, § 1; Ord. of 9-20-11, §§ 2—4; Ord. of 9-11-12, § 1; 
Ord. of 10-23-12, § 2; Ord. of 1-26-16, § 1; Ord. of 9-27-16, § 2; Ord. of 6-13-17, § 1) 


Sec. 7-62. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this article IV, section 7-61 shall be enforced by the town police department and 
any other law enforcement agency authorized by the Vermont Legislature to enforce vehicular laws. 
(Ord. of 8-9-94, § 1) 


Sec. 7-63. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates the provisions of section 7-61 and upon receipt of a uniform traffic ticket 
from an authorized law enforcement officer shall either: 
(1) ?Pay a fine to the Vermont Traffic Ticket Center in an amount established by the State of 
Vermont; or 
(2) ?Request a hearing before the Vermont Traffic Hearing Officer or its successors. 
(Ord. of 8-9-94, § 1) 


Sec. 7-64. - Designation. 
    This article may be referred to as the Barre Town Speed Limit Ordinance and in a prosecution 
hereunder a copy of such ordinance, certified by the town clerk, shall be prima facie evidence thereof. An 
allegation that the act constituting the offense charged is contrary to a specified provision of this article 
shall be sufficient reference hereto. 
(Ord. of 8-9-94, § 1; Ord. of 1-10-95, § 1) 


Sec. 7-65. - Work site regulations and penalties. 
(a) ?When the town department of public works, its agents or other highway or utility workers must work, 
including operating equipment or stockpiling material, within the travelway of a town highway, a 15 
mph speed limit may be posted, with the town manager's written approval, one hundred (100) feet 
beyond the borders of the work site. In lieu of posting a reduced speed limit the highway may be 
closed. 
(b) ?"Reduced Speed Limit Ahead" and construction zone signs must be conspicuously posted in view of 
approaching motorists in the following locations: 
Normal Speed Limit 
Distance from Work Site Speed Limit Signs 
45 mph 
350' 10' 
40 mph 
275' 10' 
35 mph 
200' 10' 
30 mph 
150' 10' 
25 mph 
100' 10' 
 
"Reduced Speed Limit Ahead" signs may be temporary signs but shall have black lettering on an orange 
background. "WORK SITE, 15 MPH, SPEED LIMIT" signs may be temporary and shall be conspicuously 
posted in view of approaching motorists. 
(c) ?The penalty for violating speed limits established in compliance with this section shall be twice the 
penalty for violation of section 7-61. Procedures and options for violators shall be the same as cited 
in section 7-63. 
(Ord. of 9-8-98, § 1) 


Chapter 8 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Town manager to have control and supervision of the town's system of sewers, 
drainage and water, § 21(j)(4)(9). 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 6; any 
ordinance or resolution fixing utility rates and charges saved from repeal, § 1-5(16). 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate the location, installation, maintenance, repair and removal of 
utility poles, wires and conduits, water pipes or mains, gas mains and sewers on public highways or 
public property of a municipality, 24 V.S.A. § 2291(6); authority to construct and maintain sewerage 
system, 24 V.S.A. § 3501 et seq.; authority to construct and maintain sewage disposal plant and system, 
24 V.S.A. § 3601 et seq. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 8-1—8-15. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - WATER[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Town manager to have charge, control and supervision of any public water system 
owned or operated by the town, § 21(j)(9). 
Cross reference— Health, Ch. 4; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 6. 
State Law reference— Authority of town to construct, maintain etc., waterworks, 24 V.S.A. § 3301; water 
mains and sewers, 24 V.S.A. Ch. 95. 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 8-16. - Limits of water system responsibility. 
(a) ?Governing authority. The board of selectmen, acting in the capacity of water commissioners, have 
full governing authority for the public water system, as defined below. 
(b) ?Supervisory authority. The town manager, in accordance with the provisions of the Town Charter, 
has supervisory responsibility for the designated public water supply system. 
(c) ?Service limits. The public water supply system operated and controlled by the town is known as the 
"Sterling Hill" system. It consists of a booster pumping station on Wilson Street in South Barre, 
transmission and distribution mains, a three hundred thousand-gallon storage reservoir on the north 
face of Millstone Hill in Lower Websterville, and appurtenances. Only those properties adjacent to or 
within five hundred (500) feet of a water main in a public right-of-way are considered within the 
existing service limits of this system. A map generally depicting such limits is on file with the town 
clerk. 
(Ord. of 11-16-82, § A(1)) 


Sec. 8-17. - Connections to existing mains. 
(a) ?Connection approval. The board of selectmen requires that all connections to the existing water 
system of the town must be approved by the town manager or his designated representative, except 
as provided in subsection (b). 
(b) ?Board of selectmen approval required. Approval for a water connection shall be brought before the 
board of selectmen for approval if any of the following exist: 
(1) ?Line being connected to is a private line; 
(2) ?Line being connected to is less than six (6) inches in size; 
(3) ?Line being connected to is not located in a town road right-of-way or on the owner's property 
(i.e., the connection line will cross another property). 
To consider such a request, the board of selectmen will require the information as routinely required for 
any connection (see section 8-41 et seq.) plus any additional information or technical data as deemed 
necessary to make a decision. This may include written agreements with property or line owners for 
installation and maintenance. 
(c) ?Applicant responsibility. The applicant will provide all labor, materials, excavation, backfill, tools and 
equipment necessary to make the service connection under the approval and supervision of the 
town. For single-family residential connections, the town will: 
(1) ?Furnish the corporation stop, curb stop and meter (to be charged to the owner); 
(2) ?Tap the existing main (to be charged to the owner); 
(3) ?Furnish and install water meter and appurtenances. 
(d) ?Town responsibility. The town will be responsible for the maintenance of this service connection, 
from the main line to the town right-of-way or curb stop; after the initial installation and acceptance of 
the completed project by the town. For all other types of connections, the service shall be in accord 
with requirements outlined in this article. 
(e) ?Unauthorized connections. No person or entity may connect to the town water system without the 
prior approval of the proper authorities listed in this section. Should such an unauthorized connection 
be found to exist any property owner or owners receiving services from the connection must obtain 
all necessary permits and pay all corresponding fees. The town may also require such owner(s) to 
expose the connection for proper inspection by a town representative. Connections failing to meet 
town standards must be brought into compliance by the owner(s) at the owner(s) expense and are 
subject to re-inspection and confirmation by the town representative. 
(Ord. of 11-16-82, § A(2); Ord. of 10-30-2001, § 2) 


Sec. 8-18. - Extension of public mains. 
(a) ?Extension of water mains to new service areas or developments is the responsibility of the property 
owners involved. Plans for extensions must be approved by the appropriate state agencies and the 
town selectboard. No actual, physical extension of public mains shall occur without the final approval 
of the selectboard. 
(b) ?Extensions shall be placed in town or state owned rights-of-way except in cases where ledge or 
topography cause extreme cost; in such cases: 
(1) ?The town may allow the developer or owner to put the main(s) outside of publicly owned rights-
of-way if the town is given a thirty-foot permanent easement (fifteen (15) feet each side of pipe 
centerline); 
(2) ?Extensions are not allowed to be dead-ended in land off the right-of-way; access must be given 
so that lines can continue along the right-of-way for future extensions. 
(c) ?Prior to town approval of plans for main extension placed within the state highway right-of-way, 
written approval of plans must be obtained from the state agency of transportation. 
(d) ?Extensions shall be maintained by the developer for a period of one (1) year at which time the town 
is given title to the main and is responsible for its operation and maintenance. The one-year period 
shall commence on the latter of the following: 
(1) ?The date which the town accepts the installation; 
(2) ?The date that service is permanently turned on. 
(e) ?The town will not accept the lines without receipt of suitable "record drawings" of the completed 
facilities and the town's subsequent approval after one (1) year of maintenance. 
(f) ?The town will determine all pipe sizes, with six-inch diameter being the minimum size acceptable. 
(g) ?The town may share the cost of larger main lines if larger mains would be required for future needs 
of the town's overall water system. 
(h) ?The town may enter into an agreement with the developer to establish a procedure to require 
persons benefiting from the extension but not contributing to the cost of the extension to pay the 
developer tap-on fees. 
(Ord. of 11-16-82, § A(3); Ord. of 10-30-2001, § 2) 


Sec. 8-19. - Water meters. 
(a) ?All service connections should be metered. The town will provide and install in each structure 
serviced by municipal water a water meter and such other items as are necessary for its operation of 
a kind and to such specifications as the town shall decide, including if it deems necessary, outside 
meter readers. Title to the water meter, outside meter reader, and all accessory parts shall remain in 
the town and shall not pass to the owner of any structure where such property is installed. 
(b) ?The owner shall be responsible to provide an accessible, frost-free location for the meter. 
(c) ?The owner shall allow access to the meter by town personnel or an authorized representative of the 
town. The town will maintain the water meter and all accessory parts at its expense; however, the 
town shall not be liable for damage to the meter or accessory parts caused by the owner or by 
persons on the owner's premises or by fire, theft, freezing, or other casualty, and the repair of such 
damage shall be paid by the owner. The town shall have the right, for its agents and employees, 
upon reasonable notice to the owner, or at regular intervals, of access at reasonable times to the 
premises for the purpose of meter installation, reading, maintenance, and repair. 
(d) ?It is the owner's responsibility to ensure that the meters and accessories are not damaged or 
tampered with. 
(e) ?The owner shall reimburse the town for any charges related to repair of a damaged meter, caused 
by abuse or negligence, plus a charge for estimated water use which was not registered during the 
period of malfunction. 
(f) ?Meter wells may be required if a private line (house connection) is more than one hundred fifty (150) 
feet in length from the water main right-of-way to the dwelling. The cost of construction and 
maintenance to meter wells shall be borne entirely by the property owner or owners whose meter is 
located in the meter well. The town shall approve of the design and construction of meter wells. 
(g) ?If called upon by a water user, the water department shall test the user's water meter for accuracy. 
In the event the meter, after testing, is determined to be accurate, the owner shall be charged the 
current fee to compensate for services rendered. No fee shall be assessed if the meter is determined 
to be defective. The water user shall be notified of this policy prior to testing the water meter. No fee 
shall be assessed without such prior notification. 
(Ord. of 11-16-82, § A(4)) 


Sec. 8-20. - Multiple meters. 
    Any water user may have more than one (1) meter at a particular location if the following conditions 
are met: 
(1) ?Owner assumes all installation costs; 
(2) ?Owner assumes responsibility of payment of all individual meter bills; 
(3) ?Owner is billed for each meter. 
(Ord. of 11-16-82, § A(4)) 


Sec. 8-21. - Charges and billing. 
(a) ?Installation charges for tapping, corporation stops, curb stops, and similar work shall be based on 
current prices. 
(b) ?Installation charges for water meters, backflow prevention devices, and vacuum relief devices, 
where applicable, shall be made at the current amount in effect at the time of installation. Any extra 
expense to the town for installation caused by abnormal plumbing or structural conditions shall be 
due the town upon installation of the meter. Where abnormal structural or plumbing conditions exist, 
if the town deems it necessary, the town may require the owner to provide at his expense the 
necessary structural or plumbing alterations so that the town may make a normal meter connection. 
(c) ?Each meter will be billed as a separate unit and quantity discounts will not be granted for the total 
water used by several meters. 
(d) ?If a property owner is making an attempt to repair a water leak on a service connection, the property 
owner's liability will be a maximum of three (3) times the normal usage. 
(Ord. of 11-16-82, § A(5)) 


Sec. 8-22. - Billing and collection. 
(a) ?The selectmen of the town, acting in their capacity as water commissioners of the town, hereby 
enact the following regulations relating to the billing of users of the municipal water supply under the 
authority of 24 V.S.A. §§ 3311 and 3313 or any other statutes which apply: 
(1) ?The town shall bill water users on a quarterly basis. 
(2) ?The individual water user will be responsible for reading the water meter on his premises, 
recording this reading on a card to be supplied by the town, and returning the card to the Barre 
Town Municipal Building, Websterville, VT 05678. 
(3) ?The town will send to the individual property owner or occupant, no later than fifteen (15) days 
prior to billing date, a postage-paid card to be utilized in recording the meter reading. 
(4) ?The property owner or occupant will be responsible for reading the water meter and recording 
the data on the card supplied by the town. 
(5) ?It shall be the occupant's responsibility to return the card to the town immediately. 
(6) ?A service charge of ten dollars ($10.00) will be made to the water user for any cards not 
returned by the billing date. This charge will be made to defray cost to the town for reading the 
meter. 
(b) ?The provisions of subsection (a)(1)—(6) shall not apply to the following: 
(1) ?Upon request, the elderly and handicapped and anyone who due to unique circumstances 
would have difficulty reading their own meter; 
(2) ?All properties with meter wells; 
(3) ?Certain commercial and industrial establishments which are high water users. 
(c) ?The town will read each meter once a year to ensure that all meters are functioning properly. 
(d) ?Meters will be read upon request when a transfer of property takes place at a service charge of ten 
dollars ($10.00). The charge will be to the purchaser of the property and payable when the deed is 
filed with the town clerk. 
(e) ?Delinquent water charges shall subject the customer to termination of service (see section 8-23). 
(f) ?The charging for water in new installations (new homes or businesses) shall commence at the 
installation of the water meter. 
(g) ?The charging for water in conversion installations (changing from flat rate to metered rate) shall 
change from the flat rate to the metered rate starting at the beginning of the billing period following 
the meter installation. 
(h) ?The town shall charge for water consumption according to the current rate schedule. 
(i) ?The town shall charge a turn-off and turn-on fee for each time a water service is either turned off or 
turned on after the initial installation and for reasons other than maintenance or repair of the system. 
This fee will include the removal of the water meter. The fee is in the current rate schedule. 
(j) ?The town shall charge at least the minimum rate for the period in which water is turned off and for the 
period in which the water is turned on. 
(k) ?Any amount due the town for a meter, meter parts, repairs or other installation costs, or for damage 
to a meter as hereinafter provided, shall be a lien on the owner's property and may be enforced 
against the property for the entire amount due, upon default in the payment of any installation or from 
the time damage is done to the meter. 
(Ord. of 11-16-82, § A(6)) 


Sec. 8-23. - Termination of service for nonpayment of bills. 
(a) ?Termination proceedings shall be instituted against any service which is over one (1) year old. 
(b) ?Termination proceedings shall be in accordance with 24 V.S.A. Ch. 129. 
(Ord. of 11-16-82, § A(7)) 


Sec. 8-24. - Restrictions on disconnection. 
    Disconnection of water service shall be not permitted if: 
(1) ?Aggregate delinquent bills do not exceed fifteen dollars ($15.00); 
(2) ?The delinquency is solely on a disputed portion of a charge, which is the subject of an appeal; 
(3) ?The delinquency is due to a failure to pay a nonrecurring charge such as a deposit, special 
assessment or special construction charge; 
(4) ?The disconnection would represent an immediate and serious hazard to the health of someone 
within the ratepayer's household, as set forth in a physician's certificate filed with the utility; 
(5) ?The ratepayer has not been given an opportunity to enter into a reasonable agreement to pay 
the delinquent bill; 
(6) ?The ratepayer has entered into an agreement to pay the delinquent bill and is abiding by the 
terms of the agreement; 
(7) ?Adequate notice as required by law has not been given the ratepayer. 
(Ord. of 11-16-82, § A(7)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 24 V.S.A. § 5143. 


Sec. 8-25. - Disconnection procedures. 
(a) ?If a ratepayer has received a notice of disconnection and no appeal is made or agreement reached 
on payment of the bill, disconnection can occur between 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. on any business 
day. A business day is defined as Monday through Thursday, except legal holidays when offices are 
not open to the public. When service is disconnected, the person making the disconnection must 
inform a responsible adult on the premises or leave in a conspicuous and secure place notification 
that service has been interrupted and the procedures for reconnection. After disconnection, 
restoration of a service must occur within twenty-four (24) hours of the request of the ratepayer when 
the cause of disconnection has been removed. 
(b) ?A ratepayer desiring to appeal a water bill may appeal as to the proper amount of the bill or the 
correction of the application of the rules and regulations. Appeals may be made to the chairman of 
the board of selectmen. 
(Ord. of 11-16-82, § A(7)) 


Sec. 8-26. - Work in public right-of-way. 
(a) ?Any work relative to water mains or services which is located in the town right-of-way shall be 
conducted in accordance with current requirements of the town, as provided and specified in 
separate appropriate standards. 
(b) ?The town engineer will provide copies of pertinent standards to any party applying for a permit to 
install water lines or services. 
(c) ?The applicant is advised of the following special requirements: 
(1) ?If traffic flow will be disrupted due to work in town roads or streets, provide twenty-four-hour 
prior notice to: 
a. ?Town police department; 
b. ?Town fire chief; 
(2) ?Provide barricades, flashers, marking and adequate warning signs for safety of the public; 
(3) ?Provide uniformed flagmen when required by the department of public works or police 
department; 
(4) ?Backfill for all trenches under public roads and streets shall be sand or approved gravel, 
compacted in maximum lifts of six (6) inches; 
(5) ?Where pavement is damaged, cut or removed, it shall be replaced within two (2) weeks of 
completion of the work. Pavement replacement shall match that which exists or a minimum of 
two and one-half (2½) inches. If cold patch is used, it shall be removed and replaced with hot 
mix when weather permits; 
(6) ?Contractor is responsible for maintenance of work for one (1) year; 
(7) ?A bond for work on right-of-way may be required by the town manager; 
(8) ?No connection to the main will be made between November 1 and April 15, inclusive, except if 
during November the town engineer determines weather conditions are favorable for 
excavating, backfilling, and compacting, he/she may allow a connection with the following 
conditions: 1) the town engineer or other qualified town representative must be present during 
excavation, backfilling, and compacting; 2) the applicant shall use insulation board over the 
water service line and/or water main when ordered by the town engineer or other qualified town 
representative on site; 3) the applicant must restore trenches the next spring and if required by 
the town engineer excavate, backfill, and compact the trench; 4) no work shall be permitted 
during a snow or ice storm; 5) the application must comply with the engineer's orders for soil 
erosion, seeding, and mulching, including returning the next spring to reseed and mulch. 
(Ord. of 11-16-82, § D(3); Ord. of 11-22-94, § 4; Ord. of 12-21-10, § 3) 
Cross reference— Excavations, § 6-21 et seq. 


Sec. 8-27. - Enforcement. 
    Any person who neglects or refuses to comply with the civil ordinances listed under chapter 8 article 
2 division 1 shall be in violation of such civil ordinances. Enforcement shall be in accordance with the 
provisions of such ordinances and 24 V.S.A sections 1974(a) and 1977 et. seq. with a civil penalty of one 
hundred ten dollars ($110.00) per offense. 
    The waiver fee shall be set at thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for the first offense, sixty dollars ($60.00) for 
the second offense within a six-month period and eighty-five dollars ($85.00) for each subsequent offense 
within a six-month period. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 10-30-2001, § 2) 


Secs. 8-28—8-40. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 


Sec. 8-41. - Generally. 
    Prior to being granted permission to extend, connect or revise the use of the town public water 
system, it shall be necessary to apply for a permit in accordance with the following sections. Forms are 
available from the department of engineering or the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. of 11-16-82, § B; Ord. of 11-22-94, § 5) 


Sec. 8-42. - Minor application. 
(a) ?Generally. A permit application shall be classed as minor for a routine service connection to an 
existing town water main of adequate capacity located in the public right-of-way or town-owned 
easement. Such service connection request shall be for a single residential dwelling, on a parcel 
which has evidence of all necessary town and state subdivision permits. The town engineer will 
determine the adequacy of the existing main based on size, condition, pressure and reserve 
capacity. 
(b) ?Procedures. The procedures for a minor application for a service connection to a town water main 
shall be as follows: 
(1) ?Complete application form provided, including sketch map showing lot number (if applicable), 
size and dimension, street name, direction of north, location of existing water main, sewer lines, 
proposed service connection routes for water and sewer service, building location, size of 
service pipes; 
(2) ?File the application with the town zoning administrator who will: 
a. ?Check the application for completeness; 
b. ?Confirm that the proposed dwelling is on an approved parcel; 
c. ?Forward the application to the town engineer for review. 
(3) ?The zoning administrator and town engineer shall act on the application within fifteen (15) days 
of filing date. If approved, the installation may proceed immediately, subject to any conditions of 
the approval. If denied, the applicant may revise the application in order to conform with town 
standards and resubmit it; action will be taken within ten (10) days for resubmitted applications; 
or request review by the board of selectmen based on the original application; the date of such 
review will be scheduled by the chairman of the board of selectmen and the town manager 
when preparing selectmen agendas. 
(Ord. of 11-16-82, § B(1); Ord. of 11-22-94) 


Sec. 8-43. - Major application. 
(a) ?Generally. A permit application shall be classed as major for water main extensions, new 
connections to private lines or modifications in use of existing connections to the town water supply 
system. Effectively, all applications not defined as "minor" shall be filed as "major." 
(b) ?Procedures. The procedures for a major application for a service connection to a town water main 
shall be as follows: 
(1) ?Complete application form as required for "minor" application as required in section 8-42 and 
for "major" application; 
(2) ?Attach detailed construction plans and specifications to include the following minimum 
information: 
a. ?Site topographic plan, at scale 1" = 50' or less; 
b. ?Location of proposed waterline improvements; 
c. ?Size of proposed additions/revisions; 
d. ?Size and location of all valves and fittings; 
e. ?Size and location of existing water mains and sewers; 
f. ?Profiles, drawn to scale, of any new water mains. Service lines will generally not need a 
profile, unless required by the town engineer, as in case of difficult site conditions or 
numerous other utilities; 
g. ?Plans shall include: North, street name, names of adjacent property owners, proposed 
meter location; 
h. ?Additional data may be required by the town engineer, including: Line pressure at various 
times of day, hydrant flow rates (existing and proposed); 
i. ?Statement that installation will conform to town standards, as contained herein; 
(3) ?Plans for extension of the town public water system shall be prepared by a registered 
professional engineer. Service connection plans shall be prepared by a technically qualified 
person, familiar with waterworks and plumbing practices; 
(4) ?Review by the zoning administrator, town manager, and town engineer normally will be 
completed within fifteen (15) days of filing date. If approved, the town manager will schedule a 
review by the board of selectmen within thirty (30) days. If denied, the applicant may revise the 
application/plans in order to conform with town standards and resubmit. Action will be taken 
within ten (10) days for resubmitted applications or request review by the board of selectmen, 
based on the original application. The date will be scheduled by the chairman of the board of 
selectmen and the town manager. 
(Ord. of 11-16-82, § B(2); Ord. of 11-22-94, § 7) 


Sec. 8-44. - Notice of construction activity. 
    Any person desiring to begin construction of a water main or service connection shall: 
(1) ?Provide the town engineer with written notice forty-eight (48) hours prior to beginning any 
construction of water main or service connection installation and arrange a date or schedule for 
the town to make the connection. 
(2) ?Provide the town engineer with one (1) week's written notice prior to the need for the town to 
install the water meter and activate the service connection. 
(Ord. of 11-16-82, § B(3); Ord. of 11-22-94, § 8) 


Secs. 8-45—8-60. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - INSTALLATION SPECIFICATIONS 


Sec. 8-61. - Service connections. 
    Service connections shall conform to the following minimum requirements: 
(1) ?Minimum size. Three-fourths inch. 
(2) ?Pipe materials. 
a. ?Water main to curb stop. ¾"—1½" copper, type K, A.S.T.M., B-88-66A; 
b. ?Curb stop to building. ¾"—1½" copper, type K or polyethylene plastic, A.S.T.M., D-2239, 
160 psi min. rating; 
c. ?Ball valve shutoff to building. 1½"—3", copper, type K or PVC, schedule 40; 
d. ?Gate valve to building. 4", ductile iron, class 52, or PVC class 150 (AWWA spec. C-900); 6" 
and larger, ductile iron, class 52. 
(3) ?Minimum depth. Six (6) feet of cover over pipe. 
(4) ?Distance to adjacent property lines. Ten (10) feet. 
(5) ?Curb stops or shutoff valve. To be located one (1) foot on town side of right-of-way or 
easement, wherever feasible. It is preferable that curb stops not be placed in streets or 
sidewalks. 
(6) ?Plastic pipes. Shall be laid with a No. 4 copper wire laid in the trench connected to the curb 
stop and to the meter to provide electrical conductivity for tracing. 
(7) ?Pressure relief valve. All services shall include a pressure relief valve, suitably piped to drain 
with air gap, at the meter, set at twenty-five (25) psi above the normal high pressure in the main 
at the point of connection. Relief valves protect the building plumbing, fixtures, appliances and 
hot water tanks. 
(8) ?Pressure reducing valve. All services shall include an automatic pressure reducing valve, 
adjusted to regulate building pressure to sixty (60) psi (;pm; 10 psi). Size of reducing valves to 
be appropriate for size and flow requirements of building. 
(9) ?Miscellaneous service connection and water main fittings. Following are components normally 
required and specifications required by the town: 
Item 
Size 
Specification  
"Quality Water Products"  
Everett J. Prescott, Inc. 
Curb box 
Max. open length of 72" w/  
57" operating rod, 2-hole 
#45390 1" 2-h. service box  
cover BI 

cover 
#45420 5'—6' service box L/C 


#45490 ½" × 36" service box rod 
Valve box  
?adaptor 
1"—4", w/special lid 
#45302/45305 5½" × 1" fixed top ext. w/cover 


#45310 5½" × 2" fixed top ext. w/cover 


#45315 5½" × 3" fixed top ext. w/cover 


#45317 5½" × 4" fixed top ext. w/cover 
Valve box lids 
____________ 
____________ 
Valve box 
6' bury, 2-piece 
#45005 5½" cover "Water" 


#45070 26" top TF spun 


#45080 36" top TF spun 


#45088 60" top TF spun 


#45130 36" base flare 


#45135 48" base flare 


#45145 60" base flare 
Curb stop 
¾"—1" 
#47230 ¾" ball curb CPPJ 


#47880 1" ball curb CPPJ 
3-part union 
¾"—1" 
#47410 ¾" cplg CPPJ 


#48060 1" cplg CPPJ 
Corporation  
?stop 
¾"—1" 
#47160 ¾" CC×CPPJ  
#47780 1" CC×CPPJ 
 
(Ord. of 11-16-82, § C(1)) 


Sec. 8-62. - Water main extensions. 
    Where required, the applicant shall construct additions or extensions of the town water system, in 
accordance with the following: 
(1) ?Minimum size of water mains shall be six (6) inches, unless adequate proof is furnished which 
justifies the use of smaller pipe. The town intends to provide adequate fire flows to all service 
areas in accordance with the current requirements of the insurance services office. 
(2) ?In cases where the town desires to install a pipe size larger than the needs of the applicant, the 
board of selectmen may, following review, consider sharing the cost of the installation with the 
applicant. 
(3) ?The board of selectmen may require the applicant to have the proposed work reviewed by a 
registered engineer and the same engineer to furnish record drawings of the work. 
(4) ?The board of selectmen may require an escrow account of the proposed work to ensure its 
completion. 
(Ord. of 11-16-82, § C(2)) 


Secs. 8-63—8-80. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - SEWAGE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Selectmen to perform duties of sewer commissioners, § 11(a); town manager to 
have control and supervision over system of sewers and drainage, § 21(4). 
Cross reference— Health, Ch. 4. 
State Law reference— Authority to construct and maintain sewerage system, 24 V.S.A. § 3501 et seq.; 
authority to construct and maintain sewage disposal plant and system, 24 V.S.A. § 3601 et seq. 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 8-81. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be 
as follows: 
    BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the 
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty 
(20) degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which 
receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and 
conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of 
disposal. 
    Combined sewer shall mean a sewer receiving both runoff and sewage. 
    Garbage shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and 
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Industrial wastes shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trades or 
businesses as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Natural outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or 
ground water. 
    pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of 
solution. 
    Private sewer disposal system shall mean that system installed, maintained, and owned by a private 
individual or corporation. 
    Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of 
food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow 
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 
centimeters) in any dimension. 
    Public sewer shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is 
controlled by a public authority. 
    Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface water, 
and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, 
institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may 
be present. 
    Sewerage system shall mean all public sewer facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and 
disposing of sewage. 
    Sewage treatment plant shall mean the water pollution control plants. 
    Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Slug shall mean any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any 
given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes 
more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration of flows during normal operation. 
    Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer") shall mean a pipe or conduit which carries 
stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than 
unpolluted cooling water. 
    Superintendent shall mean the superintendent of sewage works or water pollution control of the 
town, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    Suspended solids shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, 
sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Watercourse shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or 
intermittently. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. I, §§ 1—23) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 8-82. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any manner on 
public or private property within the town or any area under the jurisdiction of the town, any human or 
animal excretement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b) ?It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the town or in any area under the 
jurisdiction of the town, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where treatment has been 
provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. II, §§ 1, 2) 
Cross reference— On-site wastewater disposal systems, § 4-66 et seq.; health, Part III, ch. 4, 
art. III. 


Sec. 8-83. - Unlawful to construct, maintain privy, privy vault, etc. 
    Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, 
septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. II, § 3) 
Cross reference— Alternative sewage disposal systems, § 4-71. 


Sec. 8-84. - Owners must connect to public sewer. 
    The owner of any dwelling, building, or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, 
or other purposes and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in 
the future be located a public sanitary sewer, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet 
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities with the proper public sewer in accordance with the 
provisions of this article, within sixty (60) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that the public 
sewer is within two hundred (200) feet of the property line. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. II, § 4) 


Sec. 8-85. - Impossibility or undue hardship grounds for waiver of requirement of sewer connection. 
    Any person alleging the inability to comply with section 8-84 on grounds that the person's property is 
so situated as to render connection to the town sewer a physical impossibility or an undue hardship may, 
within fifteen (15) days of official notice, petition the selectboard as the board of sewer commissioners. If 
the board's decision is in agreement with the petition, the board is hereby authorized to abate the 
penalties prescribed in section 8-89(b) for failure to comply with section 8-84. A decision in opposition to 
the petition shall bind such person to the provisions of section 8-84 and the compliance dates set by the 
official notice. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. II, § 5; Ord. of 10-30-2001, §§ 1, 2) 


Sec. 8-86. - Permit required for connection, use, alteration, etc., of sewer appurtenances. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or 
disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the town 
engineer. Any person proposing a new discharge into the system or a substantial change in the volume or 
character of pollutants that are being discharged into the system shall notify the town engineer at least 
forty-five (45) days prior to the proposed change or connection. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. IV, § 1; Ord. of 11-22-94) 
Cross reference— Permit application procedures for on-site wastewater disposal systems, § 4-
70. 


Sec. 8-87. - Damage to sewage system. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, 
deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of a public or private 
sewage system. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of 
unlawful mischief as set forth in 13 V.S.A. § 3701. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. VI, § 1) 


Sec. 8-88. - Authority of superintendent and authorized town employees. 
(a) ?The town engineer and other duly authorized employees of the town bearing proper credentials and 
identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, 
measurement, sampling, and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article. The town 
engineer or other duly authorized employee of the town shall have no authority to inquire into any 
processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond 
that point having direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or 
facilities for waste treatment. 
(b) ?While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) of this 
section the town engineer or duly authorized employees of the town shall observe all safety rules 
applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for 
injury or death to the town employees and the town shall indemnify the company against loss or 
damage to its property by town employees and against liability claims and demands for personal 
injury or property damage assessed against the company and growing out of the gauging and 
sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to 
maintain safe conditions as required in section 8-134. 
(c) ?The town engineer and other duly authorized employees of the town bearing proper credentials and 
identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the town holds a duly 
negotiated easement for the purposes of but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, 
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the public sewer system lying within the 
easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement shall be done in full accordance 
with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. VII, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 11-22-94, § 10) 


Sec. 8-89. - Penalties and violations. 
(a) ?Any person found to be violating any provisions of this article except section 8-87 shall be served by 
the town with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a fourteen-day time limit 
for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such 
notice, permanently cease all offenses. 
(b) ?Any person who neglects or refuses to comply with the civil ordinances listed under chapter 8 article 
3 division 1, shall be in violation of such civil ordinances. Enforcement shall be in accordance with 
the provisions of such ordinances and 24 V.S.A sections 1974(a) and 1977 et. seq. with a civil 
penalty of one hundred ten dollars ($110.00) per offense. 
    The waiver fee shall be set at thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for the first offense, sixty dollars ($60.00) for 
the second offense within a six-month period and eighty-five dollars ($85.00) for each subsequent offense 
within a six-month period. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 


Section 8-87 - is a criminal ordinance not subject to section 8-89(b) enforcement. 
    (c) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the town for any 
expense, loss, or damage occasioned the town by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. VIII, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 10-30-2001, §§ 1, 2) 


Secs. 8-90—8-105. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 


Sec. 8-106. - Building sewer permit required; classes; fee. 
    There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: One (1) for residential and commercial 
service, and one (1) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner 
or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the town. The permit application shall 
be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment 
of the town engineer. A permit and inspection fee of five dollars ($5.00) for a residential or commercial 
building sewer permit and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid 
to the town at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. IV, § 2; Ord. of 11-22-94, § 11) 


Sec. 8-107. - Owner to bear costs of installation and connection; to indemnify town for loss, damage. 
    All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be 
borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the town from any loss or damage that may directly or 
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. Also, responsibility of the maintenance 
of the public building's sewer from the building to the town main line shall be borne by the owner. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. IV, § 3) 


Sec. 8-108. - Building sewer must be provided for each building. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one 
(1) building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be 
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer 
from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one (1) building 
sewer. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. IV, § 4) 


Sec. 8-109. - Uses limited for old building sewers. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on 
examination and test by the town engineer, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. IV, § 5; Ord. of 11-22-94, § 12) 


Sec. 8-110. - Building sewer specifications. 
(a) ?The building sewer shall be cast-iron soil pipe, vitrified clay sewer pipe, asbestos-cement pipe or 
equal; there shall not be utilized or allowed bituminous fiber pipe or plastic pipe unless same are, 
prior to use, of a type approved by the state plumbing code. Joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any 
part of the building sewer that is located within ten (10) feet of a water service pipe shall be 
constructed of cast iron soil pipe with leaded joints. Cast-iron pipe with leaded joints may be required 
by the town engineer where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in 
filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast-iron soil pipe, except that nonmetallic 
material may be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed cradle as approved by the town 
engineer. 
(b) ?The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the town engineer, but in 
no event shall the diameter be less than four (4) inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall be not 
less than one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch per foot. 
(c) ?The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such 
branch is available at the suitable location. If the public sewer is six (6) inches in diameter or less, 
and no properly located "Y" branch is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to 
receive the building sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about forty-five (45) 
degrees. A forty-five (45) degree ell may be used to make such connection, with the spigot end cut 
so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the 
point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A 
smooth neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in 
concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection when approved by the town engineer. 
(d) ?Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the 
basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the 
public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means 
and discharged to the building sewer, or the building drain and the plumbing attached thereto shall 
be modified to accommodate gravity flow. 
(e) ?No sewer line of less than eight-inch diameter will be allowed to be laid within the town highway 
right-of-way except for the purpose of connecting to the municipal line. 
(f) ?Any sewer line that is to be taken over by the town must be at least an eight-inch line. The minimum 
grade for this line will have to be four (4) percent or better. 
(g) ?The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the 
building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the ASTM and the WPCF 
Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation 
from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the town engineer before 
installation. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. IV, §§ 6—11, 16; Ord. of 11-22-94, § 12) 


Sec. 8-111. - Connection of roof drains, other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to building 
sewer. 
    No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or 
other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is 
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. IV, § 12) 


Sec. 8-112. - Notification of inspection. 
    The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the town engineer when the building sewer is 
ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the 
supervision of the town engineer or his representative. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. IV, § 13; Ord. of 11-22-94, § 13) 


Sec. 8-112a. - Connections prohibited during winter. 
    No connection to the public sewer will be made between November 1 and April 15, inclusive, except 
if during November the town engineer determines weather conditions are favorable for excavating, 
backfilling and compacting, he/she may allow a connection with the following conditions: 1) the town 
engineer or other qualified town representative must be present during excavation, backfilling, and 
compacting; 2) the applicant shall use insulation board over the building sewer line and/or public sewer 
main when ordered by the town engineer or other qualified town representative on site; 3) the applicant 
must restore trenches the next spring and if required by the town engineer excavate, backfill, and 
compact the trench; 4) no work shall be permitted during a snow or ice storm; 5) the application must 
comply with the engineer's orders for soil erosion, seeding, and mulching, including returning the next 
spring to re-seed and mulch. 
(Ord. of 12-21-10, § 4) 


Sec. 8-113. - Excavations for building sewers. 
(a) ?All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless 
otherwise approved by the town engineer. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance 
with good practice, subject to approval by the town engineer. No backfill shall be placed until the 
work has been inspected. 
(b) ?All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights 
so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property 
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the town. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. IV, §§ 14, 15, Ord. of 11-22-94, § 13) 
Cross reference— Street excavations, § 6-21 et seq. 


Sec. 8-114. - Enforcement. 
    Any person who neglects or refuses to comply with the civil ordinances listed under chapter 8, article 
3, division 2, shall be in violation of such civil ordinances. Enforcement shall be in accordance with the 
provisions of such ordinances and 24 V.S.A sections 1974(a) and 1977 et. seq. with a civil penalty of one 
hundred ten dollars ($110.00) per offense. 
    The waiver fee shall be set at thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for the first offense, sixty dollars ($60.00) for 
the second offense within a six-month period and eighty-five dollars ($85.00) for each subsequent offense 
within a six-month period. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 10-30-2001, § 2) 


Secs. 8-115—8-125. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS AND NATURAL OUTLETS 


Sec. 8-126. - Prohibited discharges to sanitary sewer. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, 
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial waters to any 
sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. V, § 1) 


Sec. 8-127. - Designation of sewers for stormwater, other unpolluted drainage. 
    Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged only into approved storm sewers 
or approved natural outlets. Approval shall be given by the town engineer. Upon any party being notified 
that the party is in violation of this section, the party shall have thirty (30) days from the date of notification 
to remedy its drainage or the party will be in violation of this section. Any party may apply to the sewer 
commissioners for a permit to discharge into an unapproved storm sewer or natural outlet and such 
permit shall be granted subject to the terms; conditions and for such periods as the sewer commissioners 
in their sole discretion feel to be in the best interests of the town. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. V, § 2; Ord. of 11-22-94, § 14) 


Sec. 8-128. - Prohibited discharges to public sewers. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes 
to a public sewer: 
(1) ?Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; 
(2) ?Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient 
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage 
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or 
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant; 
(3) ?Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0, or having any other corrosive property 
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage 
works; 
(4) ?Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the 
flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but 
not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, 
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails 
and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. V, § 3) 


Sec. 8-129. - Discharge of certain wastes restricted. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, 
waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the town engineer that such wastes can harm either 
the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or 
can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to 
the acceptability of these wastes, the town engineer will give consideration to such factors as the 
quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of 
the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of 
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances 
prohibited are: 
(1) ?Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees 
Fahrenheit; 
(2) ?Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 
one hundred (100) mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at 
temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit; 
(3) ?Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any 
garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater 
shall be subject to the review and approval of the town engineer; 
(4) ?Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating 
solutions whether neutralized or not; 
(5) ?Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or 
toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that 
any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds 
the limits established by the town engineer for such materials; 
(6) ?Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in such 
concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the town engineer as necessary, 
after treatment of the composite sewage to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other 
public agencies or jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters; 
(7) ?Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits 
established by the town engineer in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(8) ?Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5; 
(9) ?Materials which exert or cause: 
a. ?Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to fullers earth, 
lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to sodium 
chloride and sodium sulfate); 
b. ?Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning 
solutions); 
c. ?Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to 
constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works, and which may cause the 
effluent limitations of the discharge permit to be exceeded; 
d. ?Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs." 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. V, § 4; Ord. of 11-22-94, § 15) 


Sec. 8-130. - Action of town engineer upon discharge of wastes having deleterious effect upon sewage 
works, etc. 
    If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which 
waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 8-129, and which in 
the judgment of the town engineer may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, 
equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, 
the town engineer may: 
(1) ?Reject the wastes; 
(2) ?Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3) ?Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; 
(4) ?Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by 
existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of section 8-161 et seq. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. V, § 5; Ord. of 11-22-94, § 15) 


Sec. 8-131. - Approval required for pretreatment, equalization plants and equipment. 
    If the town engineer permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and 
installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the town engineer, 
and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, laws and the municipal discharge 
permit. Further, such pretreatment installations must be consistent with the requirements of any state 
pretreatment permit issued to the industry. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. V, § 5; Ord. of 11-22-94, § 15) 


Sec. 8-132. - Interceptors. 
    Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the town engineer, they 
are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any 
flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required 
for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of the type and capacity approved by 
the town engineer; and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. V, § 6; Ord. of 11-22-94, § 15) 


Sec. 8-133. - Maintenance of preliminary treatment facilities. 
    Where approved preliminary treatment is provided for any waters or wastes, it shall be maintained 
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation, in the opinion of the town engineer, by the owner at 
his expense. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. V, § 7; Ord. of 11-22-94, § 15) 


Sec. 8-134. - Control manhole. 
    When required by the town engineer, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer 
carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters 
and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of 
the wastes. Such manholes, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be 
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the town engineer. The manhole shall be installed by 
the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. All 
industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform such monitoring of the discharges as the town 
engineer may reasonably require, including installation, use, and maintenance of monitoring equipment, 
keeping records and reporting the results of such monitoring to the town engineer. Such records shall be 
made available, upon request, by the town engineer, to other agencies having jurisdiction over 
discharging to the receiving waters. Where industrial pretreatment permits are issued by the state, 
monitoring records must also be submitted to the secretary in accordance with such permits. Records of 
any other monitoring will be supplied by the town engineer to the secretary on request. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. V, § 8; Ord. of 11-22-94, § 15) 


Sec. 8-135. - Measurements, tests and analyses. 
    All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of water and wastes to which reference 
is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for 
the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, and 
shall be determined at the central manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control 
manhole. If no special manhole has been required, the central manhole shall be considered to be the 
nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon 
the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. The particular 
analysis involved will determine whether a twenty-four hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is 
appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and 
suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty-four-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH's 
are determined from periodic grab samples. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. V, § 9) 


Sec. 8-136. - Termination of disposal authorization. 
    Any industry held in violation of the provisions of this article may have its disposal authorization 
terminated. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. V, § 10) 


Sec. 8-137. - Special agreements with industrial concerns. 
    No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or 
arrangement between the town and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual 
strength or character may be accepted by the town for treatment, subject to payment, therefore, by the 
industrial concern. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. V, § 11) 


Sec. 8-138. - Enforcement. 
    Any person who neglects or refuses to comply with the civil ordinances listed under chapter 8, article 
III, division 3, shall be in violation of such civil ordinances. Enforcement shall be in accordance with the 
provisions of such ordinances and 24 V.S.A sections 1974(a) and 1977 et. seq. with a civil penalty of one 
hundred ten dollars ($110.00) per offense. 
    The waiver fee shall be set at thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for the first offense, sixty dollars ($60.00) for 
the second offense within a six-month period and eighty-five dollars ($85) for each subsequent offense 
within a six-month period. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 10-30-2001, § 2) 


Secs. 8-139—8-150. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 4. - PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— On-site wastewater disposal systems, § 4-66 et seq. 


Sec. 8-151. - Regulated. 
    The construction, alteration or use of private sewage disposal systems in the town shall meet the 
requirements of the town's health ordinance relating to on-site wastewater disposal systems printed in 
chapter 4, article III of this Code. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. III, § 1) 


Secs. 8-152—8-160. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 5. - RATES AND CHARGES 


Sec. 8-161. - Board of sewer commissioners to establish user charges, sewer rate schedule, user 
classifications and high-strength waste surcharge system. 
(a) ?The board of sewer commissioners shall establish the user charge and high-strength waste 
surcharge system in accordance with appropriate federal and state rules and regulations pertaining 
to the costs associated to the use of sewers by all users. 
(b) ?The board of sewer commissioners shall have the authority to establish, amend, or adjust 
reasonable sewer rates and user classifications to defray the costs of operation, maintenance and 
replacement of the system, and to amortize debt and interest on the construction of the collection 
and treatment facilities, establish reserves for future construction, repair, or modification, and the 
administrative costs of the sewer fund. 
(c) ?The rate structure and established user classifications shall incorporate the requirements of 40 CFR 
35.2140 and 24 V.S.A. Chapters 97 and 101. 
(d) ?The board of sewer commissioners may, from time to time, establish, amend, or adjust a reasonable 
sewer rate schedule and user classifications in accordance with subsection (b) of this section. Such 
a schedule and classifications, adopted by a majority vote of the board of sewer commissioners, 
after notice and hearing, shall become part of this article and are listed in section 8-165. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. X, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 3-17-87) 


Sec. 8-162. - Surcharge system. 
(a) ?Users which discharge any toxic pollutants, high-strength wastes or other detrimental wastes to the 
sewer system shall be required to pay a surcharge directly related to the costs incurred by the town, 
to manage the abnormal wastes including management of both the liquid effluent and waste sludge 
portions. This section shall not be construed as to create a right to discharge. 
(b) ?The legislative body shall adopt a surcharge system for handling toxic or other abnormal wastes at 
such time as the need develops. The surcharge system shall use the parameters of a medium-
strength waste as a comparative base. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. X, § 4) 


Sec. 8-163. - Users to pay for increased cost caused by pollutants. 
    Each user which discharges pollutants that cause an increase in the cost of managing the system 
shall pay for such increased cost. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. X, § 5) 


Sec. 8-164. - Financial management system. 
    The town maintains a separate sewer billing and accounting system. Revenues and expenditures 
are separately maintained and are reported yearly in the published town report. A computerized listing of 
all users and their equivalent user units is maintained by the town. The budget is reviewed yearly and 
takes into account annual operation and maintenance costs, personnel, material, repairs, energy, and 
administration. 
(Ord. of 2-28-85, Art. X, § 6) 


Sec. 8-165. - Rate structure. 
(a) ?The rate structure shall be based on a system of equivalent user units in which a single-family 
residence shall receive an equivalent value of 1.0 and all other connected establishments shall 
receive multiple or fractional user values which represent their proportional contribution to the 
wastewater volume. Where metered water flow is used to establish a value of equivalent units, one 
(1) e.u. shall equal a daily average not to exceed three hundred (300) gallons of water. The 
equivalent user units to be used for all establishments shall be determined from the following 
schedule: 
User Classifications 
Units Assigned  
(Minimum) 
Single-family Dwellings 
1 unit 
Apartments/Dwelling Units 
1 unit per apartment or dwelling unit 
Nursing Homes 
1/9 of 1 unit for each employee full-time or 
equivalent employee plus 80 GPD per bed. 
Retail Stores, Workshops, Offices and 
Warehouses 
1/9 of 1 unit for each full-time or equivalent 
employee. 
Churches, Church Auditoriums, and Other Public 
or Quasi-public Meeting Rooms and Halls. 
1 unit each 
Service Station (without car wash facilities) 
1 unit 
Mobile Home 
1 unit 
Unspecified Users 
As determined by the result of a study by the town 
manager, using as a unit basis, 300 gallons per day of 
average flow. 
Industrial Users (other than Warehouses) 
As determined by the result of a study by the town 
manager, using as a unit basis, 300 gallons per day of 
average flow. 
Barbershops, Neighborhood Grocery Stores 
With Water Facilities. 
1 unit 
Businesses Utilizing Water-cooled Refrigeration 
Units Emptying Into the Sewer. 
1 unit for each 3 refrigeration units. 
Publicly owned Elderly Housing Complexes 
½ unit per bedroom 
 
(b) ?If any parcel connected to the sewer combines two (2) or more of the classifications listed above, 
the number of equivalent user units in each classification shall be determined and the total shall 
constitute the number of equivalent user units assigned to the parcel. In the event a user does not 
fall within any of the listed classifications, the legislative body reserves the right to establish a new 
classification and an equivalent user value to be used to determine the sewer charges. 
(c) ?Each user will be notified at least annually of the rate and the portion of the user charges which are 
attributable to wastewater treatment services. 
(d) ?Whenever any user's metered water flow exceeds its equivalent unit value of 300 gallons per day, 
the board of sewage disposal commissioners may adjust the user's equivalent unit value according 
to the following schedule: 
301—450 gpd: ½ unit additional. 
451—600 gpd: 1 unit additional. 
601—750 gpd: 1½ units additional. 
751—900 gpd: 2 units additional. 
½ unit additional for each 150 gpd or part thereof. 
The system of equivalent units shall be reviewed yearly by the board of sewage disposal commissioners 
and adjusted, if necessary, to account for changes in classification which may have occurred in the 
previous year. 
(e) ?Daily averages of metered water flow for the purposes of determining equivalent user units shall be 
established by either of the following means: 
(1) ?Annual daily average metered water flow: or 
(2) ?Daily average water flow during the two (2) lowest measured quarter-annual periods, when it 
can be satisfactorily demonstrated that such basis will provide a more accurate estimate of the 
annual average sewage discharge flows based on annual average water use. In such cases, it 
shall be the burden of the sewer user to demonstrate such accuracy; or 
(3) ?Annual average metered sewage flow measured by such sewage metering devices that the 
board of sewage disposal commissioners may approve and installed are [and] maintained at the 
sewer user's sole expense. 
(f) ?Installation of water meter. 
(1) ?Effective October 1, 1989, all building sewers serving industrial, commercial, or institutional 
establishments must have installed a water meter approved by the town engineer in order to 
provide an equitable assessment of sewage discharges. 
(2) ?The town engineer may require the installation of a water meter on any structure served by a 
building sewer when, in the opinion of the town engineer, such building sewer use exceeds or is 
likely to exceed an annual average of three hundred (300) gallons per day. 
(Ord. of 3-17-87; Ord. of 3-21-89, §§ 1—5; Ord. of 11-22-94, § 16; Ord. of 2-12-13, § 1) 


APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted August 5, 2008, as amended through April 1, 2009, provided for 
the repeal of App. A, Arts. I—IV and the enactment of new provisions to read as herein set out. See Code 
Comparative Table for amendatory history. 
Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. 
The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. 
Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, 
headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state 
statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. 
Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; guidelines for numbering buildings, § 5-1 et seq.; streets, 
sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 6; utilities, Ch. 8; municipal plan, App. B; subdivision regulations, 
App. C; any zoning map amendment saved from repeal, § 1-5(6); any zoning ordinance saved from 
repeal, § 1-5(15); ordinances concerning fees for zoning matters saved from repeal, § 1-5(18). 
State Law reference— Authority of municipalities to adopt zoning regulations, 24 V.S.A. § 4401(b)(1). 


ARTICLE 1. - AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE 


Sec. 1.1. - Authority. 
    In accordance with 24 V.S.A. 117 § 4401 and 4411 of the Vermont Planning and Development Act 
(hereinafter referred to as the "Act") there are hereby established zoning regulations for the Town of 
Barre, which are set forth in the text and map(s) that constitute these regulations. These regulations shall 
be known and cited as "The Town of Barre, Vermont, Zoning Bylaw (hereinafter referred to as the 
"Bylaw"). 


Sec. 1.2. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this bylaw is to: 
    Create a comprehensive framework for the Town of Barre's planning and zoning process; 
    Encourage appropriate and responsible development of all lands within the Town of Barre in a 
manner that promotes the best interests of all of its citizens; 
    Minimize and/or prevent problems associated with lacking or poor planning and zoning; 
    Encourage balance between competing and/or varied interests, being mindful of the Town's 
history and also of its future while ensuring the integrity of both; 
    Encourage balance between our natural and manmade environments, and to find the 
appropriate use of land to provide opportunities that will maximize residential, recreational, 
commercial, and industrial uses of land; 
    Provide a forum and mechanisms to protect the citizens of the Town of Barre and their property 
from adverse impacts created by inappropriate and ill-planned land usage and to allow and 
encourage citizen participation at every level of the process. 


Sec. 1.3. - Application. 
    The application of this bylaw is subject to the provisions of all subchapters of the Act as most 
recently amended by the Vermont State Legislature. 
    In accordance with 24 VSA § 4446, no land development (as defined in article 7, section 7.2) shall 
commence unless in accordance with the provisions established by this bylaw. Any use of land that is not 
permitted in this bylaw shall be considered prohibited. 


Sec. 1.4. - Interpretation. 
    In any case where this bylaw imposes a greater restriction upon the use of a structure or land than is 
required by statute, ordinance, rule, or regulation, the provisions of this bylaw shall control except in the 
case of 24 VSA § 4412 and 4413. This bylaw is not intended to repeal, annul, or in any way impair any 
previous zoning ordinance of the Town of Barre or permits previously adopted or issued. Any use of a 
structure or land considered lawful on or before the effective date of this bylaw shall continue to be a 
lawful use subject to the provisions of this bylaw. 


Sec. 1.5. - Amendments or repeal. 
    This bylaw may be amended or repealed in accordance with 24 V.S.A. § 4441 and 4442. 
(Summarized below.) 
(A) ?A person or body other than the planning commission wishing to amend or repeal any section 
of this bylaw (including zone change request) must submit in writing a request to the planning 
commission along with supporting documentation stating what their amendment request is. The 
request shall also include what effects the proposed change may have on future potential 
development in the area with regard to traffic, drainage, capacity of municipal services, and 
conformance with the town plan, how it is compatible with surrounding uses, and other factors 
that may be appropriate if requested by the planning commission. The planning commission 
may then decide whether to proceed with the request. If the planning commission decides to 
adopt the request, the amendment or repeal will then be as if they had written it. 
If the planning commission decides to adopt a request by an individual body, or at their own 
direction, a report must be written. Any such report shall satisfy the requirements of 24 V.S.A. § 
4441 concerning bylaw amendments and 24 V.S.A. § 4384(c) concerning plan amendments. 
(B) ?However, if a proposed amendment or repeal is supported by a petition of five (5) percent of 
Town of Barre voters, the planning commission shall correct technical deficiencies and shall, 
without otherwise changing the amendment or repeal, promptly pass the request onto the 
selectboard. 


Sec. 1.6. - Effective date. 
    This bylaw shall take effect on the date of its adoption by the Town of Barre, in accordance with 24 
V.S.A. § 4442. 


Sec. 1.7. - Severability. 
    If any provision or clause of this bylaw or application thereof to any person or circumstance is held 
invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the bylaw which can be given 
effect without the invalid provision or applications, and to this end the provisions of this bylaw are 
declared to be severable. 
Table 1.1 - Municipal Permits and Approval 
Permit/Approval 
Required for (General Description) 
Issued By 
Reference 
Land Development (Zoning Permits) 
Building permits 
(exterior only) 
Construction, reconstruction, conversion, 
structural alteration, relocation or 
enlargement of any building or structure. 
Zoning 
administrator 
Art. 7, Sec. 7.3 
Change of use 
permits 
A change in use of an existing structure or 
parts thereof or a change of land from one 
use to another. 
Zoning 
administrator. 
Art. 7, Sec. 7.4 
Sign permits 
A sign being erected, or altered in any way 
except as noted in this bylaw. 
Zoning 
administrator 
Art. 7, Sec. 7.5 
Home occupation 
permits 
A customary use of a minor portion of a 
residential dwelling in accordance with this 
bylaw. 
Zoning 
administrator 
Art. 7, Sec. 7.6 
Flood hazard approval 
Any development within the flood hazard 
area shall require site plan review and 
approval. 
Development 
review board 
Art. 5, Sec. 5.8 
Certificate of 
occupancy 
The commencement of use of a structure 
or land that has been permitted within a 
zoning permit. 
Zoning 
administrator 
Art. 7, Sec. 7.7 
Variances 
A request either on appeal or otherwise for 
a variance from a provision of this bylaw. 
Development 
review board 
Art. 7, Sec. 7.7 
Site plan approval 
Any land development except that which is 
exempt in Sec. 5.11 of this bylaw. 
Development 
review board 
Art. 5, Sec. 5.6 
Conditional use 
approval 
Approval by the development review 
board as stipulated herein where certain 
criteria are applied and appropriate 
conditions attached. 
Development 
review board 
Art. 5, Sec. 5.5 
Subdivision of Land 
Subdivision regulation 
The division of land into more than one 
parcel. 
Development 
review board 
Town of Barre 
Subdivision 
Regulations 
Other Municipal Permits 
Municipal wastewater 
and water permits 
Connections to the municipal sewer and 
water system. 
Town engineer 
Town Code 
On-site septic permits 
Any installation or repair of a septic 
system. 
Town engineer 
Town Code 
Working in the right-
of-way 
Any work within and including the 
excavation of land that occurs within a 
town road or right-of-way. 
Town engineer 
Town Code 
Driveway permit 
Any connection to a town highway or right-
of-way by a driveway or other means. 
Town engineer 
Town Code 
 
This list is not necessarily inclusive. The planning and zoning office should be consulted to discus 
individual needs. 


Sec. 1.8. - Referral to state and federal agencies. 
    Notice is hereby given that many new land use or changes to existing land use may require state or 
federal permits. A state or federal permit specialist should be consulted. 


ARTICLE 2. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS 


Sec. 2.1. - Zoning districts. 
    Low Density Residential 
    Medium Density Residential 
    High Density Residential 
    Very High-Density Residential 
    East Barre Commercial 
    Office Building Retail 
    Office Building Business 
    Highway Commercial 
    Industrial 
    Earth Resource Extraction 
    Conservation 


Sec. 2.2. - Purpose statements. 
Low Density Residential: 
This district is limited to nonintensive land uses. The purpose of this district is to prevent premature 
development of land, retain certain areas for nonintensive uses, prevent development where it would 
be a burden on the community, and retain areas for open space. Since the rural character of these 
lands depends on open space and natural areas, protection of these features should be considered 
when evaluating proposed conditional uses. Municipal water and sewer may or may not be available. 
Medium Density Residential: 
This principally residential district is designed to provide areas where moderate density residential 
development may occur in a rural-suburban setting. This district is similar to low density residential 
with the primary difference being that medium density residential is located around the more 
developed areas of town and conditional uses vary. Municipal water and sewer may or may not be 
available. 
High Density Residential: 
This district is designed to encourage continued predominantly residential development at relatively 
high densities in established neighborhoods close to village centers which have both public water 
and sewer services. 
Very High-Density Residential: 
This district is designated for land centrally located where town water and sewer facilities are 
available and where, due to reasons of utilities, location and existing intensive development, higher 
density is appropriate. The purpose of this district is to permit a continuation of residential and 
related uses where consistent with the objectives of the Barre Town Municipal Plan. 
East Barre Commercial: 
This district is intended to reflect East Barre's inherit uniqueness given its long-standing mixture of 
uses including residential and commercial. 
Office Building Retail: 
This district is intended to be comprised of businesses to which people/customers must go to for the 
business to operate. These districts are limited by their density and street traffic. They are also fully 
served by municipal utilities. 
Office Building Business: 
Organizations in this district would not necessarily be businesses that have customers coming and 
going on a regular basis. Transact business with customers out of the building. Emphasis would be 
on business-to-business transactions, warehouse shipping, nonprofit organizations, etc. 
Highway Commercial: 
This district allows for large, higher-intensity commercial developments such as automotive-oriented 
businesses that either by their volume or by the nature of their business require larger lots than those 
in the other commercial districts. Uses include those generally associated with the traveling public 
such as overnight accommodations, gas stations, grocery stores and restaurants, which inherently 
see more traffic from customers and deliveries than office buildings. 
Industrial: 
This district is designed to provide location for the establishment of industry, and to provide 
employment opportunities and a broadening of the tax base in Barre Town. Good roadway access 
and water and sewer services are major considerations. A variety of types of manufacturing and 
warehousing is permitted. Heavy industry requires a conditional use permit. 
Earth Resource Extraction: 
This district is specifically for the existing pits or quarries in Barre Town. This does not include all of 
the pit/quarry owners' land. After the pit/quarry has been closed the land may be rezoned for 
practical purposes following the required procedures for change of zone. While this district exists for 
existing uses such as the granite quarries and gravel pits, earth resource extraction is allowed in all 
districts except very high-density residential, high-density residential, and East Barre commercial 
[districts]. 
Conservation: 
This district consists of land that is rural in character with forest areas, wetlands, rivers and streams, 
and steep slopes as its primary use. Much of this land is undevelopable. Some developments by 
conditional use permit may be allowed. 


Sec. 2.3. - Zoning map and interpretations of zoning districts. 
(A) ?By rezoning from office building retail to industrial the northeast corner of the Wilson Industrial Park; 
said area includes part of parcel numbers 006/47.05, 006/47.18, and 006/47.04. 
(B) ?By rezoning from low density residential to highway commercial land on the north side of Bridge 
Street (S.A. #7) from the Stevens Branch west to the westerly line of parcel 030/20.0; said area 
includes the road frontage of parcel 031/017.01 to the same depth as the adjoining parcel 030/22.0; 
the entire area of parcels 030/22.0, 030/21.0, and 030/20.0. 
(C) ?Where due to scale, lack of detail, or illegibility of the zoning map there is uncertainty as to the 
location of any zoning district boundary, the zoning administrator shall determine its location. Any 
person may appeal the zoning administrator's decision in accordance with article 7, section 7.8 of 
this bylaw. 
(D) ?Where a zoning line between two districts divides a lot, the provisions of either district may be 
extended by thirty (30) feet. In extending the district line thirty (30) feet, the overall effect of the 
development should retain the character and usability under each district. Only the permitted or 
conditional uses in each district, and their accessory structures, may be used on that portion of the 
property covered by the district. Accessory uses such as parking may be permitted in either district. 
(E) ?Any area not presently zoned, through inadvertence or otherwise, shall be considered to be in the 
most restrictive district immediately adjoining it. 
(Ord. No. 4-28-15, § 1) 


Sec. 2.4. - Application of district standards. 
(A) ?The standards for each district shall apply uniformly to each class of use and/or structure, unless 
otherwise specified in these regulations. All uses and structures must comply with all prescribed 
standards for the district in which they are located as set forth in tables 2.1 and 2.2 and as defined in 
article 2, unless otherwise permitted under planned unit development (PUD) pursuant to article 6 of 
this bylaw. Nonconformities shall be regulated in accordance with section 3.7. 
(B) ?Prescribed uses for each district are classified as "permitted" and are subject to approval by the 
zoning administrator, to be reviewed in accordance with article 7, or "conditional" as allowed with the 
approval of the development review board to be reviewed in accordance with article 5, section 5.5. 
(C) ?Any uses not specifically permitted in any given zone may be considered and allowed if, after 
review by the planning commission in a public hearing, the planning commission determines that the 
use will not alter the characteristics of the area and will not cause an undue burden on the 
community. 
(D) ?Any list of prohibited uses in any section of these regulations shall not be deemed to be an 
exhaustive list. Such list is included for the purposes of clarity and emphasis, and to illustrate, by 
example, some of the uses that are deemed undesirable and incompatible and are thus prohibited. 


Table 2.1. - [Uses/zones] 
    The following table provides a list of the permitted uses (P), conditional uses (C), and uses not 
permitted (blank) for each zoning district. When determining a land use classification for a property, the 
most specific use below shall be interpreted as the use of that property. 
    In all cases, it is very important to review the definition (Article 8) of each use before determining the 
exact intent of the use and for possible exceptions. 
Use/Zone 
Cons. 
Ind.* 
Earth 
Rsrce. 
Office 
Bus. 
Office 
Retail 
Hwy 
Com. 
VHD 
Res. 
HD 
Res. 
MD 
Res. 
LD 
Res. 
EBC 
Residential 
Dwelling unit 











Dwelling, one-family 
P 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
Dwelling, two-family 
C 





C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
Dwelling, multi-family ** 





C 
C 
C 


C 
Accessory dwelling 
Allowed where other single-family residential use are allowed in 
accordance with article 4, sec. 4.2 
Bed and breakfast 
P 




P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
Group home 
Allowed where other single-family residential uses are allowed in 
accordance with article 3, sec. 3.3 (D) 
Boarding house/lodging 
house 





C 





Motel 





P 





Hotel 





P 




C 
Shelter 





C 
C 




Convalescent/nursing home 





C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
Elderly/disabled housing 
complex/PUD 





C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
Mobile home park 





C 
C 
C 
C 
C 

Home occupation 
P 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
Home based 
business/home industry 
P 





P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
Planned unit developments 
(PUD's) 






P 
P 
P 
P 













Places of Assembly 
Funeral home 




P 
P 




C 
Health club 




P 
P 




C 
Open-air market, 
temporary 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
Open-air market, long-term 




C 






Indoor market, temporary 
C 
C 
C 
C 
P 
P 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
Indoor market, long-term 




P 
P 




C 
Church or religious 
institution *** 




P 
P 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
Clubs, lodge and/or union 
hall 




P 
P 


C 
C 

Hospital *** 





C 





Health clinic 




P 
P 




C 
Community 
center/recreational facility 





C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
Senior center 






C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
Conference center, meeting 
hall 



P 
C 
P 





Public transportation 
facility 




C 
P 




C 
Cinematic theater 
(movieplex)/auditorium 




C 
P 
P 



C 
Sports and/or 
entertainment facility 

C 



C 





Opera house/performing 
arts facility 



C 
P 
P 




C 












Government Facilities *** 
Municipal parks 
C 




C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
Municipal offices 



P 
P 
P 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
Public works garage 

P 
P 
C 
C 
P 





Sewer treatment plant 

C 



C 





Water treatment plant 
C 
C 









Emergency service facilities 



P 
P 
P 




C 
Court house 



P 
C 
P 




C 
Federal, state, and county 
offices 



P 
C 
P 




C 
Cemetery 
C 




C 


C 
P 
C 
Corrections facility 





C 



C 

Transfer station 

P 



C 





Recycling center, 
temporary 

P 
P 
C 

P 





Recycling center, long term 

P 
P 








Postal office 



P 
P 
P 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
Postal/parcel processing 
facility 

P 



P 

















Recreational/Commercial *** 
Athletic fields 





P 


C 
C 
C 
Golf course 


C 








Recreational services, 
indoor 




P 
P 



C 
C 
Recreational services, 
outdoor 


C 

C 
P 




C 
Campground 





C 



C 

Campground, primitive 
C 








C 

Outdoor firearms/archery 
range 
C 

C 






C 

Indoor firearms/archery 
range 




P 
P 





Outdoor non-motorized 
recreation 
C 




C 



C 













Commercial/Professional 
Private park/recreational 
area 
Allowed accessory use to a permitted use but a conditional use if not open 
to the public 
Airport, private 









C 

Airport, commercial 











Photo studio 



P 
P 
P 




C 
Photo processing facility 




P 
P 




C 
Licensed professional 
service office bldg. 




P 
P 




C 
Laboratory 

C 



C 





Veterinary clinic/animal 
hospital 




P 
P 





Bank/credit union 



P 
P 
P 




C 
ATM facility 



P 
P 
P 




C 
ATM facility, accessory use 



P 
P 
P 




C 
Mixed use 



C 
C 
C 





Office building 

C 

P 
P 
P 




C 












Commercial/Retail 
Motor vehicle repair 
(major) garage 

C 



C 




C 
Motor vehicle repair 
(minor) garage 

P 


P 
P 




C 
Car wash 

P 


P 
P 




C 
Motor vehicle dealership 




P 
P 





Motor vehicle sales 




P 
P 




C 
Motor vehicle fuel station 




P 
P 




C 
motor vehicle service 
station 




P 
P 




C 
Convenience store/motor 
vehicle fuel station 




C 
P 




C 
Solid waste facility *** 

C 
C 








Kennel/animal shelter 





P 



C 

Retail store, large 




P 
P 





Retail store, small 




P 
P 




C 
General store 




P 
P 
P 



C 
Grocery store/supermarket 




P 
P 




C 
Restaurant, fast food 




P 
P 




C 
Restaurant 




P 
P 




C 
Redemption center 




P 
P 




C 
Adult establishment 





C 





Laundromat 



P 
P 
P 
P 
P 


P 
Laundry plant 

C 



C 





Dry cleaning plant 

C 



C 





Dry cleaning drop-off 



P 
P 
P 
P 
P 


P 
Garden center 




P 
P 




C 
Greenhouse, commercial 
C 
C 



P 



C 

Maple product dealer 











Farm stand commercial 





C 

















Industrial 
Light industry 

P 









Heavy industry 

C 









Granite quarrying 


C 








Storage, mini 





P 





Storage, large 

P 



P 





Junkyard 

C 









Fuel storage tank farm 

C 



C 





Public utility facility *** 

P 

C 
C 
P 

















Educational Institutes *** 
Adult day care centers 





P 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
College/university 









C 

College/university campus 









C 

Dormitory/residence hall 









C 

Daycare/pre-
school/nursery school 





P 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
Daycare/pre-
school/nursery school 
(home) 
P 




P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
Public or private school 





C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
Commercial school 





C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
Library/research center * 




P 
P 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
Art gallery * 




P 
P 




C 
Museums * 
C 
P 


P 
P 




C 
 
* Accessory gift shops and/or small retail stores used for the sale or display of products produced by the 
permitted use shall be allowed by right. 
** Higher minimum density requirements shall be required (see article 3, sec. 3.3(e)) 
*** Some of these uses may have limits on local control by state statute with regard to whether they are 
permitted. Where such uses do not face limitations, the chart shall apply. Uses limited by statute can still 
be regulated at the local level, with respect to location, height, building bulk, yards, courts, setback, 
density of buildings, off-street parking, loading facilities, traffic, noise, lighting, landscaping, and screening 
requirements, and only to the extent that the regulations do not have the effect of interfering with the 
intended functional use as described in 24 VSA § 4413. 
(Ord. of 4-28-15, § 2) 


Table 2.2. - Town of Barre Lot Zone Standards
 
Use  R-1 R-2 R-3 
Minimum lot size 2 acre 2 acre 0.3 acre
Road frontage 85' 200' 200'
Setback street 200' 110' 85' 
Setback side 50' 25' 15'
Setback rear 25' 12' 10' 
Building height 35' 35' 35'
Overall development 35% 35% 35%
Accessory setback 8' 8' 8'



Notes:

Conservation
Industri
al* 
Earth 
Resourc
e 
Extracti
on* 
Office 
Buildi
ng 
Busin
ess 
*/** 
Office 
Buildi
ng 
Retail  
*/** 
Highw
ay 
Comm
er-  
cial*/*
* 
Very 
High-
Densit
y 
Resid
en-  
tial** 
High-
Densit
y Resi-  
dential
** 
Mediu
m-
Densit
y 
Reside
n-  
tial** 
Low-
Densit
y Resi-  
dential
** 
East 
Barre 
Comm
er-  
cial** 
Lot size 
25 acre 
2 acre 
15 acre 
1/2 
acre 
1/2 
acre 
1 acre 
8500 
sq. ft. 
1/3 
acre 
2 acre 
2 acre 
1/3 
acre 
Road 
frontage 
500' 
200' 
100' 
100' 
100' 
200' 
85' 
110' 
200' 
200' 
85' 
Setback 
"street" 
**** 
50' 
50' 
50' 
25' 
25' 
50' 
15' 
25' 
50' 
50' 
15' 
Setback 
"side" **** 
25' 
25' 
50' 
25' 
15' 
25' 
10' 
12' 
25' 
25' 
10' 
Setback 
"rear" **** 
25' 
25' 
50' 
25' 
15' 
25' 
10' 
12' 
25' 
25' 
10' 
Building 
height 
35' 
50' 
50' 
40' 
40' 
40' 
35' 
35' 
35' 
35' 
35' 
Overall 
develop
ment *** 
15% 
75% 
75% 
75% 
75% 
75% 
35% 
35% 
35% 
35% 
35% 
Accessor
y's 
setback 
"side 
only" 
street 
same as 
above 
25' 
50' 
50' 
5' 
5' 
5' 
5' 
8' 
8' 
8' 
5' 
 
* Side and rear setback shall be increased in these zones when abutting directly up against a residential 
zone. Industrial setback shall be 100 feet, all the commercial zones 50 feet. The setback increase shall 
not apply to commercial or industrial land that abuts cemeteries. 
** Minimum lot size shall be altered accordingly, based on the chart below: 
Municipal sewer/on-site water 
1 acre 
On-site sewer/municipal water 
1.5 acre 
On-site sewer/on-site water 
2 acre 
 
*** Overall development includes building coverage, parking areas, leachfield areas, rights-of-way and 
easements. Driveway accessing the parcel shall not be counted. These standards shall only apply to 
parcels created after the adoption of this bylaw. Pre-existing parcels shall follow the previous provision 
which only applied to overall building coverage. Those percentages of coverage were as follows: 
Residential/conservation: Thirty-five (35) percent 
Commercial/industrial: Fifty (50) percent 
****Setback shall apply to all property lines and/or in situations where rights-of-ways or easements are 
used for vehicular ingress and egress, the appropriate street setback for that zone shall be used from the 
edge of said right-of-way or easement instead of the property line. This requirement shall not apply to pre-
existing parcels. 
(Ord. of 9-22-09, § 1; Ord. of 4-28-15, § 2) 


ARTICLE 3. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


Sec. 3.1. - Abandonment and demolition of structures. 
    Refer to Town of Barre Ordinance (yet to be drafted or adopted, recommended by the zoning rewrite 
committee and the planning commission to have a separate ordinance). 


Sec. 3.2. - Access requirements/required frontage on a public road. 
    No land development may be permitted on lots which do not have the minimum road frontage on a 
public (class 1, 2, 3) highway for the zone in which the subject parcel lies, or, with approval of the 
development review board (DRB) access to such road is provided by a permanent easement or right-of-
way at least twenty-five (25) feet in width. Such access shall be considered during subdivision review (a 
driveway permit issued by the town engineer is still required) of new lots, or for pre-existing, 
nonconforming uses provided all aspects of the Town Code are met and the access can demonstrate 
acceptable site distances and spacing. When access to back lands is provided by a 25-foot right-of-way, 
each lot shall have a separate right-of-way. Shared driveways are discouraged and will only be 
considered for up to two (2) lots. If a shared driveway is proposed, it must be constructed entirely on one 
(1) right-of-way or the other so as to not compromise the ability for another driveway to be constructed. 
(A) ?Exemptions: 
1. ?As approved by the DRB during subdivision review. 
2. ?Any legally subdivided lot created in accordance with the subdivision ordinance that may 
not have completely conformed to the regulation or lots that were in existence before 
subdivision was required. 
3. ?Upon request in writing, the town engineer may grant seasonal access for some limited 
activities as well as agricultural access. 
(B) ?Town road access: Requests for access to a municipal road or municipal right-of-way shall be 
applied for on a form provided by the town and shall be considered and acted upon by the town 
engineer in accordance with the Town of Barre Highway Ordinance, Sections 2 and 4 and Town 
of Barre Code, chapter 6. 
(C) ?Shared access: Shared access is allowed only in the event that each parcel sharing the 
access has its own permanent easement or right-of-way. The exception shall be that shared 
curb-cuts are allowed in order to encourage a reduction in the number of curb-cuts in close 
proximity. The shared curb-cut shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet wide and thirty (30) feet 
deep (as measured at the edge of the travel way) and shall be paved by the developer. Shared 
curb-cuts shall be limited to no more than three (3) driveways. The interest of each owner shall 
be protected by deed language and/or written agreement recorded in the land records providing 
for the joint maintenance of the shared portion. The developer shall enter into a shared curb-cut 
agreement with the planning commission during subdivision review agreeing to construct the 
shared curb-cut. 


Sec. 3.3. - Equal treatment of housing. 
(A) ?In accordance with 24 V.S.A. § 4412(1), no provision of this bylaw shall have the effect of excluding 
mobile homes, modular housing, or prefabricated housing from the Town of Barre, except upon the 
same terms and conditions as conventional housing is excluded. 
(B) ?Provisions for mobile home parks are specifically outlined in article 4, section 4.15 and are allowed 
as a conditional use in the following zones: 
Highway commercial, residential (very high, high, medium, and low) 
(C) ?Accessory dwellings are detailed in article 4, section 4.2, and are considered a permitted use in all 
zones that permit owner-occupied single-family residential use. 
(D) ?Group homes/residential care homes are considered a permitted use where single-family residential 
uses are allowed. A group home is defined in article 8. 
(E) ?Multifamily dwellings are allowed after issuance of a conditional use permit in the following zones. 
Very High-Density Residential and East Barre Commercial 
?Existing Structures 
?New Structures 
??Up to 8 units 
??Up to 8 units 
High-Density Residential 
?Existing Structures* 
New Structures 
??Up to 8 units 
??Up to 2 units 
Highway Commercial 
?Existing Structures** 
?New Structures 
??Unlimited number of units 
??8 units min./max unlimited 
 
* Existing structure shall not be altered. 
** Existing structures may be altered but it shall be required that the minimum number of units, 
based on the density of the lot, be created. 
a) ?In all cases, parking for multifamily dwellings must follow the parking requirement in this article, 
section 3.9. All parking must be on-site or secured by a permanent easement. 
b) ?Minimum size of all multifamily dwelling units shall be at least two hundred fifty (250) square 
feet in overall size. 
(F) ?General requirements for all types of residential housing (excluding primitive camps (see definition)) 
: All residential structures, at a minimum, must have a reinforced concrete slab at least four (4) 
inches thick and shall, at a minimum, encompass the entire underside of the structure. In addition, 
the underside of the dwelling shall not be exposed. All residential structures shall be secured to the 
slab either by way of accepted industries' standards or manufacturers' recommendation. 
Recreational vehicles regulated in article 4, section 4.4 or recreational vehicles in an approved 
campground shall be exempt from this requirement. 
All fuel tanks 1 shall meet setback requirements of the zone in which the property is located and as 
outlined in article 2, table 2.2 and shall [be] situated in a way that they are not visible from a road 
whether by way of screening or location. They shall also be on a concrete slab or solid base. Exempt 
from this requirement are fuel tanks that hold thirty-two (32) gallons or less and there shall be no 
more than one (1) tank. 
1 This requirement does not apply to tanks in existence prior to enactment of this bylaw. 


Sec. 3.4. - Fencing requirements. 
    Fences in general do not require permitting, however, [it] is imperative that the property owner and 
installer of the fencing, wall or hedge know exactly where the property boundaries are before installation. 


Sec. 3.5. - Height maximums. 
    No structure or anything attached to a structure shall be any higher from the ground (as defined 
below) than the maximum height for a structure as allowed in article 2, table 2.2 of this bylaw for the zone 
in which the structure lies. 
(A) ?Determining the height of a structure: The height of a structure shall be determined by 
measuring the vertical distance from the average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front 
of a building or structure, to the highest point of the roof or structure, except in the case of a 
gable roof, where the measurement shall be the average height between the eaves and the 
ridge. 
(B) ?Exemptions: The following are exempt from height regulations but not from setback 
requirements. The minimum setback shall increase by one (1) foot for every foot the structure is 
above the maximum height for the zone in which the structure is located. 
1. ?Antenna structures, wind turbines with blades less than twenty (20) feet in diameter, or 
rooftop solar collectors less than ten (10) feet high, any of which are mounted on a 
complying structure; 
2. ?Cranes and/or derricks associated with the removal of quarried granite; 
3. ?Public power transmission generation and distribution facilities and agricultural structures; 
4. ?Church steeples, flagpoles, water towers; 
5. ?Communication equipment approved through the town's telecommunication ordinance. 


Sec. 3.6. - Lot, yard and setback requirement. 
    As established in article 2, table 2.2 no structure of any kind or anything that requires a zoning permit 
shall be erected within the required setback area of the zone in which the project lies. This interpretation 
shall include overhangs or anything else that extends beyond a structure and/or that does not directly 
touch the ground. This shall also include fuel storage tanks or anything else that may be considered 
hazardous to the good and welfare of the public. 
(A) ?Exempt from this requirement. 
Signs that meet the requirement of article 7, section 7.5. 
Anything approved by the selectboard that doesn't fall under zoning review. 
(B) ?Measurement of setbacks. Setbacks shall be determined by measuring from the closest part of 
a structure or object to a particular point such as a property line or a publicly traveled town or 
state right-of-way or land. 
On a municipal, state, or federal right-of-way or municipality-owned land used for the purpose of 
public travel, or may possibly be used, the setback shall be measured from the edge of said 
right-of-way or land and not from the edge of the traveled portion of the road. 
For a property with frontage on more than one (1) road, the street setback shall be used as the 
setback requirement from both roads. 
For odd-shaped lots, the zoning administrator shall determine which setbacks apply on which 
sides of the structure. 


Sec. 3.7. - Nonconformities (uses, structures, and parcels). 
    The following shall apply to any structure, use, or parcel, or parts thereof, that does not conform to 
this bylaw but was in conformance with all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations prior to the 
enactment of this bylaw, including a structure, use, or parcel previously improperly authorized as a result 
of error by the zoning administrator. Exception: All development in the special flood hazard area must be 
reviewed under article 5, section 5.8. 
Nonconforming uses: 
(A) ?Shall not be changed to another nonconforming use without approval of the development 
review board (DRB) and then only to a use which, in the opinion of the DRB, is of the same or of 
a more restrictive nature. 
(B) ?Shall not be re-established if such use has been discontinued for a period of twelve (12) 
months or replaced by a conforming use. 
(C) ?May be re-established if damaged by the elements, catastrophe, or act of nature provided that 
such reconstruction will not enlarge or alter the use for a purpose different from the previous 
use unless to a conforming use and provided that such reconstruction is completed within two 
years from the date of such damage. 
(D) ?Shall not be enlarged or extended except with approval of the DRB upon findings, after public 
hearing that no greater detrimental effect to the community will result. 
(E) ?A use, located in a nonconforming structure or on a nonconforming lot, shall not, of itself, be 
considered a nonconforming use. 
Nonconforming structures: 
(F) ?May be repaired or rebuilt if damaged by the elements, catastrophe, or act of nature provided 
that such reconstruction will not enlarge or alter the footprint of the structure and provided that 
such reconstruction is completed within two (2) years from the date of such damage. 
(G) ?If declared unsafe or unsanitary by a proper authority may be restored to a safe and sanitary 
condition. 
(H) ?May be enlarged only to the extent that the degree of nonconformance is not increased. 
Increased nonconformance shall mean that the part of the structure that is proposed to be 
extended does not meet the required dimensional minimums of the zone in which the structure 
is located. 
Nonconforming parcels: 
(I) ?A nonconforming parcel such as a pre-existing small lot, or a lot that does not meet other 
dimensional minimums shall be allowed to be developed for the intent for which it was created 
so long as the use is permitted and it was in existence on the date of the enactment of this 
bylaw, and further, provided that all other required municipal permits are acquired. Any lot that 
is pre-existing and nonconforming that subsequently comes under common ownership with one 
(1) or more contiguous parcels shall not automatically be deemed merged. 
(Ord. of 3-9-10, § 1) 


Sec. 3.8. - Outdoor storage limitations. 
(A) ?Truck trailers. This limitation is for any trailer, customarily pulled by a commercial tractor unit, for the 
delivery of goods over the road. 
    Such trailers shall be limited to no more than two (2) at any one (1) time, shall only be allowed on a 
temporary basis, and at no time shall a trailer(s) remain on a parcel for more than six (6) months each 
twelve-month period (limitation is cumulative so no combination of trailer(s) shall exceed six (6) months in 
a twelve-month period). Commercial and industrial uses shall be exempt from these limitations provided 
site plan approval is obtained (with the length of time for use of a trailer determined) from the 
development review board. 
    Regardless of whether temporary or allowed by site plan approval, the following shall apply: 
1. ?The use of the trailer(s) shall be accessory to the principal use of the property. 
2. ?The trailer(s) shall meet setbacks for the zone in which it lies. 
3. ?The trailer(s) shall not encumber required parking spaces for the subject use. 
4. ?The trailer(s) shall sit on inflated tires. 
5. ?The exterior of the trailer(s) must be maintained to the degree that it does not become a blight 
including external rusting, holes, safety hazards, graffiti, and generally in good appearance. 
6. ?The trailer(s) shall not be used for advertising of the subject parcel or any other use on any 
other parcel. 
7. ?If hazardous materials are to be stored in the trailer(s), the container shall be labeled as such 
and secured in a manner consistent with the U.S. Department of Transportation guidelines and 
Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation regulations. 
8. ?Exempt from these requirements are farms that qualify as an agricultural use as defined by the 
State of Vermont, Agency of Agriculture, Food and Markets. 
(B) ?Storage of campers/recreational vehicles. No more than two (2) campers, boats, or other 
recreational vehicles over twenty (20) feet long may be parked in a residential zone unless screened 
from all adjacent properties and any public roadway. See article 4, section 4.4 for other regulations 
involving campers and recreational vehicles. 
(C) ?Private motor vehicle sales. Such storage is limited to the display of no more than one (1) motor 
vehicle at a time, whether registered and/or inspected or not, on any given lot. This restriction does 
not intend to include other personal items such as recreational equipment, snowmobiles, 
motorcycles, etc. 
(D) ?Converted vehicles used for storage. The conversion of buses, motor vehicles, recreational 
vehicles, including campers for storage use is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 10-3-17, § 1) 


Sec. 3.9. - Off-street parking, loading and service area requirements. 
    Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the minimum parking chart and 
specifications of this section whenever a new use is established or an existing use is enlarged. 
(A) ?Size. All parking spaces shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet wide and twenty (20) feet long. 
(B) ?Location. Whenever possible, off-street parking shall be on the same lot as the use itself. If 
parking is to be provided on a contiguous privately owned parcel or on a lot directly across the 
street, the applicant shall provide evidence that such an arrangement can be accommodated 
and is secured by way of a legal document that is recorded in the land records. However, at no 
time shall the minimum number of parking spaces for a given use be less than what is required. 
(C) ?Unavailable area. No area shall be considered available for parking spaces if it shall be used 
for any purpose that limits its availability for parking year-round such as snow storage, loading 
areas, fire lanes, display area for merchandise, etc. 
(D) ?General requirements. Areas designated as loading areas shall be kept free from parking 
spaces. 
Parking areas shall have an approved stormwater management plan so that abutting properties 
and public ways are not adversely affected. 
Where a specific use is not listed in the minimum parking chart, the DRB shall determine the 
minimum standard for the use. 
(E) ?Parking lot lighting. All parking lot lighting shall be shielded so that the light is directed towards 
the parking area and not the adjacent land or the road. 
All parking areas and passageways not associated with a dwelling shall provide adequate 
lighting during the hours of use so as to provide illumination for the safety of those using the 
parking lot and passageways. In addition, the DRB may require screening to mitigate impacts of 
vehicle headlights on abutting uses especially when adjacent to a residential use. The Town of 
Barre encourages the installation and use of energy efficient lighting. Requirements of this 
article, [section] 3.15 shall also apply. 
(F) ?Setback. All parking spaces shall be subject to side yard setback requirements for the zone in 
which the subject property lies. 
(G) ?Minimum parking chart. 
Dwellings, (all types): Two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit. 
Motel, hotel, bed and breakfast: One (1) space for each unit plus one (1) space for every five (5) 
rooms. 
Boarding house, lodging house: One (1) space for each resident plus two (2) additional spaces. 
Also, one (1) additional space for every five (5) rooms. 
Group home: One (1) space for every two (2) residents in addition to the required parking for 
the dwelling. 
Convalescent/nursing home: One (1) parking space for every two (2) beds. 
Elderly/disabled housing complex: One (1) parking space for every unit. 
Places of assembly: One (1) parking space for every one hundred seventy-five (175) square 
feet of floor space (not counting storage areas and other miscellaneous areas) or, if outdoors 
minimum parking shall be determined by the DRB based on the proposed use. 
Restaurants: One (1) parking space for every one hundred (100) square feet of overall building 
size. 
Commercial/retail use: One (1) parking space for every two hundred (200) square feet of overall 
building size. 
Industrial use: Minimum of two (2) spaces plus one and one-half (1.5) parking spaces per one 
thousand (1,000) square feet of overall building size. 
Professional/medical uses: Minimum of two (2) spaces plus one (1) parking space for every two 
hundred (200) square feet of overall building size. 
The required number of contiguous off-street parking spaces may be reduced by the development 
review board (DRB) during either conditional use or site plan review, providing the applicant can 
demonstrate that the request for reduction is due to: 
1. ?The unique use of property and it can be demonstrated that traffic volume will be 
substantially less than normally anticipated. 
2. ?The requirement being excessive or insufficient for the use at that time. 
3. ?The nature of the project for which vehicle usage is minimal such as elderly or disabled 
housing use. 
In all cases, the DRB must consider potential future uses of any structures being built so as to 
accommodate future uses and the parking that may be needed for those uses. In lieu of required 
parking space actually being created, the DRB may designate potential future parking spaces and 
exclude permanent development on them. 
(H) ?Loading requirements. Off-street loading areas shall be required for all new or altered uses 
and/or structures that commonly and/or regularly receive deliveries or pickups for the conduct of 
their business. Loading areas shall be located in such a way that any vehicle using the loading 
area shall not protrude into the traveled portion of the road or highway and/or disturb the 
internal circulation pattern of the use. In addition, no required parking space shall be 
encumbered by any vehicle unloading or loading. 
The DRB during conditional use or site plan review may exclude any of the requirements under 
(H) if the applicant can demonstrate that the requirement is excessive for the use, size, or 
locations of the building. 


Sec. 3.10. - Steep slopes. 
(A) ?All development involving the excavation, filling, or regrading of land (including the installation of 
driveways) having a slope of fifteen (15) percent or more shall be subject to review by the DRB 
under article 5 of this bylaw. Under this provision, the DRB may require for review and approval, the 
submission of erosion control and stormwater management plans prepared by a professional 
engineer which plans: 
1. ?Cover all phases of development, including site preparation, construction, and post-
construction; and 
2. ?Incorporates accepted or best management practices for erosion control and stormwater 
management as defined by the Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation; and 
3. ?Identify related long-term maintenance and management requirements. 


Sec. 3.11. - Surface waters and wetlands. 
(A) ?Streams and watercourses: No structure shall be placed, and no land shall be excavated, filled or 
graded in any zoning district within a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet from the high-water mark of 
all: 
1. ?Ponds and streams. 
2. ?Delineated boundary or buffer zone of a Class 1 or Class 2 wetland, as defined and regulated 
under the Vermont Wetlands Rules, and which is shown on the most recent Vermont Significant 
Wetlands Inventory Map for the Town of Barre. 
(B) ?The DRB may accept a buffer management plan in cases where setback cannot be met for practical 
development of a project. Said plan shall describe the long-term management of the land within the 
required setback areas with the goal of protecting surface water quality, fish and wildlife habitat, and 
stormwater management systems. 
(C) ?Prior to granting such approval, the DRB shall find that the proposed construction, earth excavation, 
filling or grading, will not contribute to any impeded drainage, flood hazard, erosion silting, or other 
adverse effect on natural conditions, on fish or wildlife habitat, or interfere with the present or 
planned stormwater drainage system of the town. 
(D) ?All projects that contemplate development within said required setback shall require site plan review 
in accordance with article 5 of this bylaw. The DRB may approve modifications to the setback 
standards set forth above after a determination that the proposed modifications meet the following 
criteria: 
1. ?That reasonable efforts will be undertaken to protect water quality, such as, but not limited to, 
the planting of shade trees adjacent to streambanks, the establishment of vegetated buffer 
areas along streambanks, and/or stormwater management provisions to collect and disperse 
stormwater away from the stream or river. 
(E) ?Required setback areas are to be maintained in undisturbed state unless otherwise permitted by the 
DRB as part of an approved buffer management plan. The following structures or uses may be 
allowed, subject to approval by the DRB, within setback areas required under this section: 
1. ?Roads, driveways, and utility crossings; 
2. ?Bank stabilization and restoration projects, in accordance with applicable state and federal 
regulations; 
3. ?Stormwater management and flood control facilities, in accordance with applicable state and 
federal regulations; 
4. ?Bicycle and pedestrian paths; and 
5. ?Anything intending to specifically provide access to the surface water and wetlands. 


Sec. 3.12. - Water supply and wastewater disposal. 
    Regulations regarding water supply and wastewater disposal can be found in the Town Code in the 
following section but not necessarily limited to: 
Chapter 8, Utilities 
Chapter 4, Health 
    All land development proposed, authorized and controlled by this bylaw, shall follow the above-
referenced sections [chapters] of Town Code and any other applicable town or state law and regulation. 
Failure to do so will result in a violation of not only Town Code but this bylaw as well. 
(Ord. of 9-22-09, § 2) 


Sec. 3.13. - Filling of land (not municipal solid waste landfills). 
    In any zoning district, dumping of refuse and waste material over two hundred (200) cubic yards in 
volume (and less than eight hundred (800) cubic yards) to be used for the filling of land with material from 
a location other than on the same parcel, or the relocation of such material from one location to another 
on the same parcel, is prohibited unless approved by the town engineer. 
    Fill exceeding eight hundred (800) cubic yards requires site plan review and approval by the 
development review board under site plan review criteria and taking into consideration the following: 
(1) ?The contour of the land before and after the proposed fill is added and what the final grade will 
be in relation to abutting land. 
(2) ?Impact to existing drainage and any proposed changes thereto. 
(3) ?The proposed amount of fill to be brought in. 
(4) ?The amount of traffic as it relates to the hauling of the fill as well as consideration as to what 
effect the weight of the vehicles hauling the fill may have on the roadways. Weight limits may be 
appropriate. 
(5) ?Hours of proposed operations including the time of day and what days of the week. The DRB 
may limit both depending on location and how surrounding uses may be affected. 
In any case and regardless of the amount of fill: 
(1) ?No existing drainageways or swales that are an integral part of a drainage system, year round 
or seasonal, shall be filled in any way. 
(2) ?When filling or grading on a parcel, unless it is below grade of a town highway, provisions for a 
ditch or swale that allows runoff from both the highway and the parcel shall be made. Such a 
ditch or swale shall be sufficient to accomplish the goal of preventing water from remaining on 
or entering onto the highway. Said swale shall be constructed in accordance with industry 
standards and so that it will not erode. 
(3) ?The filling of land shall not have a negative impact on the rights of others when those rights are 
secured by easements or rights-of-way on the land subject to the filling. Filling in an area 
subject to an easement or right-of-way shall require site plan review and approval by the 
development review board under site plan review criteria. The intent of this requirement is to 
ensure that the rights of others to use the easement or right-of-way for what was intended is not 
altered which shall include but is not limited to the use as ingress and egress and access to 
underground uses such as utilities. 
(4) ?In all cases the filling of land shall have the effect of zero increase in runoff on abutting 
properties and shall not cause significant alteration in contours as it relates to abutting 
properties. 
(5) ?If any of the preceding restrictions cannot be adhered to, then site plan review and approval by 
the development review board is required. 
    The following materials may be used for fill: Loam, soil, rock, stone, gravel, sand, cinders, and other 
solid materials including concrete, whether reinforced or not may be used as fill. Wood or anything 
considered hazardous to the environment, including tires, may not be used as fill. 
    Temporary storage of fill is allowed for noncommercial purposes for distribution on the lot in 
accordance with above but shall not be stored within the setback without properly installed and 
maintained erosion control measures, must be used on site, shall not be stored for more than one (1) 
calendar year, and shall not be stored within fifty (50) feet of a waterway that is an integral part of a 
drainage system or wetland unless approved by the development review board. 
    Regardless of the purpose of the fill and what the site review requirements are, all fill that involves 
the potential for movement from one place to another if not properly secured shall have appropriate 
erosion control measures taken to ensure that sedimentation problems for surface water do not exist. 
Additionally, appropriate actions shall be taken to control dust that may impact air quality in the area. 


Sec. 3.14. - Agricultural uses. 
    The use of land for agricultural purposes shall be allowed by right, no permit necessary, in all zones 
as long as accepted agricultural practices are being followed in accordance with the State of Vermont, 
Department of Agriculture, Accepted Agriculture Practice Regulations. Agricultural uses, where animals 
are involved, are subject to provisions within Barre Town's animal control nuisances ordinance. 
    Farm structures. For a structure to be considered a "farm structure", thus exempt from the permitting 
process (but not exempt from setback requirements), said structure must meet the definition of a farm 
structure under the accepted agricultural practices definition. Said exception does not exempt a person(s) 
from notifying the zoning office, on a form supplied by the zoning office, that a farm structure is being 
erected. 


Sec. 3.15. - Outdoor lighting. 
    All lighting, whether for commercial, industrial or private use, for the purpose of providing security or 
otherwise, shall be shielded or pointed in a way to direct the lighting downward and not directly towards 
abutting properties and/or traveled ways. 


ARTICLE 4. - SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS 


Sec. 4.1. - Applicability. 
    This section [article] of the bylaw is enacted to establish bylaws for specific uses that are allowed or 
not allowed within the limits of the Town of Barre. These uses must meet the requirements and standards 
outlined in this section [article] of the bylaw for consideration as permitted uses within their respective 
zones after approval by the development review board (DRB). This section is enacted in accordance with 
24 V.S.A. 117 § 4411(a)(1), which allows the municipality to create and enforce bylaws that permit, 
prohibit, restrict, regulate, and determine land development, including the specific uses of land. 


Sec. 4.2. - Accessory dwelling. 
    Accessory dwellings are allowed in accordance with 24 VSA 117 § 4412 (1) (E) and (F) and further 
defined in Article 8 of this bylaw.). If the primary dwelling is on municipal sewer an additional sewer unit 
must be obtained for the accessory dwelling, water will be based on usage. If the primary dwelling is 
using an on-site septic system, certification from a qualified/certified engineer that the system is capable 
of handling the additional flow will be necessary. An upgrade to the system may be required. The onsite 
water supply shall also be adequate to serve both dwellings. 
    Accessory dwellings require zoning review by submission of a change of use permit. 
    Accessory dwellings are allowed in any zone where single-family dwellings are allowed such as 
conservation, very high density, high density, medium density, low density, and East Barre commercial. 
(Ord. of 10-3-17, § 2) 


Sec. 4.3. - Adaptive reuse of agricultural structures. 
    For the purposes of this bylaw, this section refers to the adaptation of existing agricultural structures 
for use as commercial storage in zones where such use may not otherwise be allowed. 
    All proposed rehabilitation and adaptive reuse of agricultural structures is subject to site plan review 
and approval by the DRB in accordance with article 5, section 5.6 of this bylaw. 
    The zoning administrator shall determine whether the application falls under the classification of 
minor or major development as outlined in article 5, subsection 5.6(A). 


Sec. 4.4. - Campers/recreational vehicles. 
    For the purposes of this bylaw, campers and recreational vehicles (RVs) are hereby defined as 
temporary dwellings subject to the permitting provisions of this section of the bylaw. Such temporary 
dwellings are those not generally located on a lot year-round as a primary or secondary residence and 
which could reasonably be towed or driven off the lot. The definition of a temporary dwelling does not 
include the storage of such vehicles on a property for personal or commercial use as storage units which 
is defined in article 3, section 3.8 of this bylaw. 
    Campers and RVs are allowed as a temporary residence with permission of the landowner on all 
residential use properties for up to fourteen (14) days without a conditional use permit. 
    Any residency lasting longer than the fourteen-day period requires a conditional use permit as 
approved by the DRB. A three-day grace period will be allowed, the applicant must initiate the permitting 
process on or before the fourteenth day in order to comply with this provision, must file their application in 
the zoning office and pay all applicable fees. The applicant is also required to attend the DRB hearing 
where the permit will be considered. Conditional use permit and review provisions are located in article 5, 
section 5.5 of this bylaw. Permits are valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance. 
    Residency is allowed from the expiration of the fourteen-day period until such DRB hearing only if 
the permit process has been initiated in the time prescribed above. If the application is denied, the 
camper or RV must be removed within five (5) days from the lot. 
    If no approved on-site disposal method is available, a condition of the conditional use permit, if 
granted by the DRB, shall be that the owners/occupants of a camper or recreational vehicle must dispose 
of their wastewater at least once a week, more often if necessary, at an approved wastewater disposal 
facility (such as a municipal treatment plant or a commercial campground with such capabilities). The 
applicant must comply with the provisions of this paragraph while waiting for the DRB hearing. 


Sec. 4.5. - Campground. 
    A campground is fully defined in article 8 of this bylaw as a commercial use of land for the temporary 
accommodation of campers, tents, cabins and/or recreational vehicles used for sleeping and cooking. A 
campground is a permitted use in all zones except industrial and earth resource extraction zones. 
    Land development for the proposed purpose of constructing a new campground or expanding an 
existing one shall be subject to site plan review and approval as defined in article 5, section 5.6 of this 
bylaw. The zoning administrator shall determine whether the application falls under the classification of a 
minor or major development in accordance with article 5, subsection 5.6(A) of this bylaw. 
    A permitted campground must provide an adequate and safe water supply, as well as adequate 
access to wastewater or other sanitary facilities (i.e., composting toilets, septic systems, municipal 
system, etc). Owners/operators of said campground shall provide waste disposal and recycling services. 
    Each camping space shall be individually defined and have its own access except in campgrounds 
or areas of campgrounds which are for tents only and used for low-impact (leave no trace) camping. No 
camping space shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to either a public street/road right-of-way or property 
line. 


Sec. 4.6. - Contractor's yard. 
    A contractor's yard is defined as the yard of any contractor where equipment and materials are 
stored or where a contractor performs shop or assembly work. It does not include any other yard or 
establishment otherwise defined or classified in this bylaw nor does it include the storage of materials at 
the site of an allowed home-based industry as defined in article 4, section 4.12 of this bylaw. 
    A contractor is hereby [defined] as any person, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, or 
corporation engaged in the business of accepting orders or contracts, either as a contractor or 
subcontractor, for construction of residential dwellings, commercial or industrial structures and/or 
infrastructure including, but not limited to, other structures, roads, driveways, water and sewer service. 
    A contractor's yard is an area of any size needed for the storage of equipment or materials essential 
to the operation of a contractor. Any proposed changes to an existing contractor's yard, or the creation of 
a new contractor's yard, is subject to site plan review and approval by the DRB as outlined in article [5], 
section 5.6 of this bylaw. Pursuant to the site plan review process, the DRB may attach any conditions in 
deems necessary to the approval of a permit, such as adequate screening or fencing. 
    A contractor's yard is a permitted use in the industrial, highway commercial, office building retail, and 
earth resource extraction zones, and a conditional use in East Barre commercial. 


Sec. 4.7. - Day care facility. 
    Day care facilities are fully defined and separated in article 8 of this bylaw into two (2) categories: 
(Commercial) a day care facility outside of/separate from the primary residence of the caregiver(s), and 
(Home) a day care facility operated from the primary residence of the caregiver(s). 
    In accordance with 24 V.S.A. 117 § 4412(5), a state-licensed or registered day care facility serving 
six (6) or fewer children shall be considered as a permitted single-family residential use of property and is 
thereby exempt from site plan review. All other state-licensed or registered facilities serving more than six 
(6) children, whether commercial or home, shall be subject to site plan review and approval as outlined in 
article 5, subsection 5.6(5) of this bylaw. 
    Home day care facilities are permitted uses in all zones, with the following exceptions: Industrial, 
earth resource, office/business, and office/retail unless the residential use is considered pre-existing. 
Home and commercial day care facilities are permitted uses in the highway commercial zone. 
Commercial day care facilities are conditional uses in the following zones: very high-density residential, 
high-density residential, medium-density residential, low-density residential, East Barre commercial. 


Sec. 4.8. - Elderly/disabled housing complex. 
    A complex for the elderly or disabled is fully defined in article 8 of this bylaw as a multiple-unit 
housing complex exclusively occupied by elderly residents and/or those with disabilities. 
    The principal resident of any individual dwelling unit within an elderly housing complex must be at 
least sixty (60) years of age. No more than two (2) individuals under the age of sixty (60) may live with the 
principal resident in a dwelling unit within an elderly housing complex. 
    For the purposes of this bylaw, an individual will be considered as disabled should he or she meet 
the definition of disabled as established in 9 V.S.A. 139 § 4501. 
    All housing complexes other than those given special consideration in state statute shall each be 
considered a planned unit development (PUD) and subject [to] review and approval under article 6 as well 
as site plan review and approval as outlined in article 5 of this bylaw. 
    Proposed land development shall be considered as a complex if it shall contain three (3) or more 
individual dwelling units and serve only a designated segment of the Barre Town population, such as the 
elderly or disabled. 
    All elderly and/or disabled housing complexes must also fulfill the parking requirements established 
in article 3, subsection 3.9(G) of this bylaw unless otherwise determined by the DRB. 
    Elderly/disabled housing complexes are allowed as conditional uses in the following zones: highway 
commercial, high-density residential, medium-density residential and low-density residential. 


Sec. 4.9. - Extraction and quarrying. 
    The definition of "extraction and quarrying" includes, but is not limited to, granite quarrying, sand, 
and gravel pit operations. 
    Any proposed land development for the removal, refinement and/or processing of topsoil, sand, 
gravel, stone, or other aggregate resources or minerals, including the construction or expansion of 
accessory buildings and structures and that disturbs at least one-half (½) acre of land is subject to review 
and approval based on the criteria established in article 5, section 5.6 of this bylaw and the conditions 
and procedures outlined in this section of the bylaw. 
    An application for proposed land development that disturbs at least one-half (½) acre of land for the 
purposes of extracting earthen materials shall be considered an application for major site plan review. 
    In addition to the criteria in article 5, section 5.6 the DRB may require the applicant to submit 
additional information about the proposed land development, such as: 
The estimated depth of the proposed excavation; 
The distance from the outer edge of the excavated area to any and all adjacent properties and roads; 
The effect anticipated by any noise, dust, and vibration; 
A plan for addressing issues related to erosion and runoff; 
The effect anticipated on traffic in the area(s) leading to and from the site of the proposed land 
development; 
A plan addressing reclamation and rehabilitation of the quarried/excavated areas, or a plan outlining 
fencing, signage or other security measures where reclamation and rehabilitation are not options; 
and 
Other criteria not covered in this section or in the site plan review criteria listed in article 5, section 
5.6 of this bylaw and which is deemed necessary for consideration by the DRB in their review of a 
specific land development proposal. 
    In addition to the review criteria listed above, the DRB may also establish the following conditions for 
permit approval: 
Hours and days of the week in which the operation will be permitted; 
Routes of transportation taken by trucks or other heavy equipment in order to transport materials and 
machinery to and from the site; 
Safety measures considered necessary and appropriate to secure the site when it is not in operation 
and/or not staffed; 
The length of time for which the use is allowed; and 
Provisions for reclamation of the site when closed. 
    The proposed use of land for extraction of earth resources is allowed in all zones. Granite quarrying 
is only allowed in the earth resource extraction zone as a conditional use. 


Sec. 4.10. - Fraternal or charitable organizations. 
    Any land development, when proposed for use by a club, lodge, or union hall as fully defined in 
article 8 of this bylaw, or for use by a charitable organization, shall require site plan review and approval 
from the DRB in accordance with article 5, section 5.6 of this bylaw. 
    Examples of land development include, but are not limited to, the construction of or addition to a 
building for gathering the organization's members and/or providing office space for employees of said 
organization. 
    Clubs, lodges, and union halls and charitable organizations are permitted uses in the office/retail and 
highway commercial zones and as a conditional use in low-density and medium-density residential zones. 


Sec. 4.11. - Home occupations. 
    A home occupation is fully defined in article 8 of this bylaw as an occupation carried on by the full-
time resident(s) of the premises, and is permitted in all zones that allow residential use or where the 
residential use is pre-existing nonconforming. Home occupations require a home occupation permit in 
accordance with article 7, section 7.6 of this bylaw and such occupations are protected by 24 V.S.A. 117 
§ 4412(4) if the occupation is customary in residential areas and does not have an undue adverse effect 
upon the character of the neighborhood in which it is located. Permits must meet the following criteria: 
The principal operator of the business or industry shall be a full-time resident of the dwelling; 
No more than two (2) people who are not full-time residents of the dwelling shall be employed by the 
business and work from or at the location of the dwelling; 
All proposed signage must be approved by the DRB in accordance with section 7.5 of this bylaw. 


Sec. 4.12. - Home based business/home industry. 
    This section is intended for business and industry as fully defined in article 8 in which the occupation 
is customarily performed off-premises. Such uses may have employees but none of them shall work at 
the home other than those who reside there on a full-time basis. 
    If equipment, materials, or employee vehicles are stored outside, site plan approval [is] required. 
Further, any outside storage of material, vehicles and equipment associated with a home-based business 
or home industry shall be screened from all roads and/or abutting properties. Screening shall be solid, 
either vegetated or otherwise, and at least six (6) feet in height so as to accomplish the intended goal of 
restricting views from at-grade abutting properties. The type of screening shall be determined by the DRB 
as part of site plan review/approval. 
    Excepted from this requirement of screening shall be personal vehicles driven on a regular basis by 
the resident and on which advertising may be displayed as well as personal equipment not associated 
with the business. Home occupations or outside play equipment associated with an allowed or permitted 
use are not included in this provision of screening. 
    Business or occupations customarily intended to be included within this definition include, but are not 
limited to: 
Plumbing, heating, air-conditioning work; 
Painting contractors; 
Electricians; 
Masonry and stonework work; 
Carpentry work; 
Roofing, siding, sheet metal work; 
Glasswork. 


Sec. 4.13. - Planned industrial park. 
    The purpose of a planned industrial park is to encourage flexibility of design and development of land 
in such a manner as to promote the most appropriate use of the land and to facilitate a unique, dense, 
industrially developed area with adequate protection of abutting properties. 
    A planned industrial park is subject to approval of the DRB following site plan review as outlined in 
article 5, section 5.6 of this bylaw. The DRB may subject any proposed new industrial park or expansion 
of an existing industrial park to all conditions deemed necessary and prudent. Planned industrial parks 
are not specifically intended to be planned unit developments. However, they could be if desired but 
would then also be subject to article 6 provisions in addition to those stated here. 
    There shall be permitted within such a designated industrial park only such uses as are permitted in 
an industrial zone. 
(A) ?General requirements of a planned industrial park. 
1. ?Lot areas. Any tract of land to be considered for an industrial park shall be a minimum of 
twenty-five (25) acres and must be located within an industrial zone. All individual lots 
inside the park shall be a minimum of forty thousand (40,000) square feet with a minimum 
of two hundred (200) feet of frontage on a town highway within the park. 
2. ?Water and sewer. Any tract of land to be considered for an industrial park shall be served 
by municipal water and sewer. 
3. ?Setback minimums. The setback minimums are as follows: 
a. ?Buildings: One hundred (100) feet from residential zone lines, fifty (50) feet from right-
of-way line on a principal street separating the industrial park from another zone, 
twenty-five (25) feet from street right-of-way line on streets within the industrial park, 
twenty (20) feet from side and rear lot lines within the park. 
b. ?Parking: One hundred (100) feet from residential zone lines, twenty-five (25) feet from 
street right-of-way line, and ten (10) feet from side and rear lot lines within the park. 
4. ?Building height. The maximum allowed building height is forty (40) feet. 
5. ?Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be no more than fifty (50) percent of the 
entire lot. Lot coverage shall include parking and access areas. 
6. ?Parking requirements. The requirements for parking areas are as follows: 
a. ?Each space shall be at least ten (10) feet × twenty (20) feet in size; 
b. ?There shall be least one (1) parking space for every three (3) employees at peak 
employment per shift; 
c. ?All vehicle parking is restricted to off-street parking; 
d. ?Parking areas shall be graded so as to drain off surface water; 
e. ?Where a parking area is not otherwise screened from adjacent residential properties, 
there shall be installed a solid screen not less than six (6) feet in height using 
evergreen shrubs, all-metal industrial type of galvanized or nonferrous material, wood, 
plastic or other materials approved by the DRB; 
f. ?Lights shall be used to illuminate parking areas and shall be arranged to reflect lighting 
away from adjacent premises and the street; 
g. ?Areas for parking, maneuvering and unloading trucks shall be provided in addition to 
spaces provided for employee parking; 
h. ?When loading docks are on the street side of a building, whether the street is a 
principal street or an access road, sufficient space must be provided to keep trucks 
from blocking roads or sidewalks; and 
i. ?Adequate visitor or transit employee parking space shall be provided in keeping with 
the nature of the anticipated use of the site. 
7. ?Utilities serving the buildings. All proposed buildings in an industrial park shall comply with 
the following regulations: 
a. ?Primary lines may be constructed overhead or underground; 
b. ?Secondary lines shall be constructed underground unless not economically feasible 
due to topography or specifically approved by the DRB; 
c. ?Storage containers for fuel oil, gas, or other bulk fluids may be installed underground 
in accordance with other applicable state and federal laws. If installation is 
aboveground, landscaping must be in accordance with the DRB's direction; 
d. ?Water and sewer lines shall be installed in accordance with town specifications; and 
e. ?Roads shall be installed in accordance with town specifications. 
8. ?Signs. All signs for the industrial park shall be installed using the following guidelines: 
a. ?All flashing and/or signs with moving parts are prohibited; 
b. ?Park entrance signs shall make provisions to identify the park and each tenant within 
the park, but in no instance shall the sign exceed the requirements of article 7, section 
7.15 of this bylaw; 
c. ?All signs shall be erected within three (3) years of the date of approval of the project 
unless otherwise approved by the DRB; 
d. ?On-premises signage shall be two (2) feet high by eight (8) feet wide at a height of 
four (4) feet from the ground to the bottom of the sign; and 
e. ?On-premises signage shall be located fifteen (15) feet from the street line right-of-way 
facing a street within the industrial park and adjacent to the front entrance or other 
acceptable location as approved by the DRB. 
9. ?Access to all lots in the industrial park must be on streets within said park, unless otherwise 
allowed by the DRB. 
10. ?General requirements include any other requirements as specified by the DRB during the 
site plan review process established in article 5 of this bylaw. 


Sec. 4.14. - Mixed-use. 
    Mixed-use land development, for the purposes of this bylaw, is defined as planned development 
featuring a dense mixture of multiple uses. 
    A mixed-use land development project shall contain, for example, some combination of residential, 
retail, service, professional, and restaurant uses, with the goal of establishing or enhancing cohesive 
areas of development in Barre Town. A mixed-use development is not specifically intended to be a 
planned unit development but could be if desired by a developer. If a PUD is proposed, approval of a 
mixed-use would also be subject to the provisions of article 6 in addition to those stated here. 
    Mixed-use land development proposals and projects are subject to site plan review and approval by 
the DRB as outlined in section 5.6 of this bylaw. In addition, due to the status of mixed-use development 
as a conditional use in its allowed zones, a conditional use permit is required. Conditional use permitting 
is outlined in section 5.5 of this bylaw. 
    One (1) example of mixed-use land development may be a building, or series of buildings, with the 
following tenant composition: 
1st Floor = Fifty (50) percent retail, fifty (50) percent social service provision 
2nd Floor = Professional offices 
3rd Floor = Residential 
    The above example is one (1) of many potential mixed-use projects. Each building in a mixed-use 
project shall include multiple uses. 
    Mixed-use land development that includes a proposal for more than one (1) building may be subject 
to the following criteria/conditions, in addition to the site plan review criteria in article 5.6 of this bylaw: 
A plan and/or design for the flow of traffic, both pedestrian and automotive. 
Plantings, screenings, and other green space-oriented requirements as establish by the DRB. 
Restricted hours of operation for the nonresidential uses. 
Measures designed for the protection of natural and historical resources and landmarks. 
Consistency with the character of the area as defined by the surrounding properties. 
    Mixed-use land development is allowed as a conditional use in the following zones: Highway 
commercial, office building business, office building retail, and East Barre commercial. 


Sec. 4.15. - Mobile home park. 
    A mobile home park is defined in article 8 of this bylaw as a parcel of land under single or common 
ownership or control which contains, or is designed, laid out or adapted to accommodate, more than two 
(2) mobile homes. 
    All proposed new construction and/or expansion of existing mobile home parks within the Town of 
Barre shall comply with the provisions of 10 V.S.A. chapter 153 and this bylaw. 
    Any proposed land development for the purpose of constructing a new or expanding an existing 
mobile home park is subject to: 
(a) ?Conditional use review and approval due to the categorization of such land development as a 
conditional use in zones where allowed. Conditional use review is outlined in article 5, section 
5.5 of this bylaw, and; 
(b) ?Site plan review and approval by the DRB as outlined in article 5, section 5.6 of this bylaw, and; 
(c) ?Conditional use review may be done before site plan review or concurrently in accordance with 
article 5, section 5.2 of this bylaw. 
    Nothing in this section of the bylaw pertains to land used solely for the display or storage of mobile 
homes. 
    Pursuant to 24 V.S.A. 117 § 4412 (1) B, nothing in this bylaw is designed to exclude individual 
mobile homes from any zone unless all other types of housing are also excluded in that zone. 
    In accordance with [24] V.S.A. 117 § 4412(1)C, the following conditions apply for new mobile home 
parks or expansion of existing mobile home parks proposed in the Town of Barre: 
A minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet shall be provided for each mobile home lot inside 
the mobile home park; 
At least one (1) off-street parking space shall be required per mobile home lot; 
No mobile home shall be situated on a lot closer than twenty (20) feet to another mobile home; 
All structures, which are not physically attached to the mobile home, must be at least fifteen (15) feet 
from another mobile home, except where allowed by the DRB when the DRB has determined there 
is not cause for concern related to the public's welfare (e.g., fire). 
    If a mobile home park is a pre-existing nonconformity, the entire mobile home park shall be 
considered nonconforming. However, individual home lots within the park shall not be considered 
nonconforming within themselves and shall not be subject to the ramification of discontinuance or 
abandoned if so for more than twelve (12) months as stipulated in article 3, subsection 3.7(B) of this 
bylaw. Replacement of individual mobile homes on an existing site shall be permitted after issuance of 
proper zoning permits. Conditional use and/or site plan review is not required in the case of 
replacements. However, all development in the special flood hazard area must be reviewed under article 
5, section 5.8. 
    Zone: Mobile home parks are allowed as conditional uses in the following zones: Highway 
commercial, very high-density residential, high-density residential, medium-density residential and low-
density residential. 
(Ord. of 3-9-10, § 2) 


Sec. 4.16. - Open-air markets. 
    Open-air markets, long-term, as fully defined in article 8 of this bylaw are subject to: 
(a) ?Conditional use review and approval by the DRB; and 
(b) ?Site plan review and approval by the DRB. Both processes are explained in detail in article 5 of 
this bylaw. 
    The construction of a new structure or the expansion of an existing structure at such open-air market 
is subject to administrative review by the zoning administrator as established in article 5, section 5.7, or 
site plan review by the DRB, both processes more fully outlined in article 5 of this bylaw. 
    Examples of open-air markets include, but are not limited to, any retail business where goods are 
sold outdoors or under an open structure (such as a lean-to or tent). All retail use is allowed on a 
seasonal, temporary, or limited basis. This use includes any open-air market where booths or spaces are 
rented or leased to individuals or retailers for the sale of such products as listed in the paragraph below. 
    Examples of items sold at open-air markets include, but are not limited to: vegetables (such as at 
farmers' markets), artwork, crafts, new and used household items, antiques, and personal effects. 
    Individual farm stands are exempt from this bylaw as defined in article 5, subsection 5.6(E), 
exemptions. 
    Zone: Open-air markets are allowed in all zones as a conditional use, except industrial, conservation, 
and earth resource extraction. 


Sec. 4.17. - Public facility. 
    For the purposes of this bylaw, the definition of a public facility shall include, but is not limited to: 
State- or community-owned and operated institutions and facilities, public and private schools and other 
educational institutions certified by the state department of education, churches and other places of 
worship, public and private hospitals, regional solid waste management facilities certified under 10 V.S.A. 
chapter 159, hazardous waste management facilities for which a notice of intent to construct has been 
received under 10 V.S.A. § 6606a. 
    All proposed land development resulting in the construction or expansion of a public facility is subject 
to review and approval based on the following criteria only, provided that any regulations imposed do not 
have the effect of interfering with the intended functional use, as established in 24 V.S.A. 117 § 4413(a): 
Location; 
Size and building bulk; 
Height; 
Yards; 
Courts; 
Setbacks; 
Density of buildings; 
Off-street parking and loading facilities; 
Traffic; 
Noise; 
Lighting; 
Landscaping and screening. 
    In the event a question should arise regarding the status of a proposed facility, such as whether or 
not the applicant or the proposed structure's use is considered public, the zoning administrator shall make 
the determination. 
    Public utility power generation plants and transmission facilities are regulated by the Vermont Public 
Service Board (section 248) and are specifically exempt from this bylaw. This includes transmission lines, 
solar collectors, and wind towers/generators that are hooked to the power grid. 
    Zone: Allowed zones for public facilities are varied, and are outlined in detail in article 2 of this bylaw. 


Sec. 4.18. - Service station (motor vehicle). 
    Motor vehicle service stations as fully defined in article 8 of this bylaw. Any proposed land 
development for the new construction, re-adaptation, and/or expansion of an existing motor vehicle 
station shall be subject to site plan review and approval by the DRB, and conditional use review and 
approval by the DRB. Both processes are outlined in article 5 of this bylaw. 
    Additionally, the DRB shall also require the application of the following conditions on proposed new, 
re-adaptation, or expansion of existing motor vehicle stations: 
The lot shall have frontage on a town road or state highway of at least one hundred twenty-five (125) 
feet; 
All stored flammable and/or explosive materials, such as gas, oil, lubes, greases, etc., shall be 
stored in accordance with state environmental and safety regulations; 
Parts and dismantled vehicles shall be stored inside at all times; 
Pumps and/or other outside service devices shall be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from all lot 
lines; 
    There shall be no more than two (2) access driveways, and all access driveways shall not exceed 
forty (40) feet in width. The DRB may modify this provision to reduce or increase the number of access 
driveways and/or the required width if it determines that it is necessary or prudent based on safety 
considerations; and 
    Signs shall not be nearer than ten (10) feet to any property line and shall be as approved by the DRB 
in accordance with article 7, section 7.5 of this bylaw. 
    Only local permitting and approval processes are covered in this bylaw. The applicant is responsible 
for obtaining all necessary permits from appropriate state and/or federal agencies, and for following any 
guidelines and regulations established by those agencies. 
    Zone: Office retail and highway commercial. 


Sec. 4.19. - Junkyard/salvage yard. 
    Junkyards are fully defined in article 8 of this bylaw and by 24 V.S.A. 61 § 2241(7). 
    Any proposed land development for the purposes of creating or expanding an area for the purpose 
of storing automobile and/or general junk is permissible only as approved by the appropriate state agency 
and the town selectboard. 
    All such proposals are first required to obtain a) site plan review and approval from the DRB, and b) 
conditional use review and approval from the DRB. Both processes are established in article 5 of this 
bylaw before review by the selectboard. 
    Additionally, the DRB may impose specific conditions on any approved permit for this type of land 
development. Those conditions may include, but are not limited to: 
Minimum distances between the edge of the junkyard/salvage yard area and abutting property lines; 
Consideration of the proposed junkyard/salvage yard's proximity to natural resources such as water 
supplies; 
Hours of operation; 
Size of the lot allowed for the storage of materials; 
Odors and pest control; and 
Fencing and/or screening requirements. 
    The applicant must also procure the necessary permits and approval from appropriate state entities, 
such as the Agency of Transportation as established in 24 V.S.A. 61, and the Agency of Natural 
Resources for Act 250 review where applicable. 
    Zone: Junkyards are allowed as a conditional use in the industrial zone only. 


Sec. 4.20. - Telecommunications facility. 
    All permit applications for telecommunications facilities shall be made to the Barre Town Selectboard 
in accordance with the telecommunications ordinance of the Town of Barre adopted in 1998. All permits 
are subject to review based on the criteria listed within that ordinance along with any applicable 
procedure described within. 
    The ordinance can be found in the Barre Town Code Book, listed as Appendix D—
Telecommunications. 


Sec. 4.21. - Temporary use/special events. 
    For regulations relating to temporary use/special events, refer to the Barre Town Code, chapter 5, 
article III. 


Sec. 4.22. - Residential structure limits. 
    Only one (1) residential structure shall be permitted on a lot regardless of the lot size, zone, or road 
frontage. Except as follows: 
•?Planned unit development (article 6) 
•?Mobile home parks (article 3, section 3.3(B) 
•?Accessory dwellings (article 4, section 4.2) 
•?Single entity owned residential rental housing 
(Ord. of 10-3-17, § 2) 


ARTICLE 5. - DEVELOPMENT REVIEW 


Sec. 5.1. - Applicability. 
    Before issuance of a zoning permit for any land development that requires conditional use approval, 
site plan approval or flood hazard approval the sections in this article must be followed and approval 
granted as stipulated for each review. This article is enacted under the authority of 24 V.S.A. chapter 117, 
to protect the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Barre. 


Sec. 5.2. - Sequence and coordination of review. 
    If more than one (1) type of review is required for a project, the reviews, to the extent feasible, shall 
be conducted concurrently. If a development is before the DRB for conditional use review and is also 
subject to site plan review, the conditional use review shall be the controlling regulation and the site plan 
review, while following the criteria listed herein, shall be a specific criteria of the conditional use review. 


Sec. 5.3. - Fees. 
    The applicant is responsible for all costs associated with the application process, including the 
appropriate filing fees, mailing costs (for notification of abutting property owners, etc.), and other materials 
costs. The applicant is also responsible for any costs incurred by the town for professional engineering 
services needed due to the site plan application. 


Sec. 5.4. - Decisions. 
    Regarding any application, the development review board (DRB) shall render its final decision in 
writing in accordance with article 7, section 7.1 of this bylaw. That decision shall indicate either: 
(a) ?Approval of the request as presented based on the DRB's decision that the proposed plan is in 
compliance with the letter and spirit of the standards set forth in this bylaw; 
(b) ?Approval of the request with conditions; or 
(c) ?Denial of the request based on the DRB's decision that the proposed plan is not in compliance 
with the letter and spirit of the standards set forth in this bylaw. 
    An approval with conditions is subject to such conditions and/or modifications determined as 
appropriate by the DRB in order for the proposal to comply with the standards set forth in this bylaw. 
    A zoning permit shall not be issued if approval, or approval with conditions is not granted for a 
request applied for as part of this section. 


Sec. 5.5. - Conditional use review. 
    No permit shall be issued by the zoning administrator for any use, structure, or development which 
requires a conditional use permit in this bylaw until the DRB grants that approval. In considering its action, 
the DRB shall make findings on the general and specific standards contained herein, hold hearings and 
attach conditions as provided for in 24 V.S.A.117 §4414(3), §4460(4), and §4464. 
    The DRB shall determine that the proposed use, structure, or development conforms to the following 
general and specific standards, and shall not result in an undue adverse effect on any of the following: 
(A) ?General review standards for conditional use approval. The following general and specific 
standards are enabled through 24 VSA § 4414(3)(A) and 4414(3)(B): 
1. ?The impact on the capacity of existing or planned community facilities, to include but not 
limited to: 
a. ?Emergency services; 
b. ?Educational facilities; 
c. ?Water, sewer, or other municipal utility systems; 
d. ?Recreational facilities; 
e. ?Conservation or other designated natural areas; 
f. ?Solid waste disposal facilities; 
2. ?The character of the area affected as defined by the purpose(s) of the zone within which 
the project is located, and specifically stated policies and standards of the municipal plan; 
3. ?Traffic on roads and highways in the vicinity; 
4. ?Bylaws and ordinances then in effect; 
5. ?Utilization of renewable energy resources. 
6. ?Minimum lot size; 
7. ?Distance from adjacent or nearby uses; 
8. ?Criteria (as needed) adopted relating to site plan review pursuant to article 5, section 5.6 of 
this bylaw; 
9. ?Any other standards and factors (as needed) that the bylaw may require; 
10. ?Off-street parking requirements in accordance with standards outlined in article 3, section 
3.9 of this bylaw; 
11. ?Loading/unloading facilities. 
(B) ?In issuing a conditional use permit, the DRB may impose reasonable conditions to implement 
the purpose of this bylaw and to ensure that safeguards are in place for orderly development 
and protection for the town and its residents. 
(Ord. of 10-3-17, § 3) 


Sec. 5.6. - Site plan review. 
    No permit shall be issued by the zoning administrator for any use, structure, or development which 
requires site plan review and approval until the DRB grants that approval. In considering its action, the 
DRB shall make findings on the general and specific standards contained herein, hold hearings and 
attach conditions as provided for in 24 V.S.A. 117 § 4416. 
    One (1) hearing shall be held for site plans classified as minor, and two (2) hearings shall be held for 
site plans classified as major. 
(A) ?Major and minor classification. The applicant shall file one (1) plan for review by the zoning 
administrator to be examined and classified by the zoning administrator as either a major or 
minor development application using the criteria laid out in this section. 
Square footage is figured as gross useable floor area of a structure. Whether or not a space is 
unusable shall be determined by the zoning administrator and/or the DRB. 
1. ?Major classification. An application for land development is considered major if it meets one 
(1) or more of the criteria listed below: 
a. ?Retail commercial, professional commercial, or office use. The proposal includes 
construction of a new structure, or expansion of an existing structure, which will 
exceed two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. 
b. ?Hotel, motel, bed and breakfast. 
c. ?Restaurant use. The proposal includes construction of a new structure or an 
expansion of an existing structure that exceeds two thousand five hundred (2,500) 
square feet. 
d. ?Industrial use. The proposal includes construction of a new structure that exceeds four 
thousand (4,000) square feet, or an expansion of an existing structure that will make 
the overall size of the structure exceed four thousand (4,000) square feet. 
e. ?Combined use. Any combination of the above categories which proposed construction 
exceeds three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
f. ?Commercial or industrial expansion. Any proposed expansion of an existing structure 
that increases the overall size to three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet. 
g. ?Earth disturbance/extraction/quarrying. Any proposed land development that disturbs 
at least one-half-acre of land for the purpose of extracting natural resources or the 
storage of solid waste. This provision includes any proposed land development that 
requires a significant amount of fill as determined by the zoning administrator. 
h. ?Public utilities. Any proposed land development that requires significant additions or 
changes to any public utility or facility, including but not limited to: streets, roads, 
sidewalks, water, sewer and storm water control. 
i. ?Traffic impacts. Any proposed land development that has a significant impact on either 
traffic patterns or traffic generation in the areas around the development, and/or would 
create an added negative impact in an existing heavy traffic area. 
2. ?Minor classification . All applications for proposed land development that do not meet any 
of the standards for major classification shall be considered minor, and still subject to 
development review in accordance with 24 VSA. 117, and the criteria listed in article 5, 
section 5.6(F). 
(B) ?Site plan review submittal requirements. For all minor and major applications requiring a site 
plan review, the applicant must submit ten (10) additional copies of the site plans and any 
additional documentation required. Site plans must be submitted at least twenty-two (22) days 
prior to the hearing scheduled by the DRB. A copy of the application and corresponding 
documentation shall be kept on file in the planning and zoning department and be made 
available to the public during regular business. 
1. ?Minor site plan review applications shall include: (Architectural and/or engineered drawings 
not required). 
a. ?Name and address of the property owner, and the address of the subject property (if 
address is different from the owner's address). 
b. ?All property lines, dimensions, easements, rights-of-way, other pertinent legal 
features, and the source of that information. Sidewalks, streets, or other trails and 
roadways, if any, shall also be identified. Plans shall be provided on a survey if 
available. 
c. ?Setback distances to lot lines of all existing and proposed buildings. 
d. ?Identification (by name) of adjacent streets, alleys, and public or private property. 
e. ?Location, size, type, and shape of any structure(s) currently on the site and/or 
proposed for the site. For proposed structures, architectural drawings showing all 
sides may be required. 
f. ?Location of existing and/or proposed parking areas, along with projected or existing 
traffic movement on-site and off-site and the activities associated with loading and 
unloading. 
g. ?Location of any watercourses, wetlands, or other existing natural features on or 
adjacent to the subject property. 
h. ?Identification of the scale of the drawing and an indicator showing north. 
i. ?The zoning district in which the proposed project resides. 
j. ?Location of any zoning district boundaries within three hundred (300) feet of the 
perimeter of the property. 
k. ?Existing drainage patterns and any plans to alter that drainage pattern. 
l. ?Proposed exterior lighting. 
m. ?Any and all other materials or information deemed necessary by the zoning 
administrator and/or the DRB to determine approval or denial of a site plan. 
2. ?Major site plan review submission requirements: (Architectural and/or engineered drawings 
required). 
a. ?All of the requirements (a. through m.) listed for minor site plan review, together with 
any additions or changes included below. 
b. ?The plans must be prepared by either a licensed engineer or architect with a scale of 
one (1) inch = twenty (20) feet on standard 24" × 36" sheets, and must include any 
additional written information on attached 8½' × 11" sheets. 
c. ?A topographical map for the site with lines at ten-foot intervals. 
d. ?The uses and locations of abutting lands and the uses of those lands in relation to the 
site of the proposed land development. 
e. ?Drawings of existing and proposed structures, including the height, floor area, and 
size and location of any doors to the exterior. Drawings shall include any anticipated 
alterations and/or additions. 
f. ?Drawings for exterior facades shall be included, and all drawings shall be done to 
scale. 
g. ?Location of all present and proposed utility systems (sewage/septic, water, 
telecommunications, fuel storage, on-site mechanical equipment such as HVAC, etc.). 
h. ?Drainage plans shall include any existing and/or proposed drain lines, retention ponds, 
culverts, catch basins, headwalls, endwalls, hydrants, manholes, and drainage 
swales. The zoning administrator and/or the DRB may also request storm run-off 
calculations for large or environmentally sensitive development proposals. All 
drainage plans must comply with the regulations of and have permits from the 
appropriate regulatory state agency. The town engineer shall approve and sign off on 
the plan once it meets his/her satisfaction, and site plan approval shall not be given 
until then. 
i. ?Indicate areas within the site and within fifty (50) feet of the site of the proposed land 
development where soil removal or filling is needed. 
j. ?Applications for review shall include plans to prevent the pollution of surface or 
groundwater, erosion of soil during and after construction, and excessive runoff as 
applicable. 
k. ?In addition to [subsection (B)1.]f. of the minor site plan submittal requirements, traffic 
plans for major applications shall also include the number of curb cuts within the 
footprint of the proposed development site and the number of motor vehicle trips to 
and from the site (estimated for daily and peak hour traffic levels). 
l. ?A landscape plan, which includes all existing natural land features, trees, forest cover, 
and water sources, plus any proposed changes to these. Plans shall indicate 
vegetation/plantings used for screening and those used ornamentally. 
3. ?Waiver of submittal requirements. The zoning administrator may waive site plan submittal 
requirements for site plans classified as minor if it is determined that they are either not 
significant or necessary for the review of a given proposal. The zoning administrator shall 
notify the DRB of what has been waived and also the reasons for same before the hearing 
scheduled for the site plan review. 
The DRB may require the applicant to submit any requirements previously waived if it is 
determined that those items are necessary to make a decision on the permit application. 
(C) ?Conceptual site plan review. An applicant may request a conceptual site plan review by the 
DRB. Submittal for a conceptual review shall include ten (10) copies of a drawing of the site, 
with major features (natural and manmade) clearly marked. The conceptual plan shall also 
include a directional compass (showing north), adjacent streets and parcels (identified by 
name), and sketches and/or outlines of potential land development. Materials accepted for 
conceptual review will not be carried forward for site plan review. To proceed, the applicant 
must submit a site plan based on the requirements in subsection 5.6(B) of this bylaw. The intent 
of conceptual review of a project is for an informal presentation and discussion and the outcome 
of those discussions shall in no way bind the DRB or the town to any final decision. 
(D) ?Acceptance and transmittal of site plan/application for review. After review of the zoning permit 
application and site plan (to see if the submittal requirements have been met), the zoning 
administrator shall determine if both are complete. Upon that determination, the administrator 
shall transmit the application and site plan to the DRB for review at its next available meeting in 
accordance with the classification of the plan. The administrator shall certify for the applicant, in 
writing, that the complete application and site plan have been received. The DRB shall act to 
approve or deny the site plan within forty-five (45) days of the closure of the final hearing. 
Failure to act within that period shall be deemed as site plan approval. 
(E) ?Exemptions. The following examples of land development shall be exempt from the site plan 
approval process: 
1. ?Residential. All one-family and two-family dwellings including the expansion thereof. 
2. ?Agricultural, horticultural, floricultural, and forestry. Land development for these uses, 
including outdoor farm stands for retail purposes. No other retail use is allowed without site 
plan review and approval. 
3. ?Accessory use and structures. A use, building, or structure customarily incidental to and 
located on the same lot as the primary building. This exemption includes, but is not limited 
to, the construction of residential/private garages, sheds, pools, decks, or similar small-
accessory structures. 
4. ?Home occupations. Home occupations which are operated by the residents of the premises 
and which employ not more than two (2) persons who do not live on the premises. The 
occupation on the premises must clearly: 
(a) ?Be the secondary use of the premises; and 
(b) ?Does not change the residential character, create a nuisance, or include the storage 
of materials in the building. 
5. ?Temporary structures. Temporary structures, excluding camper/recreation vehicles, see 
section 4.4, which shall be in place no longer than two (2) months, such as tents for 
outdoor events, temporary storage containers, and other similar structures. 
6. ?Hunting, fishing, and trapping. As specified under 24 V.S.A § 2295 on private or public 
land. This exemption does not include facilities supporting such activities, such as firing 
ranges or rod and gun clubs, and the like. 
7. ?Subdivisions. The division of land pursuant to town subdivision regulations. This exemption 
does not include uses that may occupy any subdivided parcel unless specifically exempt 
herein. 
8. ?Minor grading and excavation. As associated with private road and driveway maintenance. 
Also exempt is lawn and yard maintenance which is otherwise incidental to an approved 
use. This exemption does not include extraction, quarrying activities, or the filling of land. 
9. ?Outdoor recreation. Trails (i.e., walking, hiking, horse-back riding, cross-country skiing, and 
snowmobile trials) which are not associated with a commercial establishment and where 
no structures or parking areas. 
10. ?Utility structures. Sixty-four (64) square feet or less in size. Such structures shall also be 
exempt from permit requirements and setbacks. 
11. ?Home day cares. Those which serve fewer than six (6) children. 
(F) ?Review standards for site plan approval. The DRB shall conduct site plan review with respect 
to the criteria below. The DRB may impose appropriate conditions, modifications, and 
protections where deemed necessary to eliminate or minimize potential problems and/or 
nuisances: 
1. ?The proposed land development as it complies with or compliments the policies, 
regulations, standards, and goals of the town's zoning bylaw and its most recently adopted 
town plan; 
2. ?The convenience and safety of vehicular movement within the site, and in relation to 
adjacent areas of vehicular movement. This includes consideration of access management 
in regards to entrances and exits for the subject site; 
3. ?The convenience and safety of pedestrian movement within the site, and in relation to 
adjacent areas of pedestrian movement. Also included for consideration is the relationship 
to any pedestrian access deemed necessary for adjacent properties and along public 
roads; 
4. ?Stormwater and drainage to insure adequate consideration of stormwater runoff and 
drainage issues in order to minimize the impacts of any development project on the 
adjacent property, the environment, and the town. The applicant shall bear the 
responsibility for obtaining and meeting any and all permitting requirements of the 
appropriate state agency. The town engineer shall review the stormwater runoff and 
drainage plan and shall approve the site plan and sign off on the design before the project 
may be approved; 
5. ?The protection of historic or natural environmental features on the property under review, 
as well as on the adjacent areas; 
6. ?The impact of new development on public utilities such as water and sewer infrastructure 
and on other users/consumers; 
7. ?Signage that meets or exceeds the criteria established in this bylaw, article 7, section 7.5. 
8. ?The utilization of renewable energy resources; 
9. ?Landscaping and/or screening to assist in mitigating undue impact of the proposed land 
development upon neighboring landowners; 
10. ?The adequacy of parking as well as loading and unloading facilities including their impact 
on surrounding traffic patterns, in accordance with the provisions established in article 3, 
section 3.6 of this bylaw. 
(G) ?Expiration of site plan approval. Expiration: Since site plan review is a part of the zoning permit 
process, a site plan as approved by the DRB is valid for the length of the zoning permit defined 
in article 7, section 7.2 of this bylaw. Should an extension be granted for the zoning permit (as 
allowed in section 7.2), the site plan approval shall also be extended. If the zoning permit 
expires, then so too does the site plan approval. 
(H) ?Appeals. Refer to article 7, section 7.8. 
(Ord. of 10-3-17, § 3) 


Sec. 5.7. - Administrative review. 
    To qualify for administrative review and approval by the zoning administrator any proposed land 
development, amendments to previously approved new land development, and change-of-use permits 
must fall within the following set of criteria: 
Single-family dwellings; 
Multifamily dwellings (with up to four (4) units and including accessory structures); 
Sandwich and other temporary signs; 
Permitted changes-in-use (see article 3, section 3.3 of this bylaw); 
Accessory structures and buildings with a total floor area of less than five hundred (500) square feet; 
Additions, which create a total floor area of less than one thousand (1,000) square feet. 


Sec. 5.8. - Flood hazard area devlopment. 
(A) ?Statutory authorization. To effect the purpose of 10 V.S.A. chapter 32, and in accordance with 24 
V.S.A. § 4424, there is hereby established an ordinance for areas of special flood hazard in the 
Town of Barre, Vermont. 
(B) ?Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance [section] to: 
1. ?Minimize and prevent the loss of life and property, the disruption of commerce, the impairment 
of the tax base, and the extraordinary public expenditures and demands on public services that 
result from flooding and other flood-related hazards; and 
2. ?Ensure that the design and construction of development in flood and other hazard areas are 
accomplished in a manner that minimizes or eliminates the potential for flood and loss or 
damage to life and property; and 
3. ?Manage all flood hazard areas designated pursuant to 10 V.S.A. § 753; and 
4. ?Make the state, municipalities, and individuals eligible for federal flood insurance and other 
federal disaster recovery and hazard mitigation funds as may be available. 
(C) ?Lands to which these regulations apply. These regulations shall apply to all areas in the Town of 
Barre, Vermont, identified as areas of special flood hazard in and on the most current flood 
insurance studies and maps published by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), Federal 
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), as provided by 
the Secretary of the Agency of Natural Resources pursuant to 10 V.S.A. § 753, which are hereby 
adopted by reference and declared to be part of these regulations. 
(D) ?Development permit required. A permit is required for all proposed development in areas of special 
flood hazard. Conditional use approval by the appropriate municipal panel is required for: 
1. ?New buildings, 
2. ?Substantial improvement of existing buildings, and 
3. ?Development in a floodway, 
Prior to being permitted by the zoning administrator, all development and subdivisions shall be reviewed 
to assure that such proposals minimize potential flood damage, public facilities and utilities such as 
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are constructed so as to minimize flood damage, and adequate 
drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(E) ?Procedures. 
1. ?Prior to issuing a permit, a copy of the application and supporting information shall be submitted 
by the zoning administrator to the state national floodplain insurance program coordinator at the 
Vermont Agency of Natural Resources, Department of Environmental Conservation, River 
Management Sec. in accordance with 24 V.S.A. § 4424. A permit may be issued only following 
receipt of comments from the agency or the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date the 
application was mailed to the agency, whichever is sooner. 
2. ?Adjacent communities and the stream alteration engineer at the Vermont Agency of Natural 
Resources, Department of Environmental Conservation, River Management Section shall be 
notified at least thirty (30) days prior to issuing any permit for the alteration or relocation of a 
watercourse and copies of such notification shall be submitted to the administrator of the 
national flood insurance program. 
3. ?Applications for proposed development must be accompanied by a Vermont Agency of Natural 
Resources Project Review Sheet. The project review sheet shall identify all state and federal 
agencies from which a permit approval is required for the proposal, and shall be filed as a 
required attachment to the town permit application. The identified permits, or letter indicating 
that such permits are not required, shall be submitted to the zoning administrator and attached 
to the permit before the work can begin. 
(F) ?Base flood elevations and floodway limits. 
1. ?Where available, base flood elevations and floodway limits (or data from which a community can 
designate regulatory floodway limits) provided by the national flood insurance program in the 
flood insurance study and accompanying maps shall be used to administer and enforce these 
regulations. 
2. ?In areas where base flood elevations and floodway limits have not been provided by the national 
flood insurance program in the flood insurance study and accompanying maps, base flood 
elevations and floodway data provided by FEMA or available from state or federal agencies or 
other sources, shall be obtained and utilized to administer and enforce these regulations. 
(G) ?Development standards. 
1. ?Floodway areas: 
a. ?Development, or any encroachments, within the regulatory floodway is prohibited unless it 
has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in 
accordance with standard engineering practice by registered professional engineer 
certifying that the proposed development will result in no increase in flood levels during the 
occurrence of the base flood. 
b. ?In areas where no regulatory floodway has been designated by the national flood insurance 
program, development shall not be permitted in the floodway, as determined by subsection 
(F)2., unless a technical evaluation is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of 
the proposed development, when combined with all other existing development and 
anticipated development with not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood 
more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. 
c. ?Junkyards and storage facilities for floatable materials, chemicals, explosives, flammable 
liquids, or other hazardous or toxic materials, are prohibited within the floodway. 
2. ?Floodway fringe areas (i.e., special flood hazard areas outside of the floodway): 
a. ?All development shall be: 
i. ?Reasonably safe from flooding; 
ii. ?Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or 
lateral movement of the structure during the occurrence of the base flood; 
iii. ?Constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
iv. ?Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
v. ?Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning 
equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to 
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions 
of flooding; 
vi. ?Adequately drained to reduce exposure to flood hazards; 
vii. ?Located so as to minimize conflict with changes in channel location over time and the 
need to intervene with such changes; and 
viii. ?Required to locate any fuel storage tanks (as needed to serve an existing building in 
the special flood hazard zone) a minimum of one (1) foot above the base flood 
elevation and be securely anchored to prevent flotation; or storage tanks may be 
placed underground, if securely anchored as certified by a qualified professional. 
3. ?Residential development: 
a. ?New construction and existing buildings to be substantially improved that are located in 
zones A1-30, and AH shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least one 
(1) foot above the base flood elevation. New construction and existing buildings to be 
substantially improved that are located in zone AO shall have the lowest floor, including 
basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number 
specified in the feet on the community's FIRM or at least two (2) feet if no depth number is 
specified. 
b. ?Manufactured homes to be placed and existing manufactured homes to be substantially 
improved that are: 
i. ?Located outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an 
existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or in a manufactured home park or 
subdivision which has incurred substantial damage from a flood shall be elevated on a 
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated 
to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an 
adequately anchored foundation system to resist floatation, collapse, and lateral 
movement during the occurrence of the base flood. 
ii. ?Located in an existing manufactured home park, where elevating a replacement home 
to or above base flood elevation is not possible, the lowest floor shall be supported by 
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are 
no less that forty-eight (48) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to 
an adequately anchored system to resist floatation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c. ?New subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including proposals for 
manufactured home parks and subdivisions) that are greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) 
acres, whichever is the lesser, shall include base flood elevation data. 
d. ?Residential construction located within zones AH and AO shall have adequate drainage 
paths around structure on slopes, to guide floodwater around and away from the proposed 
structures. 
4. ?Nonresidential development: 
a. ?New construction located in zones A1-30, AE, and AH shall have the lowest floor, including 
basement, elevated at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. New construction 
located in zone AO shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the 
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two (2) [feet if] depth number specified in the 
feet on the community's FIRM or at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified. 
b. ?Existing buildings to be substantially improved located in zones A1-30, AE, and AH shall 
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation or 
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base 
flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the 
passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting 
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Existing buildings to be 
substantially improved located in AO zones shall have the lowest floor, including 
basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number 
specified in feet on the community's FIRM or at least two (2) feet if no depth number is 
specified or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below 
the base flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to 
the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting 
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
c. ?A permit for a building proposed to be floodproofed shall not be issued until a registered 
professional engineer or architect has reviewed the structural design, specifications and 
plans, and has certified that the design and proposed methods of construction are in 
accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this 
subsection. 
d. ?Nonresidential construction located within zones AH and AO shall have adequate drainage 
paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwater around and away from the 
proposed structures. 
5. ?Subdivisions: Subdivision (including manufactured home parks) shall be designed to assure: 
a. ?Such proposals minimize flood damage within the floodprone area, 
b. ?Public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, [or] water systems are located 
and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage, and 
c. ?Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
6. ?Enclosed areas below the lowest floor: 
a. ?Fully enclosed areas below grade on all sides (including below grade crawlspaces and 
basements) are prohibited. 
b. ?Fully enclosed areas that are above grade, below the lowest floor, below BFE and subject 
to flooding shall: 
i. ?Be solely used for parking of vehicles, storage, or building access, and such a 
condition shall clearly be stated on any permits; and 
ii. ?Be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by 
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Such designs must be certified by a 
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following criteria: 
A minimum of two (2) openings on two (2) walls having a total net area of not less 
than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding 
shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot 
above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other 
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of 
floodwaters. 
7. ?Recreational vehicles: Recreational vehicles placed on sites with special flood hazard areas 
shall either: 
a. ?Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, 
b. ?Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or 
c. ?Be permitted in accordance with the elevation and anchoring requirements for 
"manufactured homes" in section B.2.(b) [sic]. 
8. ?Accessory structures: A small accessory building that represents a minimal investment need not 
be elevated to the base flood elevation provided the building: 
a. ?Shall not be used for human habitation, 
b. ?Shall be designed to have low flood damage potential, 
c. ?Shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance 
to the flow of floodwaters, 
d. ?Shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, and 
e. ?Shall have service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment elevated or 
floodproofed. 
9. ?Water supply systems: New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to 
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
10. ?Sanitary sewage systems: New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed 
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the 
systems into floodwaters. 
11. ?On-site waste disposal systems: On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid 
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
12. ?Watercourse carrying capacity: The flood-carrying capacity within any altered or relocated 
portion of a watercourse shall be maintained. 
(H) ?Duties and responsibilities of the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall maintain a 
record of: 
1. ?All permits issued for development in areas of special flood hazard; 
2. ?The elevation (consistent with the datum of the elevation of the NFIP maps for the community) 
of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved buildings; 
3. ?The elevation (consistent with the datum of the elevation of the NFIP maps for the community) 
to which buildings have been floodproofed; 
4. ?All floodproofing certifications required under this regulation; and 
5. ?All variance actions, including justification for their issuance. 
(I) ?Variances to the development standards. Variances may be granted in writing by the appropriate 
municipal panel only in accordance with 24 V.S.A.§§ 4469, 4424(E) and in accordance with the 
criteria for granting variances found in 44 CFR, Section 60.6, of the national flood insurance program 
regulations. 
    Any variance issued in the special flood hazard area will not increase flood heights and will inform 
the applicant in writing over the signature of a community official that the issuance of a variance to 
construct a structure below the base flood elevation increases risk to life and property and will result in 
increased flood insurance premiums up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one 
hundred dollars ($100.00) of coverage. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance 
actions. 
    A copy of such variance shall be affixed to the deed of the property on file in the municipal clerk's 
office. 
(J) ?Warning of disclaimer of liability. This ordinance [section] does not imply that land outside of the 
areas of special flood hazard or land use permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or 
flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Barre or any town 
official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance 
[section] or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(K) ?Validity and severability. If any portion of this ordinance [section] is held unconstitutional or invalid 
by a competent court, the remainder of this ordinance [section] shall not be affected. 
(L) ?Precedence of ordinance [section]. The provisions of this ordinance [section] shall not in any way 
impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any other applicable ordinances. Where this 
ordinance [section] imposes a greater restriction, the provisions of this ordinance [section] shall take 
precedence. 
(M) ?Enforcement and penalties. It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to enforce the provisions 
of this ordinance [section]. Whenever any development occurs contrary to these flood hazard area 
regulations, the zoning administrator, in his discretion, shall institute appropriate action in 
accordance with the provisions of 24 V.S.A. § 1974a or pursuant to 24 V.S.A. § 4451 or 24 V.S.A. § 
4452 to correct the violation. No action may be brought unless the alleged offender has had at least 
a seven-day notice and opportunity to cure if the alleged offender repeats the violation after the 
seven-day notice period and within the next succeeding twelve (12) months. The seven-day warning 
notice shall state that a violation exists, that the alleged offender has an opportunity to cure the 
violation within the seven (7) days, and that the alleged offender will not be entitled to an additional 
warning notice for a violation occurring after the seven (7) days. 
    If the structure is still noncompliant after the seven-day opportunity to cure has passed, the zoning 
administrator submits a declaration to the administrator of the NFIP requesting a denial of flood 
insurance. Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended, authorizes FEMA to 
deny flood insurance to a property declared by a community to be in violation of their flood hazard area 
regulations. The declaration shall consist of: 
(a) ?The name of the property owner and address of legal description of the property sufficient to 
confirm its identity or location, 
(b) ?A clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation of a cited state or local law, 
regulation, or ordinance, 
(c) ?A clear statement that the public body making the declaration has authority to do so and a 
citation to that authority, 
(d) ?Evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the violation and the prospective 
denial of insurance, and 
(e) ?A clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to Section 1316 of the 
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended. 
(N) ?Definitions. 
    Appropriate municipal panel means a planning commission performing development review, a board 
of adjustment, a development review board, or a legislative body performing development review. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any 
given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the height of the base flood, usually in feet, in relation to the 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929, the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, or other datum 
referenced in the Flood Insurance Study report, or average depth of base flood, usually in feet, above the 
ground surface. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor elevation (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Common plan of development is where a structure will be refurbished over a period of time. Such 
work might be planned unit by unit. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not 
limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling 
operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for 
which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be 
affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site 
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain 
management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional 
sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be 
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the 
pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood means: 
(a) ?A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas 
from: the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of 
surface waters from any source; and mudslides which are proximately caused by flooding and 
are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when 
earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. 
(b) ?The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result 
of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical 
levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, 
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or 
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in 
flooding. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the federal 
insurance administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones 
applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if 
appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations or an examination, evaluation and determination of 
mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from 
any source (see definition of "flood"). 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or 
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real 
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must 
be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface 
elevation more than one (1) foot at any point. 
    Floodway, regulatory, in the Town of Barre means the channel of a river or other watercourse and 
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively 
increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot at any time. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(a) ?Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the 
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as 
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(b) ?Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the 
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the 
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(c) ?Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation 
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(d) ?Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic 
preservation programs that have been certified either: 
(i) ?By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(ii) ?Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Legislative body means the selectboard in the case of a town, the trustees in the case of an 
incorporated village, and the mayor, alderpersons, and city council members in the case of a city, and the 
supervisor in the case of an unorganized town or gore. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished 
or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area 
other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is 
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of 
44 CFR 60.3. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a 
permanent chassis and is designed for the use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to 
the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into 
two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the 
start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 
1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain 
management purposes, new construction means structures for which the state of construction 
commenced on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulation adopted by a 
community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for 
which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be 
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site 
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain 
management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(a) ?Built on a single chassis; 
(b) ?Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(c) ?Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(d) ?Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for 
recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
    Special flood hazard area is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) 
percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated a Zone A on the 
flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for 
publication of the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), Zone A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-
30, AE, A99, AR, AR/AI-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO or V1-30, VE, or V. For purposes of these 
regulations, the term "special flood hazard area" is synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of 
special flood hazard". 
    Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was 
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, 
or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start 
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of 
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of 
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not 
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets 
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footing, piers, or foundations or the 
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, 
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a 
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, 
floor, or other structural part of a building, regardless whether that alteration affects the external 
dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas 
or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. Structure, for 
insurance purposes, means: 
(a) ?A building with two (2) or more outside rigid walls and a fully secured roof, that is affixed to a 
permanent site; 
(b) ?A manufactured home ("a manufactured home," also known as a mobile home, is a structure: 
built on a permanent chassis, transported to its site in one (1) or more sections, and affixed to a 
permanent foundation); or 
(c) ?A travel trailer without wheels, built on a chassis and affixed to a permanent foundation, that is 
regulated under the community's floodplain management and building ordinances or laws. 
For the latter purpose, "structure" does not mean a recreational vehicle or a park trailer or other similar 
vehicle, except as described in (c) of this definition, or a gas or liquid storage tank. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of 
restoring the structure to its before-damaged conditions would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the 
market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of 
a structure, after the date of adoption of this bylaw, the cost of which, over three (3) years, or over a 
period of a common plan of development, cumulatively equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market 
value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures 
which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does 
not, however, include either: 
(a) ?Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, 
sanitary, or safety code specification which have been identified by the local code enforcement 
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(b) ?Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the 
structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the 
community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation 
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3 is presumed to 
be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 3-9-10, § 3) 


ARTICLE 6. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) 


Sec. 6.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article of the bylaw is to allow for the establishment of planned unit 
developments (PUDs) within zones where such uses are allowed, and to encourage the development of 
planned residential or industrial/commercial projects that promote efficient and creative use of land; 
enable and encourage flexibility of design; preserve open spaces where possible; allow for more 
economical development of unique sites; create aesthetically pleasing developments that maintain the 
integrity and character of the area in which they are located; and provide more numerous opportunities for 
housing. 


Sec. 6.2. - Applicability. 
    This article of the bylaw is enacted to establish a format and process within the bylaw for treatment 
of proposed planned unit developments. Application and consideration of proposed PUD projects shall 
comply with the process and procedures outlined in this section of the bylaw. Proposed PUDs are 
reviewed under the subdivision ordinance. 


Sec. 6.3. - Sequence and coordination of review. 
    It is advised, but not required, that the applicant meet with the zoning administrator and subsequently 
the DRB for conceptual review. This will allow the applicant an opportunity to confer about the procedures 
and information needed for presentation during the formal review process. The zoning administrator may 
place any proposed PUD on the DRB agenda for conceptual review provided that the applicant follows 
the submittal requirements established in article 5, subsection 5.6(C) of this bylaw. The applicant shall 
also complete any pertinent forms and pay all applicable fees. Materials submitted for conceptual review 
will not be carried forward for subdivision review. 
    Regardless of whether conditional review is requested, all proposed PUDs must receive a 
preliminary and final review and approval. 


Sec. 6.4. - Application requirements. 
    The applicant shall submit to the zoning administrator the documentation and information required 
for review as outlined in the Barre Town subdivision regulations as established in the most recently 
adopted Barre Town Code. 


Sec. 6.5. - Planned unit development (PUD) standards and review criteria. 
(A) ?Standards. 
1. ?Development standards. The DRB may allow for varied residential uses, densities, and 
intensities within a PUD that do not otherwise correspond with or are not otherwise expressly 
permitted by the bylaws for the zone in which the proposed PUD is located. Nevertheless, the 
following shall apply: 
a. ?The applicant shall submit a site plan to the DRB showing the location, height and spacing 
of buildings, open spaces and their landscaping, streets, driveways, off-street parking 
spaces, and all other physical features. The site plan shall be accompanied by a statement 
setting forth the nature of all proposed modifications, changes or supplementations of 
existing zoning regulations together with such other information as the DRB shall require; 
b. ?A PUD application may be reviewed and approved with multiple landowners of adjoining 
parcels as long as the overall development pattern is cohesive and makes for a logical 
layout in the judgment of the DRB. If multiple owners are involved, each owner shall file 
his/her own application and subsequently the DRB shall review each application and may 
choose to approve one (1) and not another. 
c. ?Any proposed PUD developments except for elderly/disabled housing complexes must 
have a minimum of five (5) acres of land and shall comply with the following minimum 
number of dwelling units based on acreage: 
Acreage = Number of Dwelling Units 
5 = 6 
6 = 7 
7 = 8 
8 = 9 
9 = 10 
10 = 12 
11 = 13 
12 = 14 
13 = 15 
14 = 16 
15 = 18 
16 = 19 
17 = 20 
18 = 21 
19 = 22 
20 = 24 
Follow same pattern for larger parcels. 
 
Units of residential living space may be housed in individual structures or in multi-unit 
structures. Elderly/disabled housing complexes shall have a minimum of two (2) acres of 
land and are not restricted to the number of units as in a PUD. 
d. ?Any proposed PUD developments must comply with Town of Barre Standards for the 
construction of infrastructure proposed to be taken over by the town including associated 
fees for such takeover that may exist in accordance with Barre Town Code. 
e. ?A proposed PUD may be implemented in a phased construction schedule, if approved by 
the DRB at the time of the first application. A clear master plan showing the general intent 
of subsequent phases shall be submitted at the first application. Submission of the master 
plan does not necessarily bind the developer to the exact development as presented on 
the master plan but should give the DRB a general idea of what the overall PUD will look 
like. Phasing shall also be considered when it is determined by the DRB that the proposed 
development will cause an undue burden on the municipal facilities and services. 
f. ?To qualify for consideration as a PUD: 
(a) ?The proposed project shall have municipal water and sewer available for use, and 
(b) ?The developed portion (i.e. "coverage area") of the proposed project shall not exceed 
seventy-five (75) percent of the total square footage of ground area within the PUD 
envelope. 
g. ?For the purpose of calculating coverage area, the 75-percent figure is defined as the total 
of all/any buildings, structures, and other impervious surfaces including parking, roadways, 
walkways, etc. and shall exclude land around the structures as noted in [paragraph] 2.d. 
below. The applicant shall show, somewhere on the plan, the total square feet of ground 
area of the PUD and the percentage of square feet of coverage. The zoning administrator 
will verify the total. 
h. ?Other specific standards: 
Max building height: 
Thirty  
(30) feet. 
Buffer around the outside border of the PUD (except along roadways): 
?  
Twenty-five  
(25) feet. 
Minimum spacing between buildings: 
Twenty  
(20) feet. 
Minimum setback from municipal street: 
Twenty-five  
(25) feet. 
 
2. ?Open space standards. 
a. ?Open space shall be required, and shall be not less than twenty-five (25) percent of the net 
ground area of the PUD. Open spaces shall be permanently devoted to conservation, 
wildlife management, plantings/landscaping, common areas, and recreational uses. 
Questions concerning what may constitute open space, outside of the items listed above, 
and shall be clarified by the DRB during the review process. 
b. ?Open space may also include bodies of water such as ponds, streams, rivers, drainage 
easements and slopes in excess of fifteen (15) percent, if the DRB determines that such 
areas contribute to the quality and livability of the PUD. Without that determination, such 
areas shall not be counted towards the 25-percent open space requirement. 
c. ?The land area to be considered as open land shall be permanently reserved as such. This 
area shall be in such condition, size and shape as to be readily useable for the uses as 
outlined in a. above. Such land shall be reserved by the following means or equivalent as 
designated in the acceptance of the PUD by the DRB: 
Held in corporate ownership by the owners of the lot or units within the PUD. Membership 
in said corporation shall be mandatory for all owners of lots or units in the PUD. In the case 
of such corporate ownership, the developer shall include in the conveyance deed to the 
owners of the lots or dwelling units, the above membership stipulation and the stipulation 
as to the beneficial right in the use of the open land. An endowment fund for the 
maintenance of the open area, in perpetuity, shall be required as part of the corporate 
structure. 
d. ?Land area within twenty-five (25) feet of a residential structure shall not be counted as 
open land. 
e. ?A time table to develop any open space proposed for development shall be stipulated 
during the review and approval process. A satisfactory cash escrow or performance bond, 
the amount to be determined by the DRB, could also be considered to insure completion of 
the development of open space. 
3. ?Dwelling unit density. Except for an elderly/disabled housing complex, the number of dwelling 
units permitted for a proposed PUD may not exceed the number of dwelling units that would be 
allowed if the parcel were subdivided into lots that conformed to zoning regulations for the zone 
in which the proposed PUD is located except as follows: 
Additional dwelling units may be added to a PUD if the development proposal includes 
percentages of open space exceeding the 25-percent minimum. The number of additional 
allowable dwelling units shall be based on the scale established below: 
30 percent = 1 additional dwelling unit. 
35 percent = 2 additional dwelling units 
40 percent + = 4 additional dwelling units 
The unit density for elderly/disabled housing complexes is only restricted by [paragraph] 2. 
above (open space) whereas even an elderly/disabled housing complex shall meet the open 
space requirement. 
4. ?Interior roads and dwelling access. If approved by both the development review board (DRB) 
and the selectboard, a developer may request private roads be used within the PUD as long as 
the private roads are connected to a town road. Except for width, a private road shall be built to 
town road standards. Width shall be determined by the selectboard and agreed to by the DRB. 
All private roads shall be controlled and maintained by whatever association is created to 
manage the common land within the PUD. 
At the discretion of the DRB, the interest of safety, driveways to dwellings may be shared if the 
shared access limits the overall number of curb-cuts needed. Use and maintenance of the 
driveways shall be secured in deed language and/or in the form of a separate agreement 
among the parties sharing the access. 
(B) ?Review criteria. 
1. ?All proposed PUD projects, including elderly/housing complexes, shall be reviewed using the 
regulations contained in the Barre Town subdivision ordinance. 
2. ?All proposed PUD projects, including elderly/housing complexes, shall also be considered 
conditional uses and as such reviewed using the conditional use review criteria outlined in 
article 5, section 5.5 of this bylaw. 
3. ?All proposed PUD projects shall also be reviewed with respect to the following: 
The efficient, effective, and creative use of land; 
Open space preservation; 
The use of/impact on public facilities; 
Provision of opportunities for housing; and 
Contribution to the enhancement of the quality of life in the area neighboring the PUD and in 
Barre Town generally. To help meet current and future state and local energy efficiency goals. 
(Ord. of 10-3-17, § 4) 


Sec. 6.6. - Appeals. 
    Refer to article 7, section 7.8. 


ARTICLE 7. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 


Sec. 7.1. - Development review board. 
(A) ?Establishment. There is hereby established a development review board, hereinafter referred to as 
the DRB in the Town of Barre, the members of which shall be appointed by the selectboard in 
accordance with 24 V.S.A. 117 § 4460. 
The DRB may also be known as an appropriate municipal panel, as is the planning commission and 
other bodies of the Town of Barre who perform the function of development review. The DRB, as 
with all appropriate municipal panels, shall elect its own officers and adopt rules of procedure, 
subject to the Act and other relevant statutes. Rules of ethics with respect to conflicts of interest shall 
also be established. The DRB shall conduct meetings in accordance with 24 V.S.A. § 4461. 
(B) ?Meetings/hearings/warnings. Meetings and hearings shall be called by the chairperson of the DRB 
and at such times as the panel shall determine, unless specified otherwise in this bylaw. All meetings 
and hearings shall be open to the public with the exception of executive and deliberative sessions. 
All meetings shall be held in accordance with the provisions of 1 V.S.A. § 310—314 (otherwise 
known as the open meeting law). 
DRB hearings for conditional use review, variances, subdivision and zoning administrator appeals 
shall be duly warned and advertised, and conducted in full compliance with 24 VSA Chapter 36, 
Vermont Municipal Administrative Procedure Act. 
Notice of such warned hearings shall be given not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. 
Notice shall be given in accordance with 24 V.S.A. § 4464 including publication in a local paper, 
posting in three (3) or more public places within the town and posting within view from the public 
right-of-way most nearly adjacent to the property for which the application is made. Said posting shall 
be by way of a red "H" poster provided by the planning and zoning department. In addition, the 
applicant(s) and owner(s) of all properties adjoining the property subject to development, which shall 
include opposite sides of a road, shall be notified using the same time frame. Recipients shall be 
informed that participation is a prerequisite to the right to make a subsequent appeal. 
Other types of hearings for development review by the DRB shall include site plan review and flood 
hazard review. Notice for such warned hearings shall be given not less than seven (7) days prior to 
the public hearing to be held for such review. Further notice shall also include all other notice 
requirements of this section. Recipients shall be informed that participation is a prerequisite to the 
right to make a subsequent appeal. 
In any hearing by the DRB, there shall be an opportunity for each person wishing to participate, to 
achieve status as an "interested person" (see article 8, definition of an "interested person" and/or 24 
V.S.A. § 4465). A written record shall be kept of the name, address, and participation of each person 
who participated in the hearing. 
"Participation" in a DRB proceeding shall be defined as offering, through oral or written testimony, 
evidence or a statement of concern related to the subject of the proceeding. 
(C) ?Decisions. Decisions of the DRB shall be rendered in accordance with 24 V.S.A. § 4464 within 
forty-five (45) days of adjourning the hearing. Decisions shall be issued in writing and shall include a 
statement of the factual bases on which the DRB has made its conclusions and a statement of those 
conclusions. All DRB decisions shall be sent to the applicant/appellant by certified mail. The date of 
the written notification of the decision shall constitute the actual date of the decision. The appeal 
period begins with that date. 


Sec. 7.2. - Zoning permits (building, change of use, sign, home occupation). 
    No land development may be commenced whether on a temporary or permanent location on the soil 
within the area affected by this bylaw without issuance of a permit by the zoning administrator. No permit 
shall be issued by the zoning administrator except in accordance with this bylaw. A permit is required for 
all development in the special flood hazard area (refer to article 5, section 5.8). 
    "Land development" means the division of a parcel into two (2) or more parcels, the construction, 
reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any building or other 
structure, or of any mining, excavation, landfill, or the filling of land with dirt or other material for the 
purpose of changing the contour of the land and any changes in the use of any building or other structure, 
or land, or extension of use of land (24 V.S.A. § 4304 (10). Note: Refer to article 5, section 5.8 for the 
definition of development in a special flood hazard area which may or may not differ from this definition. 
(A) ?General exceptions:. The following uses and structures are specifically exempted from 
municipal land use and development regulations by state statute. In accordance with 24 V.S.A. 
§ 4413, no municipal zoning permit or approval under this bylaw shall be required for the 
following except for that all development located in the special flood hazard area must be 
reviewed under article 5, section 5.8: 
1. ?Accepted agricultural practice (AAPs) as defined by the Vermont Secretary of Agriculture, 
Food, and Markets in accordance with the Act 24 V.S.A. § 4413(d) including the 
construction of farm structures. In accordance with the Act, written notification, including a 
sketch plan showing structure setback distances from road rights-or-way, property lines, 
and surface waters shall be submitted by the AAP land owner to the zoning administrator 
prior to any construction. Such structures shall meet setback requirements approved by the 
Secretary of Agriculture, Food, and Market. 
2. ?Accepted management practices (AMPs) for silviculture (forestry) defined by the 
commissioner of forests, parks and recreation, in accordance with the Act 24 V.S.A. § 
4413(d). 
3. ?Power generation and transmission facilities, which are regulated under 30 V.S.A. § 248 by 
the Vermont Public Service Board. Such facilities shall, however, conform to policies and 
objectives specified for such development in the municipal plan. 
4. ?Hunting, fishing, and trapping as specified under 24 V.S.A. § 2295 on private or public 
land. This exception, however, does not include facilities supporting such activities, such 
as firing ranges or rod and gun clubs. For the purposes of this bylaw, such facilities are 
defined as outdoor recreation facilities (or other use). 
The following uses and structures have been determined by the town to pose little or no 
potential impact on surrounding areas or overall pattern of development in The Barre Town or 
are regulated within a separate bylaw, and as such, are exempted from this bylaw in 
accordance with 24 V.S.A. § 4446: 
5. ?Subdivisions of land pursuant to town subdivision regulations. 
6. ?Minor grading and excavation associated with road and driveway maintenance. Also 
exempt is lawn and yard maintenance or such maintenance which is otherwise incidental 
to an approved use. This specifically does not exempt extraction, quarrying activities, or 
the filling of land except as noted in article 3, section 3.13 of this bylaw. 
7. ?Outdoor recreational trails such as walking, hiking, cross-country skiing, and snowmobile 
trails which are not associated with a commercial establishment and where no structures or 
parking areas are required. 
8. ?Accessory structures sixty-four (64) square feet or less in size are exempt from permit 
requirements and setbacks but not the requirements of article 5, section 5.8 when in a 
flood hazard area. 
(B) ?Application requirements. An application for a zoning permit shall be filed with the zoning 
administrator on form(s) provided by the municipality. The zoning application shall not be considered 
complete (as determined by the zoning administrator) until such time as all fees are paid, the 
application is filled out completely, all supporting documents have been submitted, and the title 
holder to the property has signed the application. If an application is determined to be incomplete, 
the applicant shall be notified in writing of the incomplete status. 
Permitted uses: Applications for a permitted use shall include a sketch plan, no smaller than 8.5" x 
11" that depicts the following: 
1. ?The dimensions of the lot, including existing property boundaries; 
2. ?The location, footprint and height of existing and proposed structures or additions; 
3. ?The location of existing and proposed accesses (curb-cuts), driveways and parking areas; 
4. ?The location of existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way; 
5. ?The location of existing and proposed water and wastewater systems, if applicable; and 
6. ?Other such information as required by the zoning administrator to determine conformance with 
this bylaw. 
Uses subject to development review: For development requiring one (1) or more approvals from the 
development review board and prior to the issuance of a zoning permit, the application information 
and fees as required for such approvals shall be submitted concurrently with the application and 
processed accordingly. The zoning permit shall be placed in a referred status waiting for action by 
the DRB. 
Flood hazard area approval: Any application for development within the flood hazard area shall be 
subject to article 5, section 5.8, and shall include sufficient copies of the application information as 
required for referrals outlined in that article [5], subsection 5.8(E). 
(C) ?Issuance. A zoning permit shall be issued by the zoning administrator only in accordance with this 
bylaw, 24 V.S.A. § 4449, and the following provision: 
1. ?Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete application, including all application materials and 
fees, the zoning administrator shall act in writing to either: 
(a) ?Issue a zoning permit; 
(b) ?Deny a zoning permit or; 
(c) ?Refer the application to the development review board and/or, if required of the zoning 
administrator, to the appropriate state agency(ies) for consideration. In accordance with 24 
V.S.A. §§ 4448, 4449, if the zoning administrator fails to act within the thirty-day period, a 
permit shall be deemed issued on the thirty-first day. A zoning permit deemed issued under 
this clause is still subject to posting and appeal. 
2. ?No zoning permit shall be issued by the zoning administrator for any use or structure which 
requires the approval of the development review board or appropriate municipal panel until such 
approval has been obtained. For permit applications that are required to be referred to a state 
agency for review, no zoning permit shall be issued until a response has been received from the 
state, or the expiration of thirty (30) days following the submission of the application to the state, 
whichever happens first. 
3. ?Transition period for amendments to this bylaw. If public notice has been issued by the 
legislative body for their first public hearing on a proposed amendment to this bylaw, then for a 
period of one hundred fifty (150) days following that notice of public hearing, the zoning 
administrator shall review any new application with regard to compliance with the proposed 
amendment and applicable existing bylaws. If the new bylaw or amendment to this bylaw has 
not been adopted or is rejected by the conclusion of the one hundred fifty-day period, the permit 
shall be reviewed under all applicable provisions of this bylaw in accordance with 24 V.S.A. § 
4449(d). 
4. ?Appeal and notice. The time for appeal to the issuance of a zoning permit shall be fifteen (15) 
days from the date of issuance. A zoning permit shall include a statement of the time within 
which appeals may be taken under section 7.8 of this article. 
5. ?Posting. The zoning administrator, within three (3) days of the date of issuance of the zoning 
permit, shall: 
(a) ?Deliver a copy of the zoning permit to the assessor; 
(b) ?Shall post in the municipal office, a copy of the permit for a period of fifteen (15) days from 
the date of issuance. 
(c) ?Further, each zoning permit issued by the zoning administrator shall be required to have 
notice of said zoning permit posted in the form of a large red "Z" poster on the parcel 
subject to the permit. The notice shall be posted in such a manner that said notice is 
clearly visible from a public right-of-way most nearly adjacent to the subject property. 
(d) ?Said notices shall remain until such time as the appeal period has expired. 
6. ?Recording requirements. Within thirty (30) days of the issuance of a zoning permit, the zoning 
administrator shall cause the delivery of either the original, a legible copy, or a notice of the 
permit to the municipal clerk for recording in the land records of the Town of Barre generally as 
provided in 24 V.S.A. § 1154(c) and file a copy in the municipal office in a location where all 
municipal land use permits are kept as required under 24 V.S.A. § 4449(c). The applicant shall 
be charged the cost of the recording fees. 
(D) ?Amendments. A zoning permit (issued by the zoning administrator) may be amended within the first 
six (6) months after the date of issuance. However, the amendment shall require a new warning for 
the new project, as stipulated in this article, subsection 7.2(C)5. This stipulation is intended to allow 
additional projects to be added to a previously submitted application. An amendment, after the 
original approved permit is recorded, shall require a new recording and a new fee to be paid by the 
applicant. If the proposed amendment is so substantial that site plan review is required, the project 
shall not be eligible for an amendment. 
(E) ?Effective date. No land development permitted pursuant to this bylaw shall take effect until the time 
for appeal, fifteen (15) days, has passed. In the event that a notice of appeal is properly filed, no 
such permit shall take effect until adjudication of that appeal, by the appropriate municipal panel, and 
the time for filing the appeal to the environmental court has passed without an appeal being taken. If 
an appeal is filed to the environmental court, the permit shall not take effect until the environmental 
court rules in accordance with 10 V.S.A. § 8504 on whether to issue a stay, or until the expiration of 
fifteen (15) days after the date of filing to the court, whichever comes first. 
(F) ?Commencement of land development. Land development shall be considered commenced when at 
least thirty-three (33) percent of the total projected cost of the project has been reached as 
determined by the zoning administrator. 
Land development approved by a zoning permit issued by the zoning administrator shall commence 
within one (1) year of the effective date of said permit. All zoning permits shall be eligible, upon a 
request in writing from the applicant, for a one-time, one-year extension of commencement so long 
as said request was received prior to the expiration of the permit. 
(G) ?Completion, determination. (Refer also to section 7.7 of this article for certificate of occupancy 
requirements.) 
1. ?Building permit. Land development approved as part of a building permit shall be completed 
within five (5) years of the effective date of said permit. 
A project shall be considered complete for zoning purposes when the footprint of the project is 
complete and the project is no longer in an unsafe manner such as excavation not covered 
and/or the project is not secured to the extent that unwanted access is obtainable. In addition, 
all requirements of other town regulations applicable to the particular project shall be complete 
to the satisfaction of the appropriate municipal official. The zoning administrator shall make the 
final determination as to whether a project is complete to the degree that a certificate of 
occupancy shall be issued. 
At the end of five (5) years from the effective date of the permit, if a certificate of occupancy has 
not been issued or should not be issued, based on the qualifications above, then the project 
previously permitted shall be in violation of this bylaw and shall be subject to enforcement 
according to section 7.11 of this article. Continued development shall require a new permit be 
obtained with a new application and review using the zoning bylaw in effect at the time the new 
application is submitted. 
2. ?Change of use permit. A change of use permit shall be considered complete, and a certificate of 
occupancy shall be issued, at such time as the use is operational and all other required town 
regulations and permit conditions have been satisfied. 
3. ?Sign permit. A sign permit shall be considered complete, and a certificate of occupancy shall be 
issued, when the main support structure is in place so that there is clear indication as to where 
on the parcel the sign is located. If the sign projects out from the support structure, that part 
must also be completed. 
4. ?Home occupation permit. A home occupation permit shall be considered complete, and a 
certificate of occupancy shall be issued, at such time as the use is operational and all other 
required town regulations and permit conditions have been satisfied. 
(Ord. of 3-9-10, § 4) 


Sec. 7.3. - Building permits. 
    No construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any 
building or other structure shall be permitted without a building permit having been duly issued. New uses 
may also be applied for as part of a building permit. The resulting use in an approved building permit shall 
deem the use approved. 
(A) ?Specific exemptions. The following uses and structures have been determined by the town to 
pose little or no potential impact on surrounding areas or overall pattern of development in the 
Town of Barre or are regulated within a separate bylaw and as such, are exempted from this 
bylaw in accordance with 24 V.S.A. § 4446. 
Exempt items are not required to meet the minimum setback for the zone in which the subject 
property is located. Said projects shall not encroach on an existing right-of-way or easement, 
shall not take place in a floodplain without approval under article 5, section 5.8, and shall not 
cause undue and/or unacceptable stormwater runoff onto a town road, into the town stormwater 
system, or onto abutting properties. 
1. ?Exterior alterations which are incidental in nature such as siding, roofing (as long as 
dimensions are not changing in anyway), windows and doors (as long as setbacks are not 
affected), chimneys, fencing except as stipulated in article 3, section 3.4, and retractable 
awnings. 
2. ?Interior alterations, improvements or repairs which do not result in a change to the exterior 
(except as noted in [paragraph] 1. above) or a change of use. 
3. ?Incidental entry stairs (excluding decks and porches), which are clearly only intended for 
ingress and egress into the structure. 
4. ?Any detached accessory structure not intended for human habitation that is sixty-four (64) 
square feet or less in size. 
5. ?Small swimming pools (three thousand five hundred (3,500) gallons or less) that are mostly 
intended for use by children that are easily removed where no ground preparation was 
necessary for installation, and that are typically removed during the winter months. 
6. ?Replacement of an existing structure or parts thereof where replacement is exactly 
equivalent to the original location and configuration and where the total square footage is 
less than five hundred (500) square feet. 
7. ?Canvas/vinyl (or equivalent) garage/tents where a foundation is not installed and the size is 
less than two hundred forty (240) square feet. 
8. ?Garage sales that meet requirements of other parts of this bylaw. 
(B) ?Zoning administrator's site plan discretion. The zoning administrator may require site plan 
review and approval by the DRB upon review of a proposed project that would not normally 
require site plan review as stipulated in article 5, section 5.6 if, in the opinion of the 
administrator, said project: 
1. ?May have an impact on municipal services or infrastructure. 
2. ?Creates changes in stormwater discharge that may affect town infrastructure or abutting 
properties. 
3. ?Requires erosion control measures to mitigate potential impacts on surrounding properties 
during and after development. 
4. ?Substantially alters existing grade. 


Sec. 7.4. - Change of use. 
    A change of use permit shall be required when the use of an existing structure or parts thereof, or 
the use of land is changed from one use to another. Permitting shall follow the requirements as stated 
previously in this article. When a change of use is created in conjunction with a building permit as stated 
in this article, section 7.3, the use shall be reviewed and approved as part of the approval process for the 
building permit. 


Sec. 7.5. - Sign permits. 
    No sign shall be erected, enlarged, or altered (see exemptions below) in any way without a sign 
permit having been duly issued. Application for a sign permit shall be made on a form supplied by the 
zoning office. 
    Signs requiring a permit are those which signal, advertises, or which is used as an outdoor display 
for the advertising of a property, establishment, enterprise or other matter. 
    No sign, other than an official street sign or others approved by the selectboard shall be erected or 
maintained within any street right-of-way, nor shall any sign (permitted or otherwise) be placed in such a 
position as to endanger traffic on a street either by obstructing a clear view or by causing confusion with 
official street signs or signals. Determination is at the zoning administrator's (ZA) discretion but as with all 
decisions of the ZA the decision shall be appealable to the development review board. 
(A) ?Specific sign exemptions. The following have been determined by the town to pose little or no 
potential impact on surrounding areas or overall pattern of development in the Town of Barre or 
are regulated within a separate bylaw and as such, are exempted from this bylaw in accordance 
with 24 V.S.A. § 4446; 
1. ?No permit shall be required for the replacement of an existing sign, the rewording or 
redesign of a sign, or redesign so long as the overall dimensions of the sign are not 
altered. 
2. ?Other examples of exempt signs, not inclusive, are: For sale signs or for rent signs, 
including those used by real estate agencies and signs of a similar nature; signs 
advertising a temporary sale, such as a garage sale; temporary signs displayed by 
contractors while working on a site; signs bearing property numbers, post box numbers, 
names of occupants of the premises, or other identification of premises so long as the sign 
does not have a commercial or industrial connotation; flags and insignia of any 
government, charitable, fraternal, religious, and educational institution; political signs that 
are erected prior to an election and then are immediately taken down after said election. 
3. ?Signs used in conjunction with a business that does not advertise the use of the property 
so much as a product for sale. Such signs are typically located in windows and shall not 
exceed four (4) square feet in size. Excluded from this exemption are such signs when 
mounted on the exterior of the building or on a sign post. 
4. ?Signs that direct the flow of on-site traffic and parking. 
(B) ?Specific sign limitations. 
1. ?In all residential zones and the conservation zone, no sign shall exceed four (4) square feet 
in size unless authorized by the development review board and only after holding public a 
public hearing and finding that the character of the neighborhood is not affected. 
2. ?In commercial, industrial, and earth resource extraction zones, the following shall apply 
unless authorized differently by the development review board and only after holding a 
public hearing and finding that a substantial change in character of the area will not occur: 
a. ?If freestanding (i.e. not attached to a building) a sign shall not exceed forty-eight (48) 
square feet in size and shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height. 
b. ?If attached to a building the sign shall not exceed five (5) percent of the area of the 
building face to which it is attached, have any characters more than four (4) feet in 
height, or be mounted so that the highest point of the sign or structure projects above 
the height of the building. 
3. ?The following types of signs shall be prohibited in all zones: 
a. ?Flashing signs or signs with moving parts. 
b. ?String lighting. 
c. ?Signs that project more than one (1) foot over a walkway or parking area. 
4. ?Signs shall be limited to advertising only the use of the premises on which the sign is 
located. 


Sec. 7.6. - Home occupation permit. 
    This bylaw shall not infringe upon the right of any resident to use a minor portion of their dwelling unit 
for an occupation that is customary in residential areas and that does not have an undue adverse effect 
upon the character of the area in which the dwelling is located. However, no home occupation shall be 
allowed until such time as a home occupation permit has been duly issued and all other sections of this 
article have been satisfied including that, depending on the use, additional sewer allocation may be 
necessary. 


Sec. 7.7. - Certificates of occupancy. 
    It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any land or structure, or part 
thereof, created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or 
structure until a certificate of occupancy is issued by the zoning administrator stating that the proposed 
use of the structure or land conforms to the requirements of this bylaw. 
    The applicant shall submit a notice in writing to the zoning office (using the form provided with the 
zoning permit) signifying that the project approved within the zoning permit is complete and ready for 
inspection. Upon receipt of such a request, the zoning administrator or his/her designee shall inspect said 
project to ensure compliance with this bylaw. Said inspection shall take place as soon as can practically 
be scheduled by the zoning office. The applicant must allow at least one (1) week for the inspection to 
occur. 


Sec. 7.8. - Appeals. 
(A) ?Zoning administrator actions. Any interested person, as defined in article 8 of this bylaw and 24 
V.S.A. § 4465, may appeal a decision or act of the zoning administrator so long as the appeal is 
received within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision or act by the zoning administrator. Such 
appeal shall be filed with the secretary of the development review board, or the municipal clerk if no 
secretary has been elected, and by filing a copy of the notice with the zoning administrator. 
    Notice of appeal shall be in writing and shall include the name and address of the appellant, a brief 
description of the property with respect to which the appeal is taken, a reference to the regulatory 
provisions applicable to that appeal, the relief requested by the appellant, and the alleged grounds why 
the requested relief is believed proper under the circumstances. 
    Within ten (10) days of the filing of a notice of appeal, the DRB may reject an appeal or request for 
reconsideration, without hearing, and render a decision which shall include findings of fact, if the DRB 
determines that the issues raised by the appellant have been decided in an earlier appeal or are based 
on substantially or materially the same facts by or on behalf of the appellant. (See 24 V.S.A. § 4470.) 
    Otherwise, the DRB shall hold a public hearing on the notice of appeal within sixty (60) days of its 
filing, as required under 24 V.S.A. § 4468. The DRB shall give public notice of such hearing as required in 
this article, subsection 7.1(B) and shall mail a copy of the hearing notice to the appellant not less than 
fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing date. 
    In accordance with 24 V.S.A. § 4468, all appeal hearings shall be open to the public. The rules of 
evidence applicable at such hearings shall be the same as the rules of evidence applicable in contested 
cases in hearings before administrative agencies in Vermont, and as set forth in 3 V.S.A. § 810. Any 
interested person or body may appear and be heard in person or may be represented by an agent or 
attorney at the hearing. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time, by the DRB, provided that the 
date and place of the adjourned hearing shall be announced at the hearing. 
    A decision on the appeal shall be rendered within forty-five (45) days after the final adjournment of 
the hearing, as required under 24 VSA § 4464 (b). The written decision shall be sent by certified mail to 
the appellant within the forty-five day period. Copies of the decision shall be mailed to every person or 
body appearing and having been heard at the hearing. Others may also request copies. In addition, 
copies of the decision shall also be filed with the zoning administrator and the municipal clerk as part of 
the public records of the municipality, in accordance with this article, subsection 7.2(C)6. 
(B) ?Development review board (DRB) decisions.. An interested person, as defined in article 8 of this 
bylaw, and 24 V.S.A. § 4465, who has participated in a preceding of the DRB may appeal a decision 
rendered in that proceeding to the environmental court. Participation in a DRB proceeding shall 
consist of offering, through oral or written testimony, evidence or a statement of concern related to 
the subject of the proceeding. Notice of the appeal shall be filed by certified mail to the 
environmental court and by mailing a copy to the clerk or the zoning administrator. In accordance 
with Vermont Rules for Environmental Court, chapter 27, rule 5(b)(1), appeals must be filed with the 
clerk of the court within thirty (30) days of the date of the written decision rendered by the DRB. 


Sec. 7.9. - Variances. 
    On an appeal of this bylaw, in which a variance from its provisions is requested for a structure that is 
not primarily a renewable energy resource structure, the development review board shall grant such 
variances and render a decision in favor of the applicant, if all the criteria as stated in the Act are found, 
and that finding is specified in the DRB's decision. (See 24 V.S.A. § 4469.) 
    In granting variances, the DRB may impose conditions it deems necessary and appropriate under 
the circumstances to implement the purpose of these regulations and the municipal plan currently in 
effect. 
    Variance criteria, in brief (for a full description of criteria, refer to 24 V.S.A. § 4469 (a) 1-5): 
A. ?There are unique physical circumstances or conditions that prevent conformity. 
B. ?That because conformance cannot be adhered to due to [paragraph] A. above, the variance is 
necessary to enable reasonable use of the property. 
C. ?The unnecessary hardship was not created by the appellant. 
D. ?The variance will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood where the property is 
located. 
E. ?The variance will represent the minimum variance that will afford relief. 
    If it can be determined prior to application for a zoning permit that the permit cannot be approved by 
the zoning administrator due to a dimensional shortcoming, the applicant may proceed directly to the 
development review board for a variance following the guidelines above and having met the requirements 
in the Act. 


Sec. 7.10. - Waivers. 
    Waivers are intended to allow the reduction of dimensional requirements in accordance with specific 
standards as allowed for in 24 VSA 4414(8). The primary intent of this provision is to provide relief to lots 
unduly burdened by zoning requirements adopted after the lots were created. Request for waivers shall 
be heard by the development review board. Waivers may be considered in the following cases: 
1. ?Structures providing for disability accessibility, fire safety, and other requirements of law; 
2. ?To provide reasonable expansions of existing uses because of limitations on the property due to 
lot configuration, topography, or structure placement and was in conformance to the zoning 
bylaw in effect at the time. 
    In all cases the waiver: 
i. ?Shall be in compliance with the town plan and state planning goals; 
ii. ?Must not change the overall character of the area in which the project is located; 
iii. ?Shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the dimensional standard being waived; 
    The development review board may impose mitigation through design, screening, or other remedies. 
(Ord. of 10-3-17, § 5) 


Sec. 7.11. - Enforcement. 
    Violations of this bylaw shall be considered civil matters and enforced one (1) of two (2) ways in 
accordance with 24 V.S.A. chapter 117, § 4451 and 24 V.S.A. § 1974a and 1977 et seq. The zoning 
administrator shall decide which method to use to bring enforcement action based on the severity and 
complexity of the violation. 
(A) ?24 V.S.A. § 4451. Any person who violates any part of this bylaw and which is enforced under 
this statute shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. No 
action shall be brought unless the alleged offender has had at least seven (7) days' warning 
notice by certified mail. An action may be brought without the seven-day notice and opportunity 
to cure if the alleged offender repeats the violation of this bylaw after the seven-day notice 
period and within the next succeeding twelve (12) months. In default of payment of the fine, the 
person, the members of any partnership, or the principal officers of the corporation shall each 
pay double the amount of the fine. Each day that a violation is continued shall constitute a 
separate offense. Fines shall be paid to the Town of Barre. 
(B) ?Judicial bureau 24 V.S.A. §§ 1974a and 1977. Upon discovery of a violation of this bylaw, the 
zoning administrator, who shall serve as issuing officer and appearing officer, may choose to 
enforce the violation through the judicial bureau and, as such, shall issue a notice of complaint 
using the complaint forms provided by the bureau. The zoning administrator shall provide two 
(2) copies of the complaint to the alleged offender, send one (1) copy to the judicial bureau, and 
shall retain one (1) copy. Information about the judicial bureau and the appeal process shall 
also be given to the alleged offender at the time the complaint is issued. 
A violation of this bylaw enforced through the judicial bureau, shall receive a civil penalty of one 
hundred dollars ($100.00) with a waiver fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense. For the 
second offense within a six-month period, the fine shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) 
with the wavier fee being one hundred dollars ($100.00). For each subsequent offense within a 
six-month period the fine and waiver shall increase by fifty dollars ($50.00). Each day that the 
violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation of this bylaw. Fines shall be paid to the 
Town of Barre. 


Sec. 7.12. - Appointment and authority of zoning administrator. 
    There is hereby established the position of zoning administrator (ZA) also known as the 
administrative officer (AO). The ZA position in Barre Town is filled by appointment of the town manager in 
accordance with Barre Town's Charter. The ZA shall have all powers assigned in 24 VSA chapter 117. 
(Ord. of 3-9-10, § 5) 


ARTICLE 8. - DEFINITIONS 


[Sec. 8.0. - Definitions generally.] 
(A) ?Except where specifically defined herein or in the Act, or unless otherwise clearly required by the 
context, all words, phrases and terms in these regulations shall have their usual, customary 
meanings. 
(B) ?In the interpretation of words and terms used, defined, or further described herein, the following 
shall apply: 
1. ?The particular controls the general; 
2. ?The present tense includes the future tense; 
3. ?The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive; the term "generally shall" indicates 
that it is mandatory unless the development review board or other applicable body deems 
otherwise in accordance with these regulations. 
4. ?The word "structure" includes "building;" and 
5. ?The word "lot" includes "parcel." 
(C) ?For the purposes of flood hazard area regulation under Article 5, National Flood Insurance Program 
definitions contained in 44 CFR Section 59.1 are hereby adopted by reference and shall be used to 
interpret and enforce these regulations. Definitions of some commonly used terms are provided 
herein. 
(D) ?Any interpretation of words, phrases or terms by the administrative officer may be appealed to 
the development review board under section 7.8. In such cases, the board shall base its 
decision upon the following definitions, state statute, and the need for reasonable and effective 
implementation of these regulations. The board shall publish and update from time to time such 
written interpretation, to ensure consistent and uniform application of the provisions of these 
regulations. 
Use definitions: 
Residential: 
Accessory dwelling: An efficiency or two-bedroom apartment may be considered as an 
accessory dwelling if [it] is located within a single-family dwelling, attached to the dwelling, or 
detached but located on the same parcel, is clearly subordinate to the primary dwelling, and the 
primary dwelling is owner occupied. Both dwellings must remain under the same ownership at 
all times. An accessory dwelling must have facilities and provisions for independent living, 
including sleeping, and food preparation. The accessory dwelling shall not exceed thirty (30) 
percent of the floor space of the primary dwelling and must have sufficient wastewater capacity. 
Bed and breakfast: A single-family dwelling in which up to ten (10) rooms are rented on a daily 
or weekly basis. Distinguished from an inn or hotel in that the owner lives on the property or 
adjacent project, the use does not change the residential character of the neighborhood, and 
food service is for guests only. 
Boarding house/lodging house: A building in which rooms are rented with or without meals to 
three (3) or more, but not exceeding, twenty (20) persons. Furthermore, each boarding house 
shall have no more than one kitchen facility whether shared or not. 
Convalescent/nursing home: A place, other than a hospital, which maintains and operates 
facilities and provides nursing care, for profit or otherwise, accommodating a person or persons, 
unrelated to the home operator, who are suffering from illness, disease, injury or infirmity, and 
require nursing care. 
Dwelling, accessory: A dwelling unit located in or attached to (appurtenant) to an owner-
occupied single-family dwelling. Said dwelling unit must clearly be subordinate to the single-
family dwelling, not exceeding thirty (30) percent of the total floor space (including unfinished 
areas of the dwelling) of the dwelling. Sufficient wastewater capacity must be shown. 
Dwelling, multifamily: A building used as the living quarters of three (3) or more families, in 
separate dwelling units, including, but not limited to, apartments, flats, and condominiums. 
Dwelling, one-family (or single-family): A detached building designed for, or occupied, or 
customarily intended to be occupied solely as a residence by one (1) family. 
Dwelling, two-family: A dwelling occupied by two (2) families in two (2) separate dwelling units 
(such as a duplex or a house with an apartment). 
Dwelling unit: One (1) or more rooms constituting a separate, independent housekeeping unit 
for permanent occupancy with facilities for sleeping, bathing and cooking, and which unit may 
occupy a portion of a structure containing other dwelling units, other uses by right, or a 
combination of these uses. 
Elderly/disabled housing complex: A multiple unit-housing complex, which is exclusively 
occupied by elderly and/or handicapped persons. For the purpose of this document, elderly 
shall refer to individuals who are sixty (60) years of age or older. 
Group home: A state-licensed or registered community care home serving people who are 
developmentally disabled or physically handicapped. Note that such a home serving eight (8) or 
fewer people is treated as a single-family residential use under 24 V.S.A § 4412(g) as long as 
not located within one thousand (1,000) feet of another permitted such home and would not be 
subject to conditional use review in any zone. For the purposes of this bylaw, an individual will 
be considered as disabled should he or she meet the definition of disabled as established in 9 
V.S.A. 139 § 4501. 
Hotel: A building or group of detached or connected buildings designed or intended to be used 
primarily for providing sleeping accommodations for travelers, or for seasonal occupancy. Such 
an establishment is designed so that normal access and egress are controlled from a central 
point. A hotel is a commercial use. 
Mobile home park: A parcel of land under single or common ownership or control which 
contains, or is designed, laid out or adapted to accommodate, more than two (2) mobile homes. 
Does not include land used solely for display or storage of mobile homes. Refer to V.S.A Title 
6201 #2 for further clarification. 
Motel: A building or group of detached or connected buildings designed or intended to be used 
primarily for providing sleeping accommodations for travelers, or for seasonal occupancy. An 
automobile court or tourist court or motor lodge shall be deemed a motel. A motel is a 
commercial use. 
Shelter: When used to define a residential structure used for the temporary shelter of individuals 
or families on a nonprofit basis, it shall follow the guidelines set out for a boarding house, except 
that a lower standard of parking requirements may be used. 
Places of assembly: 
Church or religious institution: A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where 
persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which building, together with its accessory 
buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public 
worship. 
Cinematic theater (movieplex)/auditorium: A building used for viewing and showing of cinematic 
performances or educational lectures. 
Clubs, lodge and/or union hall: A building or land used for the activities of an association of 
persons for the promotion of some nonprofit common objective, such as literature, science, 
politics, and good fellowship, and not accessory to, or operated as, or in connection with a 
tavern, eating place, or other place open to the public, which meets periodically and is limited to 
members and guests. 
Community center or recreational facility: A building, together with accessory buildings and 
uses, used for recreational and cultural activities operated for profit for benefit of the community; 
shall only have an outdoor public address system or any type of amplified music device by 
conditional use permit. 
Conference center, meeting hall: A facility, which provides meeting halls, trade centers, 
merchandise marts, or convention centers for training and other gatherings for large numbers of 
people for similar functions; may be developed separately or in combination with another 
permitted use. 
Funeral home: A building used for preparation of the deceased for burial, for display of the 
deceased and for ceremonies connected therewith before burial or cremation. 
Health clinic: Office building used by state-licensed members of a healing profession, for the 
diagnosis and out-patient treatment of human ailments. 
Health club: A use of land for facilities and/or equipment for athletic training, physical fitness or 
sports, in which the participants are paying members of a club. 
Hospital: An institution providing health services, and medical or surgical care of the sick or 
injured, including as an integral part of the institution, such related facilities as laboratories, 
outpatient departments, training facilities, central service facilities and staff offices. 
Indoor market, long-term: A building for the sale of new and used household goods, personal 
effects, tools, artwork, food, plants, handicrafts, and small appliances or equipment, or similar 
goods in small quantities for duration of more than ten (10) days at a time or less. 
Indoor market, temporary: A building for the sale of new and used household goods, personal 
effects, tools, artwork, food, plants, handicrafts, and small appliances or equipment, or similar 
goods in small quantities for duration of ten (10) days at a time or less and not more often than 
four (4) times in a calendar year. 
Open-air market, long-term: A use of land for the sale of new and used household goods, 
personal effects, tools, artwork, food, plants, handicrafts, and small appliances or equipment, or 
similar goods in small quantities for duration of more than ten (10) days at a time or less. 
Open-air market, temporary: A use of land for the sale of new and used household goods, 
personal effects, tools, artwork, food, plants, handicrafts, and small appliances or equipment, or 
similar goods in small quantities for duration of ten (10) days at a time or less and not more 
often than four (4) times in a calendar year. 
Opera house/performing arts facility: A building used for theatrical performances including the 
musical and symphonic arts to the dramatic and operatic arts. This includes the storage, 
training, housing of equipment, props, sets, clothing, and items related to the development of 
such performances. 
Public transportation facility: A facility that provides for local and regional transportation. 
Senior center: A use intended for senior citizens (people over the age of fifty-five (55)) as a 
place to gather for various purposes including, but not limited to, eating, entertainment, and 
good fellowship. Nothing shall prohibit the use of a senior center for other similar uses by other 
demographics but the primary purpose of the center shall remain for seniors. 
Sports and/or entertainment facility: Establishments designed, intended, or used primarily for 
indoor or outdoor spectator events including, but not limited to, professional and amateur 
sporting events, concerts, theatrical presentations, or motor vehicle racing. Examples include 
coliseums, arenas, racetracks and sport stadiums. 
Government facilities: 
Cemetery: A use of land for burying the dead, including grave markers, mausoleums and 
accessory structures normally associated with maintenance of cemeteries. 
Corrections facility: A secured institution under the supervision of the judiciary, correctional 
departments of any local, state, or federal governments, or any law enforcement agency in 
which persons are or may be lawfully held in custody after arrest or as a result of conviction of a 
crime. 
Court house: A building used for courts of law and associated office space. 
Emergency service facilities: A use for the provision of police, fire, emergency medical services, 
and emergency management. 
Federal, state and county offices: A facility for which the primary use is for the housing of 
federal, state or county offices. 
Municipal offices: Offices for the operation of a public-owned entity. 
Municipal parks: Municipally owned for the provision of recreation for the general public 
including playgrounds, athletic fields, outdoor ice rinks, gardens, forest nature paths, skate 
parks and swimming pools. 
Postal office: A use of land for the collection, processing and distribution of letters and parcels 
to and from the general public on a walk-in basis. 
Postal/parcel processing facility: A use of land for the receiving, processing, and forwarding of 
letters and parcels without provision of such services to the general public on a walk-in basis. 
Public works garage: A garage for the storage of supplies, vehicles, and equipment and for the 
repair of vehicles and equipment for the operation of public-owned rights-of-way, utilities, 
buildings and grounds. 
Recycling center, long-term: A use of land for the collection, sorting, temporary storage and 
shipment of recyclable materials including household waste. Such a center that provides for the 
storage of such materials must be contained in approved and environmentally accepted 
methods, which all hazardous waste materials are stored according to federal and state laws 
and are placarded. Redemption of cans and bottles is allowed as an accessory use. However, a 
redemption center may not be a recycling center. 
Recycling center, temporary: A use of land for the collection, sorting, temporary storage and 
shipment of recyclable materials including household waste, but limited to only two (2) days a 
week of operation. Such a center that provides for the storage of such materials must be 
contained in approved and environmentally accepted methods, which all hazardous waste 
materials are stored according to federal and state laws and are placarded. Redemption of cans 
and bottles is excluded as an accessory use. 
Sewer treatment plant: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
Sewage works: All facilities for collecting and pumping sewerage. 
Transfer station: Land, and/or a building used by a solid waste management facility were 
municipal solid waste (combined household, commercial, and industrial waste generated in a 
given area) is collected, aggregated, sorted, stored, and/or processed for the purpose of 
subsequent transfer to another solid waste management facility for further processing, 
treatment, transfer or disposal. 
Water treatment plant: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating of water for 
public consumption. 
Water works: All facilities for pumping, storing, and dispersing of water. 
Recreational/commercial: 
Athletic fields: A commercial use of land for the use of athletic/ sport based competition and 
practice not limited to but including baseball, soccer, football, softball, track and field, rugby, 
lacrosse, cricket and other miscellaneous field/lawn games. 
Campground: A commercial use of land for the temporary accommodations of campers, tents, 
cabins and/or recreational vehicles used for sleeping and cooking which may or may not include 
hookups for utilities along with associated recreational uses and facilities. 
Campground, primitive: A commercial use of land for the temporary accommodations of 
campers, where campsites would remain undeveloped, campers would provide their own tents 
and use low-impact camping methods. A campground of this nature will still be subject to other 
town and state health codes. 
Golf course: An area of land laid out for the game of golf with a series of holes each including 
tee, fairway, and putting green and often one (1) or more natural or artificial hazards. A golf 
course includes a clubhouse, maintenance facility, shelters and driving ranges as accessory 
uses. In addition, nonmotorized commercial recreation may also be allowed within this 
definition. 
Indoor firearms and/or archery range: A private or commercial use of a building or group of 
buildings for the discharge of firearms and/ or bows for the purpose of target practice, 
competition, safety training, and certifications. 
Outdoor firearms and/or archery range: A private or commercial use of land for the discharge of 
firearms and/ or bows for the purpose of target practice, competition, safety training, and 
certifications. 
Outdoor nonmotorized recreation: Includes, but is not limited to: downhill or cross-country skiing 
areas and similar commercial facilities. This definition does not include any campground or 
recreational vehicle park, nor any carnival type amusement park, racetrack, speedway, drag 
strip or other facility for the racing of motor vehicles, or any uses of a similar nature. 
Recreational services, indoor: A commercial establishment providing indoor sports or recreation 
by and for participants; excluding, however, community center. Any spectators would be 
incidental and attend on an irregular basis. This definition includes, but is not limited to: 
Arcades 
Bowling alley/centers 
Billiard parlor/pool hall 
Dance studio 
Martial arts studio 
Music studio 
Children's indoor play center 
Archery 
Excluding adult establishments 
Recreational services, outdoor: Commercial establishments engaged in providing outdoor 
amusement or entertainment services by and for participants. Any spectators would be 
incidental and on an irregular basis. This definition includes, but is not limited to: 
Batting cages 
Driving range 
Go-cart raceway 
Golf-course, mini 
Tennis, racquetball, and/or handball club 
Skateboard center 
Archery 
Paintball 
Remote control devices such as airplanes 
Excluding adult establishments 
Commercial/professional: 
Airport, commercial: Landing fields, aircraft parking and service facilities, passenger and 
baggage terminals, and related facilities for operation, service, fueling, repair, storage, charter, 
sales, and rental of aircraft, operated by an airport authority or governmental entity. 
Airport, private: A use which may be accessory in nature to a permitted use or a primary private 
use for the purpose of providing a single strip of land for use by small propeller-driven aircraft. 
ATM facility: A use for housing an automated teller machine for financial transactions. 
ATM facility, accessory use: A use for housing an automated teller machine for financial 
transactions where the use is not the principal use of land. 
Bank/credit union: A use for businesses involving financial transactions. 
Healing profession: A state-licensed or certified professional such as medical, dental, 
psychological, psychiatric, chiropractic, dialysis, acupuncture, reflexology, massage therapy, 
mental health professional, physical and/or occupational therapy, related medical services, 
vocational training, placement service and social and recreational activities suitable for disabled 
adults and children or similar service or a laboratory which provides bacteriological, biological, 
medical, x-ray, pathological and similar analytical or diagnostic services to doctors or dentists. 
Laboratory: A building or buildings devoted to the testing and analysis of any product or animal 
(including humans). No manufacturing is conducted on the premises except for experimental or 
testing purposes. 
Licensed professional service office building: A use with a building or group of buildings that the 
primary use of said building or buildings is a service provided by state-licensed or certified 
professional services consolatory in nature. This use includes in part the healing professions, 
engineering/architectural/surveying, accounting/financial, legal, real estate, insurance. This 
definition excludes overnight care, animal hospitals, veterinarians, or other similar services. The 
sale of merchandise is allowed only as an accessory use. 
Office building: Any building or use in which one (1) or more persons are employed in the 
management or direction of an agency, business, or organization, but excludes businesses with 
high onsite customer traffic and other uses as defined herein with the exception of engineering, 
architectural, surveying and other similar types of businesses. 
Photo processing facility: A use for the processing of photographic materials, including the 
provision of service to the general public. Also, an accessory use of land for the collection and 
return of photographic materials, including the incidental sale of photographic materials, where 
image processing is performed off the lot. 
Photo studio: A use for taking photographs, including provision of such services to the general 
public. 
Private park/recreational area: A use accessory in nature to a permitted use for the purpose for 
providing a private open space and/or recreational opportunities for the health and wellness of 
individuals associated with said use. 
Veterinary clinic/animal hospital: The use of buildings and the property on which they are 
located for the ambulatory needs of animals, such as examinations, shots, minor and major 
surgery, tests and all other veterinary services. This use allows for the boarding of animals as 
an accessory to a permitted use. 
Commercial/retail: 
Adult establishment: Any premises or part thereof in which is provided, in pursuance of a trade, 
calling, business or occupation, goods, including books, magazines, pictures, slides, film, 
phonograph records, re-recorded magnetic tape and any other reading, viewing or listening 
matter, or services including activities, facilities, performances, exhibitions, viewing and 
encounters, the principal feature or characteristic of which is the nudity or partial nudity of any 
person, or in respect of which the word "nude," "naked," "topless," "bottomless," "sexy," or any 
other word or any picture, symbol or representation having like meaning or implication is used in 
any advertisement. 
Car wash: A building or structure for the operation of motor vehicle washing. A car wash can be 
an accessory use to convenience store/motor vehicle fuel station, motor vehicle service station, 
motor vehicle repair (minor) garage, motor vehicle repair (major) garage, motor vehicle 
dealership, and motor vehicle sales. 
Convenience store/motor vehicle fuel station: A retail store in which articles for sale are of 
primarily food items such as milk, bread, beverages, ice cream, canned and bottled goods, 
snacks and candy, meat, and to complement such items may include the limited sale of 
magazines, books and music, housewares, toiletries, stationery, tobacco products and lottery 
tickets. This includes the preparation and sale of food items. Also, includes the dispensing of 
motor vehicle fuels at retail, [but] no motor vehicle repair. 
Dry cleaning drop-off: An establishment for drop-off of fabric material for the purpose of dry 
cleaning of fabric off said premises. 
Dry cleaning plant: A building or structure used primarily for the dry cleaning of fabric materials 
where such fabric is picked up and delivered by the company and is customarily for bulk 
commercial use. 
Farm stand, commercial: Preparation and sale of agricultural products principally produced on 
the farm. 
Garden center: The use of lands, buildings, or structures or part thereof for the purpose of 
buying or selling lawn and garden equipment, furnishings and supplies. 
General store: A retail establishment which deals primarily with food and other goods required 
by residents of the immediate vicinity to meet their day-to-day household needs. This includes 
the preparation and sales of food on premises. 
Greenhouse, commercial: A building for the growing of flowers, plants, shrubs, trees, and 
similar vegetation which are not necessarily transplanted outdoors on the same lot containing 
such greenhouse, but are sold directly from such lot at wholesale or retail. 
Grocery store/supermarket: A store in which various kinds of foods are offered or kept for retail 
sale, including fresh, frozen, prepared and preserved groceries, meats, poultry, fish, fruit, 
beverages, garden produce, dairy produce and bakery products; and as an accessory use, 
goods or merchandise may be kept for retail sale, including hardware, patent medicines, toilet 
preparations, personal hygiene products, household supplies and magazines. Sales intended 
for public at large. Other small retail stores such as banks or pharmacies may be allowed by 
conditional use approved as part of supermarket, providing the entrance to said store is from 
within said supermarket. Other accessory uses such as eating area or food court would also be 
allowed. 
Kennels/animal shelter: A place where domestic animals excluding livestock are bred and 
raised and are sold or kept for sale or boarded. When used to define a refuge established for 
the temporary care and holding of animals, it shall follow the guidelines set out for veterinary 
clinics. 
Laundromat: A building or structure where coin-operated laundry machines, using only water, 
detergents and additives, are made available to the public for the purpose of laundry cleaning. 
Also, allowed in this use, is the dropping off one's laundry for laundering. 
Laundry plant: A building or structure used primarily for the laundering of fabric materials where 
such fabric is picked up and delivered by the company and is customarily for bulk commercial 
use. 
Maple product dealer: A person or business, who annually buys, or otherwise acquires from 
another person, one thousand (1,000) gallons of maple syrup or more for purposes of 
packaging for resale, or for resale in bulk. Dealers are required by state law to obtain a license 
from the State of Vermont prior to doing business. 
Motor vehicle dealership: A building or structure where a franchised dealer displays motor 
vehicles for sale or rent and in conjunction with which there may be used motor vehicle sales or 
rentals, a motor vehicle repair (minor) garage, a motor vehicle repair (major) garage, a motor 
vehicle service station, and a motor vehicle fuel station. 
Motor vehicle fuel station: One (1) or more pumps, each consisting of one (1) or more motor 
vehicle fuel pumps, and a shelter, which may include the sale of oils, anti-freeze, gasoline 
additives, propane, natural gas and small accessories required for the operation of motor 
vehicles, boats and snowmobiles and shall not be used for repairs, oil changes or greasing. 
This use will be accepted with conditions. 
Motor vehicle repair (major) garage: General repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of motor 
vehicle, including heavy equipment. Other allowed uses would include commercial repair. For 
collision, damage to chassis, painting and motor vehicle detailing. 
Motor vehicle repair (minor) garage: minor repair incidental replacement of parts, lubrication to 
passenger automobiles and trucks excluding heavy equipment. 
Motor vehicle sales: A building or place where used motor vehicles are kept for display to sell 
such motor vehicles as authorized by the State of Vermont. 
Motor vehicle service station: A premises where the dispensing of motor vehicle fuels at retail or 
lubricants are kept for retail sale, and where only minor or emergency repairs essential to the 
actual operation of motor vehicles may be performed, and where grease, anti-freeze, tires, 
spark-plugs and other automobile supplies may also be sold incidentally, and motor vehicles 
may also be oiled, greased or washed, but where no other activities such as major mechanical 
and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, and welding. 
Sanitary landfill: A land disposal site employing an engineered method of disposing of solid 
waste on land in a manner that minimizes environmental hazards by spreading the solid waste 
in thin layers, compacting the solid waste to the smallest practical volume, and applying and 
compacting cover material at the end of each operating day. 
Redemption center: A building or structure for the return and redemption of beverage containers 
for the recycling of said containers, any sale of beverages, snacks on premises should be 
incidental. This may be an accessory use with conditions. 
Retail store, small: A building where goods, wares, merchandise, substances, articles, or things 
are offered or kept for sale at retail, including storage of limited quantities of such goods, wares, 
merchandise, substances, articles or things, sufficient only to service such store including 
department stores [of] forty-nine thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (49,999) square feet or 
less. Other small commercial uses may be allowed by conditional use approved as part of (retail 
store, small), providing the entrance to said store is from within said (retail store, small). 
Retail store, large: A building where goods, wares, merchandise, substances, articles, or things 
are offered or kept for sale at retail, including storage of limited quantities of such goods, wares, 
merchandise, substances, and articles sufficient only to service such store including department 
stores [of] fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or larger. Other small commercial uses may be 
allowed by conditional use approved as part of (retail store, large), providing the entrance to 
said store is from within said (retail store, large). 
Restaurant: An establishment which is primarily engaged in serving food and beverages which 
are consumed on its premises by customers seated at tables and/or counters either inside or 
outside the building thereon, and, as accessory use thereto, may be engaged in providing 
customers with takeout service of food and beverages for off-site consumption. 
Restaurant, fast-food: Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods, frozen 
desserts, or beverages in ready-to-consume individual servings, for consumption either within 
the restaurant building or for carry-out, and where either: foods, frozen desserts, or beverages 
are usually served in paper, plastic, or other disposable containers, and where customers are 
not served their food, frozen desserts, or beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table 
or counter where items are consumed. 
Industrial: 
Earth extractive: Land including accessory buildings, structures and stationary or mobile 
equipment used for the removal, refinement, crushing and/or processing of topsoil, sand, gravel, 
stone or other aggregate resources or minerals. This definition includes but not limited to granite 
quarrying and sand and gravel pit operations. 
Fuel storage tank farm: An establishment primarily engaged in the bulk storage and distribution 
of petroleum, gasoline, fuel oil, gas or similar inflammable products in fuel storage tanks. The 
limited retailing of such products shall be permitted in association with a fuel storage tank farm 
provided such retailing is clearly incidental and secondary to the bulk storage and distribution 
function. 
Heavy industry: Includes those uses which have a potential for a burden upon the town for 
water supply, sewage disposal, or other municipal services, or which could generate large 
volumes of traffic or otherwise result in unsafe conditions or unreasonable traffic congestion. 
This use classification differs from light uses in that it includes uses which require unenclosed 
structures which can be large, tall, unsightly, or which have severe potential for generation of 
odor, vibration or other nuisances which could adversely affect the character of neighboring 
areas or which may involve large amounts of exterior storage, or which may otherwise have 
large-scale impact. 
Junkyard: Means any place of outdoor storage or deposit which is maintained, operated or used 
in connection with a business for storing, keeping, processing, buying or selling junk or as a 
scrap metal processing facility. "Junkyard" also means any place of outdoor storage or deposit, 
not in connection with a business which is maintained or used for storing or keeping four (4) or 
more junk motor vehicles which are visible from any portion of a public highway. However, the 
term does not include a private garbage dump or a sanitary landfill. It does not mean a garage 
where wrecked or disabled motor vehicles are stored for less than ninety (90) days for 
inspection or repairs. 
Light industry: Includes those industrial uses not defined in this section, which are generally not 
objectionable because of noise, heavy truck traffic, or fumes. Light industry uses are those 
which consist of the production, processing, cleaning, testing, or distribution of materials or 
goods. Light industry does not involve the substantial use of water in the manufacturing 
process, or the production of substantial wastes other than from restrooms. 
Public utility facility: The building in which the public utility maintains its office or offices or 
maintains or houses any equipment used in connection with the public utility. This building 
includes water or sewerage pumping station, a water storage reservoir, a gas regulator building, 
a cable and telephone building for exchange, long distance repeater services. 
Storage, large: A building used for storage of household items and seasonal, recreational or 
commercial vehicles, boats, trailers, etc. 
Storage, mini: A building containing separate, individual self-storage units divided from the floor 
to the ceiling by a wall with an independent entrance from the exterior of the building, designed 
to be rented or leased for storage of personal goods, materials and equipment. 
Educational institutes: 
Adult day care centers: A building wherein the owner or occupier of that building provides 
accommodations for adults, for temporary care on a daily basis without overnight 
accommodations. 
Art gallery: A public or private facility which is operated as a repository or a collection of works 
of individual art pieces not mass produced consisting of one (1) or more of the following: 
Paintings, drawings, etchings or sculptures; may include the sale of related objects and services 
with such sales area limited to no more than ten (10) percent of the floor area. 
College/university campus: A building or campus of buildings with numerous uses accessory in 
nature to the overall mission of the institution of higher learning. 
College/university: An institution of higher learning. 
Commercial school: A school which provides formal or informal instruction in any subject area 
for profit or gain, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, dance studio, art school, drama 
school, music school, modeling school, charm school, school of calisthenics, and 
secretarial/business/or trade school but does not include public or private school or day 
care/pre-school/nursery school. This may be an accessory use with conditions. 
Day care/pre-school/nursery school(commercial): A facility licensed by the State of Vermont to 
provide daytime care and/ or instructions on a regular basis in a building or facility dedicated to 
the purpose and in which no overnight accommodation is provided. Private kindergartens and 
similar uses would be included. 
Day care/pre-school/nursery school (home): A facility required to be licensed by the State of 
Vermont to provide daytime care and/or instructions on a regular basis in a home of said 
caregiver dedicated to the purpose and in which no overnight accommodation is provided. 
Private kindergartens and similar uses would be included. Such uses not required to be 
licensed are exempt from regulation. 
Dormitory/residence hall: A building in which sleeping units are provided and/or rented for 
occupancy by students and/or staff members affiliated with a college, hospital, private school, 
religious order, rest home, university or similar institution, and which is regulated by such 
institution. A dormitory unit may contain communal dining facilities but shall exclude the 
preparation of meals within the sleeping units, which are provided. 
Library/research center: A quiet place (room or building) where a collection of books or other 
media are kept for use by the public. 
Museums: A public or private facility, operated as a repository or a collection of natural, 
scientific, or literary curiosities or objects of interest, not including the regular sale or distribution 
of the objects collected. Activities may include the sale of craftwork and artwork, boutiques, and 
the holding of meetings and social events. This definition includes, but is not limited, to 
aquariums, botanical, zoological gardens, science and nature centers. 
Public or private school: Any school certified by the State of Vermont Department of Education 
offering traditional academic subjects and/or technical and vocational education; includes 
parochial, private, public, charter schools and vocational/technical schools (college/university 
uses, day care/pre-school/nursery school, and day care/pre-school/nursery school (home) are 
provided elsewhere and are not included under this classification). 
(Ord. of 10-3-17, § 6) 


Sec. 8.1. - Additional definitions (non-use). 
    Accessory use: A use, which is customarily incidental and subordinate to the primary use of a lot or 
parcel of land, is located on the same lot as the primary use and is clearly related to the primary use. 
    Accessory structure: A structure which is customarily incidental and subordinate to the primary use 
or structure of a lot or parcel of land, is located on the same lot as the primary structure or use, and is 
clearly related to the primary use. 
    Acre: An acre is forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet. 
    Alteration: Structural change, change of location, or addition to a building or structure, excluding 
normal maintenance and repair. Alterations shall include any construction that changes the number of 
dwelling units, or increases the size of a building or structure in terms of its height, length, width, footprint, 
or gross floor area (see also improvement, substantial improvement). 
    Applicant: The owner of land or property proposed to be subdivided and/or developed in accordance 
with these regulations and/or his or her duly authorized representative. Any party with a legal interest in 
land subdivision and/or development may apply in cooperation with the owner of the property. 
    Bylaw: The Town of Barre Zoning Ordinance. 
    Conditional use permit: A land use allowed in a specific district(s) with the approval of the 
development review board in accordance with the requirements of article 5. 
    Curb cut: A defined area of vehicular ingress and/or egress between property and an abutting road 
right-of-way. 
    Frontage: The distance of the portion of a lot line abutting a town or state road. 
    Home occupation: The use of a dwelling or attached garage for an occupation carried on by the 
residents of the premises which uses less than twenty-five (25) percent of the total square footage of said 
dwelling or less than seventy-five (75) percent of said garage and employs no persons other than other 
occupants of said dwelling and for which the occupation does not cause an undue adverse effect on the 
character the neighborhood and does not change the residential characteristics of said dwelling and 
whereas said use is secondary. Examples would include: Cosmetology, accounting/bookkeeping, 
computer based business, home bakery. 
    Home-based business/home industry: The use of a dwelling and/or land and accessory structures by 
a full-time resident of the dwelling for a business or commercial occupation which is customarily 
performed off-premises and for which said business or occupations use of the building or land is limited to 
providing office space for and/or storage of material related to said business or occupation. 
    Interested person: 
(1) ?A person owning title to property, or a municipality or solid waste management district 
empowered to condemn it or an interest in it, affected by a bylaw, who alleges that the bylaw 
imposes on the property unreasonable or inappropriate restrictions of present or potential use 
under the particular circumstances of the case. 
(2) ?The municipality that has a plan or a bylaw at issue in an appeal brought under this chapter or 
any municipality that adjoins that municipality. 
(3) ?A person owning or occupying property in the immediate neighborhood of a property that is the 
subject of any decision or act taken under this chapter, who can demonstrate a physical or 
environmental impact on the person's interest under the criteria reviewed, and who alleges that 
the decision or act, if confirmed, will not be in accord with the policies, purposes, or terms of the 
plan or bylaw of that municipality. 
(4) ?Any ten (10) persons who may be any combination of voters or real property owners within a 
municipality listed in subdivision (2) of this subsection [definition] who, by signed petition to the 
appropriate municipal panel of a municipality, the plan or a bylaw of which is at issue in any 
appeal brought under this title, allege that any relief requested by a person under this title, if 
granted, will not be in accord with the policies, purposes, or terms of the plan or bylaw of that 
municipality. This petition to the appropriate municipal panel must designate one (1) person to 
serve as the representative of the petitioners regarding all matters related to the appeal. 
(5) ?Any department and administrative subdivision of this state owning property or any interest in 
property within a municipality listed in subdivision (2) of this subsection [definition], and the 
agency of commerce and community development of this state. 
    Pond: A small body of standing water of more than four thousand three hundred fifty-six (4,356) 
square feet, naturally or artificially formed. 
    Stream/brook: A watercourse having a source and terminus, banks, and channel through which 
water flows at least periodically at a rate of more than one and one-half (1.5) cubic feet per second or 
approximately six hundred seventy-three (673) gallons per minute. 
    Personal agricultural: The raising of fruits and vegetables for personal consumption, flowers, etc., 
and the tapping and boiling of maple syrup, unless considered to be or required to be, by state law, a 
dealer as defined by state statute. 
    Primitive camp: Is a structure that is constructed for seasonal habitation by humans of no more than 
one hundred twenty (120) days in a given calendar year, is exempt under state wastewater regulations, 
does not have toilet facilities, is no more than eight hundred (800) square feet in size and is not supplied 
electricity from an off-premises source. 


APPENDIX B - MUNICIPAL PLAN[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the municipal plan for the Town of Barre passed by the town planning 
commission on April 2, 1985 and ratified by the board of selectmen in August, 1985. Obvious misspellings 
have been corrected without notation and material in brackets [] has been added for purposes of clarity. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 6; zoning, App. 
A; subdivision regulations, App. C. 
State Law reference— Vermont Planning and Development Act, 24 V.S.A. § 4301 et seq.; authority of 
municipalities to develop a comprehensive plan, 24 V.S.A. § 4381. 


I. - GENERAL INFORMATION 
    To carry out the purposes of the Planning and Development Act any Town may undertake a 
comprehensive planning program, including related preliminary planning and engineering studies, and 
prepare, maintain and implement a Town Plan. 


A. - Powers and duties of the town planning commission 
    According to the Planning and Development Act, any Town Planning Commission may: 
1. ?Prepare a plan and amendments thereof for consideration by the Town Board of Selectmen and 
to review any amendments thereof initiated by others; 
2. ?Prepare and present to the Town Board of Selectmen proposed bylaws and make 
recommendations on proposed amendments to such bylaws; 
3. ?Administer bylaws adopted, including zoning and subdivision regulations, official map and 
capital budget; 
4. ?Undertake studies and make recommendations on matters of land development, urban renewal, 
transportation, economic and social development, urban beautification and design 
improvements, and historic and scenic preservation; 
5. ?Prepare and present to the Town Board of Selectmen recommended building, plumbing, fire, 
electrical, housing, and related codes and enforcement procedures, and construction 
specifications for streets and related public improvements; 
6. ?Prepare and present to the Town Board of Selectmen a recommended annual capital budget 
and future capital program for a period of not less than five (5) years; 
7. ?Hold public meetings; 
8. ?Require from other departments and agencies of the Town such available information as relates 
to the work of the Planning Commission; 
9. ?In the performance of its functions, to enter upon land to make examinations and surveys; 
10. ?Participate in a regional planning program; 
11. ?Retain staff and consultant assistance in carrying out its duties and powers; 
12. ?Undertake comprehensive planning, including related preliminary planning and engineering 
studies; 
13. ?Perform such other acts or functions as it may deem necessary or appropriate to fulfill the 
duties and obligations. 
    Reference: Vermont Planning and Development Act (Chapter 117, Subchapter 2, Section 4325 cited 
as 24 V.S.A. 4325). 
B. ?Content of a town development plan 
    A Town Plan may include the following: 
1. ?A statement of objectives of the Town concerning its future development; 
2. ?A land use plan, consisting of a map and statement of present and prospective land uses, 
indicating those areas proposed for forests, recreation, agriculture, residence, commerce, 
industry, public and semi-public uses and open spaces reserved for floodplain or other 
conservation purposes; and setting forth the present and prospective location, amount, intensity 
and character of such land uses and the appropriate timing or sequence of land development 
activities in relation to the provision of necessary community facilities and service; 
3. ?A transportation plan, consisting of a map and statement of present and prospective 
transportation and circulation facilities showing existing and proposed highways and streets by 
type and character of improvement, and where pertinent, parking facilities, transit routes, 
terminals, airports, railroad and port facilities, and other similar facilities or uses, with indications 
of priority of need; 
4. ?A utility and facility plan, consisting of a map and statement of present and prospective 
community facilities and utilities showing existing and proposed educational, recreational and 
other public sites, buildings and facilities, including hospitals, libraries, water supply, sewage 
disposal, refuse disposal, storm drainage and other similar facilities and activities with 
indications of priority of need; 
5. ?A statement of policies on the preservation of scenic and historic features; 
6. ?A recommended program for the implementation of the objectives of the plan; 
7. ?A statement indicating how the plan relates to development trends and plans for adjacent 
municipalities and areas, and the State Comprehensive Plan; 
8. ?(Towns with population under 2,500). An education plan, consisting of a map and statement of 
present and projected uses and requirements of the local public school system. 
Reference: 24 V.S.A., Sections 4382, 4383. 


C. - Preparation, adoption and maintenance of town plan 
    Preparation: A Town plan, or its amendments may be prepared by the Town Planning Commission. 
Upon the request of the Town Planning Commission or Board of Selectmen, the Regional Planning 
Commission may participate in this process. 
    The Town Planning Commission shall hold at least one (1) public hearing within the Town on any 
proposed plan. The Commission shall make such revisions of such proposed plan as it considers 
appropriate, and shall submit the proposed Town Plan to the Town Board of Selectmen. Simultaneously 
with such submission, the Commission shall file with the Town Clerk a copy of the proposed plan for 
public review. 
    Adoption: Not less than thirty (30) nor more than one hundred twenty (120) days after a proposed 
Town Plan is submitted to the Town Board of Selectmen, it shall hold public hearings on the proposed 
plan. 
    At any time, but not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the final public hearing, the Town Board of 
Selectmen may amend that proposed plan. A copy of the amendment shall promptly be filed with the 
Town Clerk, and notice of any amendment by the Town Board of Selectmen shall be given to the 
Planning Commission at least fifteen (15) days prior to the final hearing. 
    The Planning Commission shall be given the text of the amendment and shall submit a report to the 
Town Board of Selectmen at or prior to the public hearing. This report shall include an evaluation of the 
effect of the proposed amendment upon the following: 
1. ?The capacity of existing or planned community facilities. 
2. ?The character of the area affected. 
3. ?Traffic on roads and highways in the vicinity. 
4. ?Bylaws in effect. 
    A Town Plan shall be adopted by act of the Town Board of Selectmen after the final public hearing 
and shall be effective upon adoption. 
    Maintenance: Plans should be reviewed from time to time and may be amended in light of new 
developments and changed conditions affecting the Town. A Town Plan shall expire and have no further 
force and effect five (5) years from the date of adoption. A Town may adopt any plan in the form as 
expired or about to expire, and such plan, as so adopted, shall remain in effect for the next ensuing five 
(5) years or until amended. Upon expiration of a Town Plan under this section, all bylaws then in effect 
shall be and remain in effect, valid and binding, but no amendment thereof shall be effective unless a plan 
has been theretofore adopted and is in effect and a Planning Commission has been theretofore created. 
Reference: 24 V.S.A., Sections 4384—4387 


D. - Implementing the town plan 
    According to the Planning and Development Act, any Town which has adopted and has in effect a 
plan and has created a Planning Commission may implement the Town Plan by adopting, amending and 
enforcing any or all of the following bylaws-zoning regulations; subdivision regulations; official map; and 
capital budget and capital program. 
    It can be seen that the Town Plan is of little value unless it is implemented by the Town Board of 
Selectmen adopting and enforcing a series of bylaws. Thus the first step of plan implementation is in the 
preparation of new (or revised) development standards, including: 
1. ?Zoning regulations which are up-to-date, flexible in application, and easy to administer. 
2. ?Subdivision regulations which most effectively consider and provide for problems and service 
demands brought about by new residential development. 
3. ?Official map which shows the location and width of rights-of-way of all streets and 
drainageways. 
4. ?Capital budget and capital program which rationally schedule and coordinate the financing and 
construction of proposed public works and buildings. 
5. ?Housing, building, plumbing, electrical and fire prevention codes, which require that existing and 
new buildings meet standards of performance, safety and health. 
    The full range of these controls should be used by towns to bring about desirable growth patterns. 
Private development should be permitted only on the Town's terms, and should be located in accord with 
the plan to standards established by the Town. 
Reference: 24 V.S.A., Sections 4325, 4401 (Bylaws) and 4325 (4) and (5). 


E. - Regional collaboration 
    Towns and their individual planning commissions should work together to solve mutual development 
problems using the collective resources of the region's Regional Planning Commission. Local planning 
commissions should anticipate development and growth problems and develop expertise in handling 
these situations. 
    The strength of the individual town planning commission lies in their overall regional approach. Thus, 
they should maintain a strong region-wide organization, and concentrate on searching for solutions to 
development problems while working toward their individual town plans. 
Reference: 24 V.S.A., Sections 4345, 4347, and 4348. 


II. - DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS 


A. - Zoning regulations and zoning map 
    Towns may adopt zoning regulations and a zoning map to regulate land development. 
1. ?Zoning is an exercise of the police power by the Town Board of Selectmen granted by the State 
Legislature. 
2. ?Zoning is the division of the entire Town into districts for the purpose of regulating the: 
a. ?Use of land, buildings and water. 
b. ?Density of population and intensity of use. 
c. ?Height, bulk, construction and maintenance of buildings. 
d. ?Area of open space around buildings. 
3. ?The zoning regulations consist of two (2) parts: A text setting forth the regulations that apply to 
each different zoning district; and a map showing the location and extent of each zoning district. 
4. ?The single most important purpose of zoning and designating different areas of the Town into 
different uses, is to prevent incompatible uses from forming adjacent to each other and thus it 
helps to stabilize and protect property values. 
5. ?To be legal the zoning regulations and zoning map must be based on an adopted Town Plan for 
the future development of the community. 
6. ?Zoning is a means of insuring that all essential community uses of land and buildings in the 
community are properly situated in relation to one another, for example, that houses and 
factories are not mixed with each other. 
7. ?Zoning regulations are designed to control private development, as distinguished from public 
improvements. 
8. ?Zoning can be used (among other things) to protect agricultural areas, forestry, recreational 
uses, and to prevent urban development in natural floodplain areas. 
9. ?Most zoning regulations have provisions for at least four (4) zoning districts—agricultural or 
forest; residential; commercial; and industrial. Each of these districts is "exclusive," that is, in 
residential districts commercial and industrial development is excluded. 
10. ?A characteristic feature of zoning regulations that distinguishes it from most other bylaws is 
that the regulations differ from district to district rather than being uniform throughout the Town. 
11. ?Zoning is "prospective" (rather than retroactive) and therefore cannot be used as a major 
device for improving existing bad conditions. 
12. ?The Planning Commission advises the Town Board of Selectmen of their recommendations for 
applications for zoning amendments to either the zoning map or zoning regulations. Requests 
for zoning amendments must be considered with regard to the overall Town Development Plan. 
13. ?A Board of Adjustment, which may consist of members of the Planning Commission, is 
established by the Town Board of Selectmen as a quasi-judicial body, and is charged with 
carrying out functions granted by the Planning and Development Act; it is not a legislative body. 
14. ?The Board of Adjustment has the following powers: 
a. ?To hear and decide appeals concerning the zoning regulations. 
b. ?To hear and grant or deny a request for a variance due to practical difficulties or 
unnecessary hardship. 
c. ?To hear and grant or deny a request for a zoning permit. 
d. ?To hear and grant or deny a request for a conditional use permit as authorized under the 
zoning regulations. 
    Reference: 24 V.S.A., Sections 4401(b)1, 4405, and 4461. 


B. - Subdivision regulations 
    The Town Board of Selectmen may authorize its Planning Commission to approve, modify or 
disapprove all subdivision plats of land, and approve the development of plats previously filed with the 
Town Clerk if such plats are undeveloped under the subdivision regulations. 
    Within a rural town (population less than 2,500) such authorization may include the review of plats 
showing only new streets or highways. 
    Towns may adopt subdivision regulations setting forth the procedures, requirements and 
specifications for the submission, processing and design of plats. Subdivision regulations must be 
adopted prior to the exercise of any authority by the Town Planning Commission. 
    The purpose of the subdivision regulations is to insure that recognized standards for streets, water 
supply, sewage disposal, parks and other land or facilities intended to be dedicated to the Town are 
followed, so that new development will not endanger public health, safety or welfare and that public 
expense maintaining the development will be kept to a minimum. 
    The Planning Commission may, simultaneously with the approval of a subdivision plat, modify 
applicable provisions of the zoning regulations, to encourage flexibility of design and development of land 
in such a manner as to promote its most appropriate use to facilitate the adequate and economical 
provision of streets and utilities, and to preserve the natural and scenic qualities of open land. This 
procedure is applicable only to land zoned for residential purposes, and results in a number of dwelling 
units which cannot exceed the number which would be permitted if the land were subdivided into lots 
conforming to the minimum lot size and density requirement of the zoning regulations. 
    Through subdivision control, the Town assures a positive control over future development. Reasons 
for subdivision control are: 
1. ?To obtain a good development layout which is in harmony with the existing development; 
2. ?To insure that the development will be serviced by adequate roads, streets, utilities, drainage 
and other facilities that are economical to service and maintain; 
3. ?To insure that appropriate schools, open space, and recreation areas are provided, and that 
these have a proper relation to residential development; 
4. ?To insure that improvements are installed to serve new residents moving into the development; 
5. ?To insure that these improvements are installed at a cost to be borne by the benefited 
properties and not at general Town expense. 
Reference: 24 V.S.A., Sections 4413—4425 and also 4401(b)(2). 


C. - Official map 
    The Planning and Development Act authorizes a Town to adopt (and amend) an official map. The 
official map shows the location and widths of rights-of-way of all streets and drainageways. No building or 
improvement may be constucted within the lines of any streets or drainageways shown on the official 
map. 
    The official map is based upon the most accurate data available as to the location and width of 
streets and drainageways. Where questions arise which require more precise determinations of the 
location of any street right-of-way line or drainageway, the Town Board of Selectmen shall have a survey 
prepared of the section in question, which may become part of the official map. 
Reference: 24 V.S.A., Sections 4401(b)3 and 4422—4425. 


D. - Capital budget and capital program 
    Financially, it is not possible for taxpayers, Town government and private interests to translate all 
plans into community services at the same time. Therefore, priorities must be established and choices 
made—first things first. These choices are expressed by policy decisions and actions of elected 
representatives of the Town. They are scheduled in the capital program. 
    The Planning and Development Act authorizes a Town Board of Selectmen to adopt (and amend) an 
annual capital budget and a capital program for a period of not less than five (5) years. 
    A capital budget lists and describes the capital projects to be undertaken during the coming fiscal 
year, the estimated cost and the proposed method of financing. 
    A capital program is a plan of capital projects proposed to be undertaken during each of the following 
five (5) years, the estimated cost and the proposed method of financing, and project priority. 
    A capital project is: 
1. ?Any physical betterment or improvement including furnishings, machinery, apparatus or 
equipment for such physical betterment or improvement when first constructed or acquired; or 
2. ?Any preliminary studies and surveys relating to any physical betterment, or improvement; or 
3. ?Land or rights in land; 
4. ?Any combination thereof. 
    The capital budget and program is arranged in such manner as to indicate the order or priority of 
each capital project, and to state for each project: 
1. ?Description of the proposed project and estimated total cost thereof. 
2. ?Proposed method of financing, indicating the amount to be financed by direct budgetary 
appropriation or duly established reserve funds, the amount estimated to be received from 
federal or state governments; and amount to be financed by issuance of obligations, showing 
proposed type or types of obligations, together with the period of probable usefulness for which 
they are to be issued. 
3. ?An estimate of the effect upon operating costs of the Town. 
    No capital project may be authorized or undertaken unless it is included in the capital program as 
adopted or amended. Amendments to the capital program are possible by Town Board of Selectmen 
action. 
    To help ensure that the capital budget and program is used properly as a tool to implement the Town 
Plan and to make efficient and effective use of Town funds, the Town Planning Commission should act as 
coordinating body for preparation, review and recommendation of all suggestions for capital projects. 
Reference: 24 V.S.A., Section 4426. 


E. - Building, plumbing, electrical, housing, and fire prevention codes 
    The purpose of building codes is to protect the public against faulty design or construction of 
buildings. The building code must insure that occupants, adjoining properties, neighbors, and general 
public are protected from the erection of structures that are likely to collapse or lead to unhealthy or 
unsanitary conditions. Building codes must also prohibit conditions conducive to fire hazards. While the 
requirements deal with the physical structure of the building, they are not limited to new buildings, and 
apply to building repairs and alterations. 
    The purpose of the plumbing code is to establish reasonable safeguards for sanitation in buildings 
and property, and to protect the health of the public against hazards of inadequate or unsanitary plumbing 
installations. 
    The purpose of an electrical code is to establish safeguards for the protection of life and property. 
The necessity of enforcing good electrical practices is amply demonstrated by the fact that misuse of 
electricity is the second leading cause of fire in the United States. 
    The purpose of a fire prevention code is to establish safeguards from fire hazard in the construction 
of buildings to protect life and property. It establishes the responsibility of the controlling agencies to 
protect the public. 
    A housing code is adopted by a Town to maintain standards of living in existing structures, although 
such code also covers new residential structures. The code establishes maintenance standards, number 
of people that may occupy a building, and minimum standards related to facilities and equipment 
(bathrooms, heating, hot running water, etc.) of a residence. The building owner is responsible for: 
maintaining a sound building; keeping the structure and property in a clean, sanitary and safe condition; 
and disposing of garbage and rubbish in an approved manner. 


III. - PLAN OBJECTIVES 
    This section sets forth town goals and recommends objectives. Following this section various 
elements of the plan are inventoried and analyzed, and projections and recommendations are made. 
Recommendations are in the form of suggested policy statements. 
GOALS 
OBJECTIVES 
Controlled 
Development and 
Orderly Growth 
Promote orderly development of a variety of land uses. 

Direct and coordinate local, state, and federal transportation systems. 

Encourage urban growth to take place in clusters when feasible. 

Support controlled commercial expansion. 

Promote sound development practices. 
Conservation of Natural 
Resources 
Preserve agricultural lands; promote conservation of forested and nonfarmed 
open lands. Protect the town's watercourses and water bodies. 

Provide for public recreation areas. 

Protect aquifers and recharge areas from pollution contamination or damage. 
Preservation of Human 
Amenities 
Encourage traffic safety.  
Promote safe and sanitary homes for all people within an environment that is 
visually attractive. 

Furnish assistance in planning community facilities in conformance with 
expressed land use objectives. 
Economic Stability 
Attract business activities which can employ and expand on the range of skills 
offered by the existing labor force. 

Provide for year-round economic activities by encourage diversification of the 
economic base. 
Strengthen Municipal 
Financial Structure 
Encourage public expenditures designed to accomplish planned objectives. Aid 
equitable assignment of costs to the beneficiaries of regional facilities. Study 
and consolidate with regional municipal services. 
 


IV. - THE LAND USE PLAN 


A. - Population 
    Although the Town has continued to gain in population, the growth between 1970 and 1980 was far 
below that of 1960 when the Town experienced a 42% growth rate. The 1980 Census figures show a gain 
of 581 persons or 9% during the ten years following 1970. However, with a figure of 7,090, Barre Town 
remains the third largest community within the Central Vermont region. 
Barre Town Population 
Year 
Number 
% Change 
Source 
1960 
4,580 

U.S. Census 
1970 
6,509 
+42% 
U.S. Census 
1980 
7,090 
+9% 
U.S. Census 
1985 
7,300 
+3% 
State Planning Office Forecast 
1990 
7,516 
+3% 
State Planning Office Forecast 
1995 
7,744 
+3% 
State Planning Office Forecast 
2000 
7,934 
+2.5% 
State Planning Office Forecast 
 
    A comparison of 1970 and 1980 age breakdowns results in understanding where the Town's 
population growth is taking place. 
Age Breakdown of Population 
Year 
Under 18 
18-64 Years 
65 Years + 
1970 
2,681 
3,352 
475 
1980 
2,335 
4,099 
656 
% Change 
—13% 
+22% 
+38% 
 
Percent of Population by Age Breakdown 
Year 
Under 18 
18-64 Years 
65 Years + 
1970 
41% 
52% 
13% 
1980 
33% 
58% 
18% 
 


B. - Housing 
    Accompanying the Town's population growth has been an increase in housing throughout the Town. 
In 1970, there were 1,848 housing units in Barre Town. By 1980, this number had increased to 2,288 or 
24%. Of this number, 4 are seasonal and 313 are rental occupied. 
    The housing stock in Barre Town is dominated by single-family, owner-occupied units. There 
continues to be a need for additional rental units and housing for low and moderate income people. 
Number of Housing Units 
Year 
Single  
Family  
Structure 
Apartment 
Mobile  
Home 
Total  
Units 
Vacation/  
Seasonal 
1970 


85 
1,848 

1980 
1,828 
385 
75 
2,288 
4 
1983 
1,887 
398 
91 
2,376 
1 
1984 
1,908 
412 
93 
2,413 
1 
 
Housing Units by Year Structure Built 
Before  
1940 
1940-49 
1950-59 
1960-69 
1970-74 
1975-80 
869 
159 
221 
565 
337 
184 
 
    In addition to the above, a 36-unit elderly housing complex was completed late in 1984 in Lower 
Graniteville by the Barre Housing Authority. The Housing Authority also has a 15-unit complex designed 
for East Barre. There is no firm schedule for construction of this complex at this time. 
    Based on past experience (1980-83), single-family structures are being built at a rate of 20—25 per 
year, 1-5 mobile homes are added per year, and 5—15 apartment units are being added, mostly 
conversions of existing structures. 


C. - Employment and Economic Base 
    Granite continues to be a major factor in the employment base of the Town. However, the textile 
manufacturing facility in Lower Websterville and the railcar manufacturing facility in the Wilson Industrial 
Park have created a significant number of jobs in the community. The continuing development of the 
industrial park will hopefully further diversify the Town's employment and economic base. The following 
table shows current employment by industry in the Town: 
Employment By Industry 
Mining 
?172 
Construction, Special Trades 
?173 
Food 
? ?41) 
Textile 
?168) 
Stone, Clay, Glass 
?145)?Manufacturing 
Transportation Equip. 
?200) 
Durable Goods 
? ?45) 
Non-Durable 
? ?27)?Wholesale Trade 
Food Stores 
??59) 
Automobile 
? ?41)?Retail Trade 
Eating, Drinking Establishments 
?102 
Membership Organizations 
? ?27 
TOTAL 
1200 
 
    Agriculture has traditionally been a principal occupation in Vermont and land is a valuable resource. 
Looking at farming trends in Barre Town, one will note there has been a decrease in the number of farms 
and in the number of cows. Of course, some farms have grown larger, but land continues to go out of 
agricultural production. As development of industries, services, housing, and other similar types of land 
use continues, increasing pressure is being felt by the Town so that less and less of our better farmlands 
are available for farming. 
    The potential of the soils in Barre Town for farming have been rated based on the categories of 
highest, good, low, and limited use. Out of a total of 19,328 acres, 5,000 acres (26%) is classed as 
highest potential for agricultural; 2,947 acres (15%) is good potential; 1,240 acres (6%) is low potential; 
the remaining acres are in the limited category. This is not to say that some farming does not take place 
on the poor soils, but that they are more difficult soils to use for agricultural purposes. 
    Oftentimes, prime agricultural soils are most conducive to development. By identifying the prime 
soils, hopefully consideration will be given to preserving the better farming lands and encourage 
development on other than our best agricultural soils. 
    The community is at present basically agricultural and rural-residential with some industrial and a 
small amount of service and retail business. 
    As in the case in nearly all municipalities within the Central Vermont area, residential property 
continues to be the largest contributor to the tax base. The following table reflects this fact in Barre Town: 
Barre Town Property Valuations-1983 

Value 
% of Total 
Residential: 


Less than 6 acres 
$88,190,000 
58% 
Over 6 acres 
13,300,000 
8% 
Mobile Homes: 


Class I (no land) 
796,000 
.5% 
Class II (with land) 
750,000 
.4% 
Commercial 
8,600,000 
6% 
Industrial 
18,107,000 
12% 
Electric Utilities 
3,400,000 
2% 
Other 
62,000 
.04% 
Farms 
2,357,000 
2% 
Woodland 
— 
— 
Vacation: 


Class I (under 6 acres) 
— 
— 
Class II (over 6 acres) 
27,000 
.01% 
Miscellaneous 
5,480,000 
4% 
Personal Property 
5,854,000 
4% 
Inventory 
4,391,00 
3% 
TOTALS: 
; $151,328,000 
100% 
 


D. - Land Use 
    Land use patterns within the Town could best be described as mixed. Although a predominantly rural 
community, the Town has experienced steady suburban growth. 
    The older communities in [the] Town evolved during the nineteenth century and were closely related 
to the granite industry. These communities being Upper and Lower Graniteville, Upper and Lower 
Websterville, East Barre and South Barre, all in the southeastern part of the Town. These older 
communities contain large older homes, the majority of the multi-family dwellings, and neighborhood 
convenience stores and facilities. 
    More recent residential development has taken place adjacent to the City boundary at Richardson 
Road, Beckley Hill, Camp and Cassie Streets, and Trow Hill, and in the southerly end of Route 14 in 
South Barre. The most recent development, residential and industrial, has taken place in the Lower 
Websterville area with the Wilson Industrial Park being located there. 
    The granite quarries found in Barre Town are a significant land use and represent an important base 
to the Town's economy. The quarries are concentrated in the Millstone Hill area of the Town. Although 
residential uses are found surrounding the quarries, much of the surrounding mineral rights are owned by 
the granite companies and should be considered in any future land use planning. 
    The agricultural land in Town has been rated as to its usefulness for agricultural purposes. The 
active farms in Town are located on the West Hill, Beckley Hill, East Hill, Lowery Road, and Lower 
Websterville. 


E. - Future Land Use 
    The plan for future land use is depicted on the map which follows. Land use is classified into six (6) 
primary use categories and described below for each category is the purpose or intent for designating the 
category and the policies which should be implemented through development of land use regulations. 
1. ?Medium to High Density Residential: Land designated for this use is presently, or is expected to 
be in the future, served by municipal sewerage facilities and in most instances by municipal 
water supply facilities. Development permitted in these areas should be required to connect to 
public facilities, and further, development should be restricted from unserved areas until such 
time as public facilities are installed by either the Town or a developer. Because these areas are 
served by public facilities, a higher density of residential use would be acceptable. 
2. ?Low Density Residential: The large portion of the Town designated for this use is not particularly 
suitable for other uses such as commercial or industrial, and due primarily to topographic 
conditions these areas are not expected to be served by public sewer or water facilities within 
the foreseeable future. The area would, however, be suitable for low density residential use, 
agricultural use, recreation, etc. Controls on minimum lot sizes, large enough to support use of 
subsurface sewage disposal systems for a prolonged period and regulations on installation of 
such systems should be developed to maintain public health standards. 
Concerning both residential categories, consideration should be given when developing zoning 
regulations to permitting certain compatible uses, such as a neighborhood grocery store within a 
residential area. It would also be wise to include within any regulations a provision for planned 
developments, which would allow clustering of development and preservation of common open 
space. 
3. ?Commercial: Areas designated for commercial use are generally level, have good access by 
highway and are within existing or proposed water and sewer service areas. The existing 
commercial service areas are located naturally in close proximity to the higher density 
residential areas or where highway access is particularly favorable. It would appear, given 
recent growth trends in the Town, that additional commercial activity could be supported by the 
Town, as shown on the land use maps. 
4. ?Industrial: A sizeable portion of the Town is designated for industrial use which includes all 
phases of the granite manufacturing industry. Other types of industrial uses generally require 
level acreage with good access by highway or rail service, which accounts for the remaining 
areas shown on the map. It is recommended that in controlling industrial uses the Town 
generally permit light industrial uses, but that heavy industrial uses be regulated with respect to 
acceptable performance standards. In designing regulations, attention should also be given to 
the special types of waste generated by some industries. 
5. ?Conservation: Two (2) areas are designated for conservation use, which implies very low 
intensity uses such as agriculture, forestry, very large lot residential, etc. The first area 
encompasses the watershed, within Barre Town, of the Orange Reservoir and the second 
encompasses the watershed of Pecks Pond. As time passes, it will become increasingly 
important for the Town to protect existing and potential water supplies. 
6. ?Public Land: The final category of use shown on the map is all existing land controlled by public 
or community organizations. These lands include such uses as Town administration, schools, 
cemeteries, fire stations, etc. 
Editor's note— The official map referred to in this section is not printed herein but is on file in 
the office of the clerk/treasurer. 


APPENDIX C - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein are the subdivision regulations of the town as adopted by the board of 
selectmen on November 22, 1994. The absence of a history note denotes that the section derived 
unchanged from the original regulations. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. 
Changes made for clarity are indicated by brackets [ ]. Formerly, App. C contained subdivision regulations 
adopted March 7, 1973, as subsequently amended. Such provisions were repealed by § 1 of the 
ordinance adopted November 22, 1994. 
Cross reference— Any subdivision ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-5(15); guidelines for numbering of 
buildings, § 5-1 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 6; utilities, Ch. 8; zoning, App. A,; 
municipal plan, App. B. 
State Law reference— Vermont Planning and Development Act, 24 V.S.A. 4301 et seq.; authority of 
municipalities to develop a comprehensive plan, 24 V.S.A. § 4381; authority of municipalities to adopt 
subdivision regulations, 24 V.S.A. § 4401(b)(2). 


ARTICLE I. - ENACTMENT, PURPOSE, AUTHORIZATION, WAIVERS, DEFINITIONS 


Section 101. - Enactment. 
    In accordance with the Vermont Planning and Development Act, hereinafter referred to as the "Act", 
24 VSA, Chapter 117, Subchapter 6. By-Laws, there are hereby established Subdivision Regulations. 
These regulations shall be known as the "Town of Barre, Vermont Subdivision Regulations". These 
regulations shall supersede all previous subdivision ordinances. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 1) 


Section 102. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the subdivision regulations is to provide for orderly Town growth, and to further the 
purposes of the Act, § 4302. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 1) 


Section 103. - Authorization. 
    The development review board is authorized and empowered to administer all acts and things set 
forth and provided by 24 VSA § 4401 and § 4418. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 1) 


Section 104. - Waivers and variances. 
    In accordance with the 24 VSA §4418(2)(A): 
A. ?If it be determined that strict compliance with the rules and regulations of this ordinance would 
result in extraordinary hardship to the subdivider due to unforeseen difficulties or conditions 
beyond the control of the subdivider, then the development review board may modify, vary or 
waive such compliances, provided that such modification, variance or waiver will not nullify the 
intent or purpose of this ordinance, and provided further that such modification, variance, or 
waiver, and the reasons therefore, shall be entered upon the minutes of the development review 
board. 
B. ?Conditions of, and applications for variances. 
(1) ?In granting modifications, variances and waivers, the development review board may 
attach such other reasonable conditions as will, in its judgment, justify such modifications, 
variances or waivers and still maintain substantially the objectives of this ordinance. 
(2) ?Each and every modification, variance or waiver of the rules and regulations provided in 
this ordinance sought by a subdivider, shall be specifically applied for, in the numerical 
order as found in this ordinance, in writing by the subdivider at the time of presenting the 
plans. Any condition shown on the preliminary or final plan which would require a 
modification, variance or waiver, shall constitute a ground for disapproval of the preliminary 
or final plan unless a written request for such a modification, variance or waiver is 
accompanied with the plans. 
(3) ?If a discrepancy should exist between the subdivider conceptual plan, preliminary plan and 
the final subdivision plan, the data contained in the final subdivision plan shall take 
precedence. 
C. ?Standards for granting a variance, waiver, or modification of the rules and regulations. 
(1) ?There are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity, narrowness, 
or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical 
conditions peculiar to the particular property. 
(2) ?If granted, will not result in a change of the intent of the use of the land in the designated 
zone. 
(3) ?If granted, will represent the minimum variance, waiver, or modification that will afford 
relief and will represent the least deviation possible from the subdivision regulations and 
the municipal plan. 
(4) ?If granted, will not create or extend a burden on municipal services including municipal 
utilities. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 1) 


Section 105. - Amendments, previously approved subdivisions. 
    No change to a previously approved subdivision plan shall occur unless first reviewed and approved 
by the planning director under administrative review in accordance with 24 VSA § 4464 (c). Administrative 
review does not apply to any approved plan that would alter a boundary line or result in substantial impact 
under any of the standards set forth in the zoning bylaws, subdivision ordinance, or other town regulation. 
No amendment issued as an administrative review shall have the effect of substantially altering any of the 
findings of fact of the most recent approval. 
    A previously approved subdivision that cannot be administratively reviewed and approved due to the 
above, such as an alteration in a boundary line, shall require revised subdivision approval by the 
development review board in one (1) public hearing. This requirement includes such instances where 
adjacent contiguous parcels are being combined or "merged" into one (1) parcel. 
    In the case of adjacent contiguous parcels being combined into one (1) parcel where one (1) or more 
lot(s) is subject to an amendment but not another (meaning one (1) lot(s) received subdivision approval 
and another did not), revised subdivision approval is still required. If parcels that are not subject to 
amendment because they preexist (created before) this ordinance, then an amendment is not necessary. 
If an amendment is not necessary because of the preexistence of the lot(s), a report should be submitted 
to the development review board indicating such combination for the record. Refer to section 306 for 
more specific detail. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2010, § 1) 


Section 106. - Severability. 
    The invalidity of any provision of these regulations shall not invalidate any other part. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 1) 


Section 107. - Definitions. 
    As used in these regulations, words in the singular include the plural and those in the plural include 
the singular. The word "person" includes a corporation, unincorporated association and a partnership, as 
well as an individual. The word "building" includes structures and shall be construed as if followed by the 
phrase "or part thereof". The word "street" includes avenues, boulevards, courts, expressways, highways, 
lanes, and roads. The word "watercourse" includes channels, creeks, ditches, drains, dry runs, springs, 
streams, rivers, lakes, and ponds. The word "may" is permissive; the words "shall" and "will" are 
mandatory. 
    Act. Title 24, Chapter 117, The Vermont Municipal and Regional Planning and Development Act. 
    Alley. A minor right-of-way providing secondary vehicular access to the side or rear of two (2) or 
more properties. 
    Authorized agent. A person or group of persons who have been duly authorized in writing filed with 
the development review board by the subdivider to act in his or her behalf. Said written authorization shall 
be notarized. 
    Board. The development review board (DRB). 
    Boundary line adjustment (BLA) . Adjustments to boundary lines, also known as lot lines, in which 
there is a sale, conveyance, or exchange of land from adjacent lots which does not increase the number 
of parcels of land. A boundary line adjustment is not considered a subdivision of land. 
    Clear sight triangle. An area of unobstructed vision at street intersections defined by lines of sight 
between points at a given distance from the intersection of street sidelines. 
    Commission. The Town of Barre Planning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the "commission". 
    Cul-de-sac. A minor street opened at one (1) end only with a provision for a turnaround. 
    Easement. A nonpossessing interest held by one (1) person in land of another whereby the first 
person is accorded partial use of such land for a specific purpose. An easement restricts but does not 
abridge the rights of the fee owner to the use and enjoyment of his land. Easements fall into three (3) 
broad classifications, which are easement, surface; easement, subsurface; easement, overhead. 
    Interior walk. A right-of-way for pedestrian use extending from a street into a block or across a block 
to another street. 
    Lot. A tract or parcel of land with or without buildings thereon. 
    Plan. A map or chart of a subdivision with surveyed lot lines and dimensions as well as other 
pertinent information as these regulations may require, that after final approval becomes the approved 
document of the overall subdivision. 
    Plat. A map or chart of surveyed lot lines and dimensions, which for the purpose of this ordinance, is 
recorded in the town's land records depicting said lines and dimensions as an approved subdivided lot in 
accordance with 24 VSA § 4465(b). 
    Right-of-way. Any strip or area of land, including surface, overhead, or underground, granted by 
deed or easement, for construction and maintenance according to designated use, such as for drainage 
and irrigation canals and ditches; electric power, telegraph, and telephone lines; gas, oil, water, and other 
pipe lines; highways, and other roadways, including right of portage; sewers; flowage or impoundment of 
surface water; and tunnels. 
    Roadway. That portion of a street or alley used for vehicular access. 
    Sight distance. The maximum extent of unobstructed vision (in a horizontal or vertical plane) along a 
street based on acceptable highway standards. 
    Street. A strip of land including the entire right-of-way, intended for use as a means of vehicular and 
pedestrian travel. 
(1) ?Minor streets are those used primarily to provide access to abutting properties. The minimum 
right-of-way width shall be fifty (50) feet with wider slope and drainage rights if deemed by the 
board. 
(2) ?Principal streets are those which, in addition to giving access to abutting properties, intercept 
minor streets and provide routes carrying considerable volumes of traffic to community facilities 
and to major traffic streets, and shall be designed by the board at the time the preliminary plan 
is submitted. The minimum right-of-way width shall be sixty (60) feet with wider slope and 
drainage rights if deemed by the board. 
    Subdivider. The owner, or authorized agent of the owner, of a subdivision. 
    Subdivision: 
(1) ?A division of any part, parcel or area of land by the owner or agent, either by lots or by metes 
and bounds, into lots or parcels two (2) or more in number for the purpose of conveyance, 
transfer, improvement or sale with appurtenant roads, streets, lanes and alleys, dedicated or 
intended to be dedicated to public use, or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting 
thereon. A subdivision as defined above includes division of a parcel of land having frontage on 
an existing street, into two (2) or more lots each having frontage on an existing street. 
However, in accordance with 24 V.S.A, Chapter 117, § 4413(d), these regulations shall not 
restrict accepted agricultural or silvicultural practices as defined by the commissioner of 
agriculture, food, and markets or the commissioner of forests, parks, and recreation, 
respectively, under 10 VSA §1021(f) and §1259(f). 
(2) ?Any development of a parcel of land (for example, as a shopping center or a multiple-dwelling 
project), which involves the installation of streets and/or alleys, even though the streets and 
alleys may not be dedicated to public use and the parcel may not be divided immediately for 
purposes of conveyance, transfer or sale. 
(3) ?The term subdivision shall include the amendments where previously approved subdivisions 
are altered but does not include boundary line adjustments. 
(4) ?The term subdivision shall include the subdivision by deferral of permit. A deferral of permit is 
required for the subdivision of undeveloped lots when the owner and intended purchaser, if any, 
does not intend to develop the lot for the purpose of constructing any structure or building 
requiring sewage disposal, water supply, or plumbing. A waiver of development rights must be 
signed by the owner and the intended purchaser, if any, and recorded in the Barre Town Land 
Records. 
Prior to any development on a lot created by deferral of permit a subdivision permit must be 
obtained complying with the standards and rules of the town's subdivision regulations. If the 
lot(s) can not meet the regulations in effect at the time of the request to remove the deferral of 
permit, a permit will be denied and no building development will be permitted. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2010, § 1) 


ARTICLE II. - SUBDIVISION REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE 


Section 201. - Notice of application. 
    Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed to be made, before any contract for sale of such 
subdivision or any part thereof is made or before any permit for erection of a structure in such proposed 
subdivision is granted, the subdivider shall apply in writing to the development review board for and 
secure approval of the proposed subdivision. 
    Notice of submission for board approval of a subdivision plan shall be filed in writing by the owner or 
their agent with the planning and zoning administrator, who shall notify the chairman of the board. There 
are three (3) levels of subdivision plan filing: 
(1) ?Subdivision conceptual plan; 
(2) ?Subdivision preliminary plan; and 
(3) ?Subdivision final plan. 
    Deferral of permit may be filed as part of a subdivision preliminary plan and a subdivision final plan. 
Boundary line adjustments shall follow the requirements in section 305 of this document [chapter]. 
    The subdivision conceptual plan is not mandatory, however, it is recommended that the owner or 
their agent submit these plans as part of the application review process for consideration and review by 
the development review board prior to submitting preliminary and final plans. A warned public hearing is 
required for all final plans. The board, after a public hearing(s), may approve, modify and approve, or 
disapprove such final plan. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 2) 


Section 201-A. - Notification of on-site testing. 
    Where these subdivision regulations require on-site testing as part of the required information, the 
subdivider or their representative shall notify the planning and zoning office of the program for said 
testing. Said notification shall indicate the types, location, and the persons performing said tests. Such 
notification shall be through written or verbal communication, filed with the planning and zoning office at 
least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the beginning of any tests. The development review board may send 
a representative to observe said testing. The planning and zoning office shall be notified of any changes 
in scheduling as soon as possible. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 2) 


Section 202. - Exhibits. 
    The applicant shall submit to the planning and zoning office for the consideration of the board the 
following exhibits: 
(A) ?The subdivision plan, for the parcel to be subdivided shall be prepared and submitted in 
accordance with the subdivision requirements hereinafter set forth in the regulations, with a 
location map clearly showing the location of the proposed subdivision in the town. 
(B) ?The applicant shall obtain approval from the appropriate town official for sewage disposal and 
be in compliance with the Barre Town Code chapter 8, utilities, article II, sewage or chapter 4, 
health, article III, on-site wastewater disposal systems based on whether or not the subdivision 
involves municipal sewer service or private on-site wastewater disposal systems. 
A written report on both percolation tests and soil testing to determine the soils characteristics, 
depth to ledge and depth to the seasonal high ground water table for all on-site wastewater 
disposal systems shall be provided. 
(C) ?All applications shall be accompanied by a statement indicating the method(s) of supply of 
potable water to the proposed subdivision and also show the approximate location. If on-site 
water supply(ies) is not proposed, engineering evidence shall be submitted to substantiate the 
proposed method of water supply. 
(D) ?Any studies, reports or testing performed for the subdivision may be requested by the 
development review board for consideration and review. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 2) 


Section 203. - Fees. 
    Each application shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee, payable to the Town of Barre. The 
selectboard shall, from time to time, establish reasonable subdivision application fees to compensate the 
town for its cost of subdivision review. The selectboard's fee schedule may compensate for inspection 
costs, or the selectmen may require the applicant to pay the town's actual inspection costs. The fee 
schedule may include nonbuilding lots. The subdivider/developer/applicant shall be responsible for the 
actual cost associated with notification by certified mail of all abutting property owners. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 2) 


Section 204. - Fire district application. 
    If the proposed subdivision lies wholly or in part in a fire district, then the applicant shall submit two 
(2) copies of the application and exhibits to the Prudential Committee of the fire district for consideration 
by said committee for use of utilities and public safety. Said filing with the fire district shall be done at the 
same time as filing with the town. The development review board shall consider any suggestions and 
recommendations made by the Prudential Committee of the fire district. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 2) 


Section 205. - Public hearing. 
    In accordance with the 24 VSA § 4463(a), a public hearing shall be held by the board after fifteen 
(15) days' public notice. Public notice shall be done in accordance with 24 VSA § 4464. A copy of said 
notice shall be mailed to the applicant, to the regional planning commission, to the neighboring 
landowners who, in the opinion of the board, will be affected by the proposed subdivision, and to the clerk 
of an adjacent municipality in the case of a plan located within five hundred (500) feet of a municipal 
boundary. Notice to all abutters shall be by certified mail with the cost of such borne by the 
applicant/subdivider. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 2) 


Section 206. - Decision. 
    In accordance with the 24 VSA § 4464(b)(1), the board will either approve, modify and approve, or 
disapprove the application within forty-five (45) days after the public hearing held under Section 205 of 
these regulations. Failure to so act within forty-five (45) days shall be deemed approval. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 2) 


Section 207. - Appeals. 
    An interested person, as defined in the 24 VSA § 4465(b), may appeal a decision of the 
development review board to the Environmental Court in accordance with 24 VSA § 4471. Participation at 
a public hearing shall be required to be eligible for an appeal. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 2) 


Section 208. - Filing of final subdivision and boundary line adjustment plat. 
    In accordance with 24 VSA § 4463(b), approval of the development review board shall expire in one 
hundred eighty (180) days unless, within such period, such plat shall have been duly recorded in the land 
records of the municipality. 
    No plat showing a new street or highway may be recorded in the land records of the municipality until 
it has been approved by the development review board and such approval is endorsed in writing on such 
plat or the certificate of the clerk of the municipality showing the failure of the development review board 
to take action within the forty-five-day period is attached thereto and recorded with said plat. The fee for 
recording said plat shall be paid by the applicant. 
    The copy of the final subdivision or boundary line adjustment plat for record shall be in accordance 
with 27 VSA § 1404, or for filing in accordance with 27 VSA § 1403. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 2) 


Section 209. - Limitation on filing of subdivision plans. 
    No plan of a subdivision of land laid out wholly or partly within the limits of the Town of Barre shall be 
recorded in the land records until the board chair, vice chair, or planning director, except as otherwise 
provided by statute, shall have approved such plan and the fact of such approval is endorsed thereon as 
provided in the foregoing section. The provision of this section shall not apply to maps made by a land 
surveyor for the sole purpose of establishing boundaries already on record or where the same is merely 
intended as an outline survey showing only the exterior boundaries of such unmapped land that has not 
been divided in violation of these regulations or of the zoning bylaw of the Town of Barre, Vermont. 
    The approval or filing for record of any final subdivision plan shall not be deemed to constitute or to 
be evidence of an acceptance by the public of any street or other open public spaces shown on such plan 
or map. Such acceptance shall only be by formal resolution adopted by the town selectboard which 
resolution shall set forth the fact of such acceptance for public purposes; the width and exact length of the 
streets accepted together with the designations of the names which such streets shall thereafter be 
known. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 2) 


Section 210. - Disapproval. 
    If the application and plan are disapproved, the board shall return, without endorsement, the 
preliminary plan or the final subdivision plan as submitted by the applicant together with a statement of its 
reasons for such disapproval. One (1) print of said plan shall be retained for the record of the board. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 2) 


Section 211. - Conditions to plan approval. 
    No plan may be approved unless the streets and other required public improvements have been 
satisfactorily installed in accordance with the plan and the subdivision regulations. In lieu of the 
completion of the required public improvements, the development review board may require from the 
owner for the benefit of the municipality, a performance bond issued either by a bonding or surety 
company approved by the selectboard or by the owner with security acceptable to the selectboard, in an 
amount sufficient to cover the full cost of said new streets and required improvements on or in said 
streets or highways. Such bond or other security shall provide for, and secure to the town, the completion 
of any improvements which may be required within the period fixed in the subdivision regulations for such 
completion. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 2) 


Section 212. - Performance bond. 
    A performance bond required by Section 211 of these regulations shall run for a term to be fixed by 
the development review board, but in no case for a longer term than three (3) years. However, the term of 
such bond may, with the consent of the owner, be extended for an additional period not to exceed three 
(3) years. If any required improvements have not been installed as provided within the term of such 
performance bond, such bond shall be forfeited to the municipality and upon receipt of the proceeds 
thereof the municipality shall install or maintain such improvements as are covered by such performance 
bond. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 2) 


Section 213. - Penalties. 
    Violations of these regulations shall be regulated in accordance with 24 VSA §§ 4451 and 4452. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 2) 


ARTICLE III. - INFORMATION REQUIRED ON PLANS 


Section 301. - Subdivision conceptual plan. 
(A) ?A subdivision conceptual plan may be presented to the board for consideration prior to submission 
of a formal application to enable the board to consider the proposed subdivision. There is no fee or 
formal application required, but written notice must be given to the planning and zoning office so that 
the development review board can be notified of the request for consideration. All applicants are 
strongly encouraged to submit a conceptual plan. It is recommended to use the tax maps as a basis 
for the presentation and sketch. At a minimum, the conceptual plan shall include the following: 
(1) ?A minimum plan size of eight and one-half (8½) inches × eleven (11) inches is required. 
(2) ?Minimum details on plan: 
a. ?Name of landowner; 
b. ?Tax map number and lot number of original parcel; 
c. ?Dimensions of perimeter of original parcel; 
d. ?Proposed lot sizes and boundary lines; 
e. ?Road frontage or vehicular access to lots; 
f. ?Number of lots to be created; 
g. ?Location and name of street(s) or road(s); 
h. ?Sketch approximate locations of existing dwellings, buildings, water supply(ies) and 
sewage disposal services. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 3) 


Section 302. - Subdivision preliminary plan. 
    A subdivision preliminary plan must be presented to the board for consideration prior to submission 
of a final subdivision application to enable the board to consider the proposed subdivision. 
(A) ?The applicant shall file with their application and preliminary plan a written statement reciting 
the nature and extent of any private restrictions and any other requirements which are proposed 
for incorporation in the deeds to individual lots. 
(B) ?The plan shall be twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches outside dimensions with an 
appropriate margin. The site plan shall be drawn to any standard engineering scale, which will 
allow the entire study area to be presented. Subsequent detailed sheets shall be drawn to a 
scale of not less than one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet. 
Five (5) prints of the plan and associated detailed sheets, if any, which shall be clearly and 
legibly drawn, shall be submitted and filed with the development review board. 
(C) ?The subdivision preliminary plan shall show the following: 
(1) ?The proposed tract name or other designation by which such development shall be known 
shall be indicated on the plans. 
(2) ?The location and approximate dimensions of all existing property lines; the approximate 
location and size of all permanent buildings and their present or proposed future usage; the 
location and approximate dimensions of all existing and proposed wastewater disposal 
systems and on-site sewage disposal systems; the location of significant or pertinent 
natural resources or manmade features including forested areas, water courses and 
railroads; the location of all existing and proposed utility lines including sewer, storm drain, 
telephone, gas, electric, cable, etc.; show the location of all existing and proposed water 
supplies including water mains, drilled wells, and springs; location of proposed 
structures/buildings. The line of mean high water shall be shown thereon in case the 
subdivision is adjacent to a body of water. The boundaries of the floodplain shall be shown 
thereon in case the subdivision is adjacent to or lies within the floodplain. 
(3) ?All existing streets, abutting, adjoining or crossing the proposed subdivision. All proposed 
new streets; the radii of all curves; the dimensions of all lots within the limits of the 
subdivision together with the names of all adjoining property owners as nearly as the same 
may be ascertained, shall be shown on the plan. 
(4) ?The name of the owner(s) and/or subdivider of the land to be subdivided; the name of the 
land surveyor, engineer or preparer of such subdivision preliminary plan. 
(5) ?The approximate width and locations of all existing or proposed easements and public 
property for drainage, sewerage or public utilities, public areas, parks or playgrounds, if 
any. 
(6) ?Contours at vertical intervals of five (5) feet, larger contours allowed at the discretion of 
the development review board, shall be shown to determine the proper location of streets 
storm and sanitary sewers, drainage facilities and other construction. The elevation of such 
contours shall refer to the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey bench marks when such bench 
marks are within reasonable distance of the location. If other datum plane is used, the plan 
shall so indicate and give a description of each benchmark. 
(7) ?The zone or zones in which the subdivision lies as established by the town zoning bylaw. 
In case a zone boundary lies within the limits of the proposed subdivision, its approximate 
location shall be marked and clearly identified thereon. 
(8) ?All parcels proposed to be deeded to the Town of Barre shall be accompanied by a 
statement on the plans of the purpose for the use of such parcel(s) and the conditions of 
such transfer, if any. 
(9) ?Profiles of proposed streets, showing existing and proposed grades. Lengths of vertical 
curves shall be shown and elevations indicated at fifty-foot intervals along said curves. The 
horizontal scale of the profiles shall be forty (40) feet to one (1) inch; the vertical scale shall 
be four (4) feet to one (1) inch. Profiles shall also show the size and location of existing and 
proposed storm drains, water mains, sewer lines and appurtenances thereto. Lines 
indicating existing conditions shall be dashed; lines indicating proposed grades shall be 
solid. All elevations shall refer to the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey bench marks. If 
other datum plane is used, the plan shall so indicate and give a description of each 
benchmark. 
(10) ?Each plan shall have a locus showing surrounding area and identifying parcel being 
subdivided and how the parcel relates to area. Date, north arrow and scale. 
(11) ?If any the foregoing information may not practically be shown on the plan, it shall be 
contained in a signed written statement. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 3) 


Section 303. - Subdivision final plan. 
(A) ?Materials requirements. The plan shall be twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches outside 
dimensions with an appropriate margin. The site plan shall be drawn to any standard engineering 
scale, which will allow the entire study area to be presented. Subsequent detailed sheets shall be 
drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet. 
    Five (5) prints of the plan and associated detailed sheets, if any, which shall be clearly and legibly 
drawn along with the mylar(s) of the final plan(s), or equivalent material, shall be submitted and filed with 
the development review board. 
(B) ?Plan data and requirements. The final subdivision plan shall conform to, contain and show the 
following: 
(1) ?All plan data required under Section 302 of these regulations. 
(2) ?The title of the subdivision, north arrow, scale, date and the name of the owner or owners, the 
name of developer. 
(3) ?A certificate from a licensed surveyor who prepared such plan, certifying that it is correct and 
made from actual land survey with the surveyor's seal affixed thereto accompanied by the date 
and surveyor's signature. The deeds, plans, and/or records used by the surveyor in preparing 
the land survey plan shall be identified on the plan. 
(4) ?The boundary lines of the subdivision with courses and distances marked thereon as 
determined by an accurate land survey. The error of closure of the unbalanced survey must not 
exceed one (1) to five thousand (5,000). 
(5) ?The length, bearing or direction of all straight lines, deflection angles, radii, arcs and central 
angles of all curves along property lines of each street, all established building lines and all 
dimensions along the lines of each lot, all duly balanced so as to be consistent throughout with 
the courses and distance of the boundary lines. All dimensions shall be shown in feet and 
decimals of a foot to the nearest hundredth. 
(6) ?The lines of all easements or rights-of-way to which any lots are subject shall be denoted by 
fine dotted lines. The limits of easements or rights-of-way shall be definitely stated and clearly 
labeled and identified. 
(7) ?Stone or concrete bounds shall be set on the exterior street lines at locations designated by the 
development review board. Such bounds shall be set in bank gravel with their tops at the 
proposed finished surface grade, unless the town manager directs otherwise. Bounds shall be 
not less than four (4) feet long, and not less than four (4) inches square, with the top flat 
surface. They shall be set accurately on the street lines. A control point shall be placed clearly 
and permanently in the top of each bound. The accuracy of location of such monuments shall 
be certified in writing by the land surveyor making the final subdivision plan. 
(8) ?Town boundary lines which cross or adjoin the subdivision shall be tied in and be clearly 
designated on the final subdivision plan, if such information is available. 
(9) ?Design plans prepared by a professional engineer or certified site "B" technician must be 
accompanied by the preparer's certification, signature and date. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 3) 


Section 304. - Subdivision by deferral of permit. 
    A plan of the lot or lots involved with a deferral of permit must be included with the application in 
accordance with section 303, subdivision final plan, (A), material requirements, of these regulations. 
(A) ?Plan data and requirements. The following information shall be included on the plan: 
(1) ?Title of subdivision. 
(2) ?Name of subdivider and landowner. 
(3) ?The dimensions and area of the lot or lots to be deferred. 
(4) ?A certificate from a licensed surveyor who prepared such plan, certifying that it is correct 
and made from actual land survey with the surveyor's seal affixed thereto, and signed and 
dated. 
(5) ?The remaining acreage in the parcel from which the deferred lot is being subdivided. 
(6) ?Points of reference on the plan to assist in locating the lot including the name and number 
of highways, north arrow, abutting property owners, and other land(s) owned by the 
purchaser, retaining owner, or seller. 
(7) ?Scale. 
(8) ?Zone lines or zoning designation of parcels. 
(9) ?Locus showing surrounding area and identifying parcel being subdivided and how the 
parcel relates to the area. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 3) 


Section 305. - Boundary line adjustments (BLA). 
(1) ?Boundary line adjustments shall be reviewed by the development review board (DRB) during one 
(1) public hearing using the criteria for subdivision review and using the requirements listed under 
section 302, subdivision preliminary plan, except for those that are listed below. When considering 
BLAs, the DRB must use the following criteria to determine that the proposed BLA: 
(A) ?Is a realignment; 
(B) ?Does not substantially change the nature of any previously approved subdivision; 
(C) ?Does not result in the creation of any new lots; 
(D) ?Will not impair access to any parcel; 
(E) ?Will not adversely impact any significant natural resource or result in fragmentation of 
agricultural or conservation lands; and 
(F) ?Will not create a nonconforming lot or other nonconformance unless already nonconforming or 
in the opinion of the DRB, using these criteria, no injustice is caused. 
    A corrective deed shall be recorded in the land records which describes the new configuration or 
refers to the plat to be recorded. 
(2) ?Exceptions to plan submittal; 
(A) ?Three (3) final twenty-four (24) inch × thirty-six (36) inch paper plans are required after 
approval along with one (1) mylar of the same size. DRB review submittals prior to the public 
hearing shall consist of one (1) twenty-four (24) inch x thirty-six (36) inch paper plan along with 
a digital version of the same plan. Section 208, filing of the final plat still applies. 
(B) ?(6) not required. 
(C) ?(9) not required. 
    It should be noted that adjusting boundary lines may have effects beyond moving lines such as 
existing mortgages and land used as collateral. Consultation with a land use or real estate attorney is 
recommended before moving the boundary lines of any parcels. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 3) 


Section 306. - Amendments involving the combination of parcels "mergers". 
    Plans submitted for amendments for the purpose of combining "merging" shall meet the same 
requirement as preliminary plan submittal with regard to size, title block, zone, abutters, etc. Plans 
submitted shall show the outside boundary lines of the new parcel after combining. Interior lines that are 
to be removed shall be shown as dotted lines with a statement indicating said lines are being removed 
from the official record. Furthermore, a note shall be placed on the plan indicating that the purpose of said 
plan is to "merge" said parcels into one (1) undivided parcel. Plans submitted shall also show all pertinent 
features that could potentially be impacted by the removal of boundary lines such as easements, rights-
of-way, waste disposal systems, wells, etc. 
    A corrective deed shall be recorded in the land records which describes the new configuration or 
refers to the plat to be recorded. 
    It should be noted that adjusting boundary lines may have effects beyond moving lines such as 
existing mortgages and land used as collateral. Consultation with a land use or real estate attorney is 
recommended before moving the boundary lines of any parcels. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 3) 


ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS 


Section 401. - Conformity to the town plan and Barre Town Code. 
    All subdivisions shall conform to the existing municipal town plan and regulations within the Barre 
Town Code, including, but not limited to, the zoning bylaw, highway ordinance, health ordinance related 
to on-site wastewater disposal systems, and utility provisions. In addition, all subdivisions shall conform to 
other Barre Town ordinances and plans in effect at the time of seeking subdivision final plan approval. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 4) 


Section 402. - Street standards. 
    All plans, proposals and plats for new streets or major changes in the location, alignment, or 
changes in the classification of a roadway shall be in accord and compliance with the Town of Barre 
Highway Ordinance in effect at the time of the subdivision and shall be submitted to the development 
review board for review and comment. 
    The Town of Barre Highway Ordinance shall be referred to for the specific minimum standards as 
well as the road acceptance policy. 
    The arrangement of proposed streets shall in general provide for the continuation of existing streets 
without off-sets and with widths at least as great those of existing streets. Where such straight 
continuations are not practical, continuations may be adjusted by reasonable curves or deflection angles, 
subject to the approval of the board. Where a subdivision touches or contains streets proposed on the 
existing municipal plan, the layout within the subdivision shall conform thereto. 
(A) ?No street shall be proposed less than fifty (50) feet in width between property lines. Principal 
streets shall be at least sixty (60) feet in width. 
(B) ?Rights-of-way for vehicular access or driveways serving more than one (1) dwelling should not 
be permitted. 
(C) ?Whenever any proposed subdivision shall adjoin another tract of acreage which tract is a 
potential subdivision, right-of-way that may logically be developed in the event of the future 
subdivision of such adjoining acreage, shall be required to be planned to extend through to the 
boundary line of the adjoining acreage. 
(D) ?Unless enclosed on two (2) or more sides by obstacles, streets arranged in squares, ovals, 
and circles, etc., must have at least two (2) street connections at points substantially opposite to 
each other on the perimeter of each square, oval, or circle. One (1) of these street connections 
may extend to the undeveloped acreage. 
(E) ?There shall be no more than one (1) access per lot to a public road in all residential districts. 
There shall be no more than one (1) access per dwelling if located on more than one (1) lot. 
The following exceptions may be granted by the planning commission: 
(1) ?If it is determined after review by the town engineer, after consideration of the functional 
classification of the road, site distance, safety, width of the curb cut, drainage, topography, 
and any other pertinent factors that a recommendation be made to the planning 
commission for the granting of an exception for a second driveway access. The planning 
commission would then act on the recommendation in considering granting approval of the 
request. 
(2) ?Commercial or industrial establishments. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 4) 


Section 403. - Reserve strips. 
    No subdivision showing a reserve strip for unspecified purposes shall be approved. The 
development review board may disapprove any reserve strip shown on a plan. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 4) 


Section 404. - Dead-end streets. 
    Dead-end streets are discouraged. If the development review board approves a dead-end street, 
approval shall be based on the minimum standards of the Barre Town Highway Ordinance. 
    No lot or part of a lot may be placed in such a portion of the dead-end street as to prevent future 
extension of the street. 
    Exception: When topographic, physical, or natural conditions make it improbable at the time to 
extend the road or connect it with another proposed or existing road, Dead-end streets may be permitted 
with lots proposed off the end of the street. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 4) 


Section 405. - Block dimensions. 
(A) ?Intersecting streets shall be laid out at such intervals that block lengths between street lines are not 
more than eight (8) minimum lot frontages as required by the zoning bylaw of the Town of Barre for 
the area being subdivided, except when existing conditions in the opinion of the board justify a 
variation from this requirement. Minimum widths of blocks shall generally be not less than two 
hundred thirty (230) feet between street lines in residential areas. The long side of blocks shall face 
the main or more important thoroughfare to reduce the number of intersections thereon. 
(B) ?Pedestrian ways, a minimum of ten (10) feet in width, may be required by the board through blocks 
over six hundred (600) feet in length, or to connect dead-end streets, to provide easier access to 
parks, schools, playgrounds, or other public or semi-public places, such pedestrian ways shall be 
deeded to the town. 
(C) ?Permanent easements may be required within blocks at the discretion of the board. 
(D) ?The minimum block length shall be not less than four (4) minimum lot frontages as required by the 
zoning bylaw of the Town of Barre for the area being subdivided. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 4) 


Section 406. - Lot requirements. 
(A) ?Lots. All lots shall conform to the requirements of the zoning bylaw of the Town of Barre for the 
particular zone in which they are located. When a lot is on a street turn, the board may permit a 
reduction in the lot frontage (not to exceed fifty (50) percent for the particular zone in which it is 
located) provided the sidelines fan out so that the width of the rear line is not less than one hundred 
and fifty (150) percent of the required frontage and the lot area meets the minimum requirements for 
the zone. 
(B) ?Lots prohibited. Lots without frontage on a street are prohibited. All lots shall be suitable for the 
purpose for which they are intended to be used and no area dangerous or injurious to health or 
subject to inundation shall be subdivided into individual lots for residential purposes. 
    All development of any lot containing a stream, river, lake, pond, or other watercourse or body of 
water shall provide for and maintain a minimum setback of fifty (50) feet as measured from the edge of 
the watercourse or body of water to all such development, (including, but not limited to, structures, 
driveways, site preparation, excavation, and grading). 
    No lot (other than a corner lot) having frontage on two (2) streets less than two hundred thirty (230) 
feet apart will be approved except where topographic or other physical conditions so require. 
(C) ?Side lot lines. Insofar as practicable, the side lot lines of all lots shall be at right angles to the street 
on which the lot faces or radial to curved street lines and when such arrangement is not possible, the 
angle between the side lot line and the street line shall be shown, when possible. Town boundary 
lines shall not be considered to constitute a property boundary line in the proposed subdivision, 
unless it is the subdivider's intent to do so. 
D. ?Lot numbers. All lots shall be numbered beginning with the numeral one (1) and shall continue 
consecutively throughout the entire subdivision with no omissions or duplications. No fractions and 
no prefix or suffix such as "1A", "B2", or "C" shall be used. All lot numbers shall be conspicuous and 
centered in the approximate center of the lots in solid black numerals one-quarter (¼) inch high on 
the final subdivision plan. 
(E) ?[Conveyance of use.] The use of all lots within a subdivision must be clearly specified on the plans 
and any parcels intended to be conveyed must be accompanied with assurance for such 
conveyance. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 4) 


Section 407. - Street names. 
    All proposed streets shall bear tentative names which shall not duplicate the names used to 
designate any other street in the Town of Barre. The tentative names of all proposed streets shall be 
subject to the approval of the board. 
    A sign for a development may be erected and shall be permitted on street corners if located outside 
of the town road right-of-way. The sign must be constructed in accordance with the provisions of the 
Barre Town Zoning Bylaw and no sign shall be permitted to interfere with traffic, safety or obstruct 
visibility along roadways. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 4) 


Section 408. - Parks and playground sites. 
    The development review board may require the laying out of adequate local parks and playgrounds 
in residential areas to be dedicated to public use or to be reserved for the common use of all property 
owners by covenant in the deed, and subject to the control of the town under conditions approved by the 
selectboard of the Town of Barre. If such required park space is not available within the subdivision the 
development review board may require payment to the town, in the amount to be determined by the 
selectboard, which shall be used to establish a neighborhood recreation facility. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 4) 


Section 409. - Public sites and buildings. 
    Where a subdivision touches or contains sites proposed for public buildings in the municipal plan of 
the Town of Barre in force on the date the subdivision plan is filed, the layout of the site shall conform 
thereto. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 4) 


Section 410. - Subdivision improvement requirements. 
    Within three (3) years of the approval of the final subdivision plan, the applicant, owner, or developer 
thereof shall complete the following minimum improvements: 
(A) ?All proposed streets shall be laid out, graded, and constructed their entire length and full width 
of right-of-way in accordance with the approved design plans on record on the date of the board 
approval. 
(B) ?All necessary storm drains, culverts, and bridges that are required for the proper development 
of the site shall be built at the sole expense of the applicant, owner or developer. Storm drains 
shall include all necessary pipelines, manholes, catch basins, sufficient and adequate to provide 
proper drainage as per approved plans on record on the date of the board approval. 
(C) ?If sanitary sewers, storm drains, and water mains exist in any street adjacent to any 
development or if the town or fire district should extend a utility to a point adjacent to the 
development, the developer shall provide and connect like utilities to said system, as directed 
by the town, with the concurrence of the owner of said utility. 
(D) ?Street signs showing the names of the intersecting streets shall be erected at each 
intersection. Such signs shall be furnished by the town to the owner or developer at actual cost. 
(E) ?The monuments are to be set in place in accordance with subsection 303(B)(7) of these 
regulations after all street development is completed. 
(F) ?The bituminous surfacing indicated on the typical cross section of the approved plans shall be 
applied by, and paid for by the developer. This work will be inspected by and meet the approval 
of the town engineer. This requirement in whole or in part may be waived by the development 
review board in low-density residential zones only. 
(G) ?Where lands are to be dedicated for public use, the dedication shall take place within three (3) 
years and three (3) months of the date of final approval. 
Exception: Upon written request to the development review board an extension may be granted 
to the completion date. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 4) 


Section 411. - Miscellaneous specifications. 
    Construction specifications with regard to roads, catch basins, drop inlets, and manhole covers and 
grates shall be as noted in the supplemental standards to these regulations and as found in the Barre 
Town Engineer's Office and the Barre Town Highway Ordinance. The town engineer may recommend 
equivalent specifications and standards. The categorical standards are as follows: sewer; water; road 
construction; drainage. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 4) 


Section 412. - Character of the land. 
    All land to be subdivided shall be, in the judgment of the board, of such a character that it can be 
used for building purposes without danger to public health or safety, or to the environment. Land subject 
to periodic flooding, poor drainage, inadequate capability to withstand structures, including streets, 
utilities, and buildings, or other hazardous conditions, shall not ordinarily be subdivided. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 4) 


Section 413. - Energy conservation. 
    In order to conserve energy, all subdivisions should use the least areas of roadway and the least 
length of sewer, water, and utility lines within environmentally and economically sound limits. Buildings 
are encouraged to be sited so as to take advantage of southeast, south and southwest orientations where 
possible. Effective use of landscaping for providing wind barriers and reducing heat loss and heat gain 
are encouraged. Cluster development should be encouraged wherever feasible and desirable. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 4) 


Section 414. - Preservation of existing features. 
    Due regard shall be given to the preservation and protection of existing features, trees, scenic points, 
brooks, streams, rock out-croppings, water bodies, other natural resources, historic resources, and 
preservation of ridge lines. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 4) 


Section 415. - Utilities. 
(A) ?Easements. The board may require that underground utilities be placed either in the street right-of-
way between the paved roadway and street line or placed horizontally underneath the roadway. 
Where inclusion of utilities is not to be in the street right-of-way, a perpetual, unobstructed easement 
shall be provided with satisfactory access to the street. A minimum width of ten (10) feet shall be 
provided in areas where the easement is located adjacent to and running along the street right-of-
way. A minimum width of thirty (30) feet shall be provided in all other areas. 
(B) ?Extension of municipal utilities. All subdivisions shall make adequate provisions to utilize existing 
municipal services for water supply, stormwater, and sanitary sewage disposal, and required utilities 
and improvements. Provision should be made to extend such services to adjoining properties. 
(C) ?Water supply improvements. The board may require that a community water supply system 
unconnected to municipal systems be designed in such a way that it may eventually be connected to 
a public municipal water supply system. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 4) 


Section 416. - Electric, telephone, cable T.V. 
    The subdivider shall coordinate the subdivision's design with the utility companies and submit a plan 
prepared with their cooperation showing all line extensions necessary to serve the subdivision. Such plan 
shall be integrated with a systematic program for distribution of service to the entire area around the 
subdivision now or in the future. Common rights-of-way shall be utilized whenever possible and, when 
technology and terrain make it economically feasible; distribution systems should be built underground. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 4) 


Section 417. - Fire protection. 
    Fire protection within the subdivision shall be provided to the satisfaction of the board. In making a 
determination the board may consider recommendations of the Barre Town Fire Chief. In areas served by 
an existing fire hydrant system, the subdivider may be required to extend the fire hydrant system and 
install additional fire hydrants. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 4) 


Section 418. - Drainage improvements. 
    An adequate surface stormwater drainage system for the entire subdivision area shall be provided. 
Such system must provide for the displacement of water on-site and not adversely affect adjacent 
property and landowners owners. The subdivider may be required by the board to carry away by pipe or 
open ditch any spring or surface water that may exist either previous to or as a result of the subdivision. A 
culvert or other drainage facility shall, in each case, be large enough to accommodate potential runoff 
from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the subdivision. 
    Where it is anticipated that additional runoff incidental to the development of the subdivision will 
overload an existing downstream drainage facility so that there will be drainage to private property or an 
increase in the expenditure of public funds, the board shall not approve the subdivision until provision has 
been made for the improvement of said condition. 
    Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse or drainage way, there shall be provided a 
stormwater drainage easement of such width as to encompass the twenty-five-year flood area of such 
watercourse, which easement shall be indicated on the final plan. 
    The subdivision final plan shall show existing ground contours and proposed final contours, after 
implementation of the drainage plan. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 4) 


Section 419. - Site preservation and improvements. 
(A) ?Natural cover. Land shall be subdivided and improved in reasonable conformity to existing 
topography in order to minimize grading, cut and fill, and to retain, insofar as possible, the natural 
contours, limit stormwater runoff and conserve the natural cover and soil. After application for 
approval has been made to the board, no topsoil, sand, or gravel shall be removed from the 
subdivision for any other purpose than to meet the construction needs for that particular subdivision 
or to meet any requirements of these regulations. 
(B) ?Erosion and sediment control. The smallest practical area of land should be exposed at any one (1) 
time during development. Land should not be left exposed during the winter months. Where 
necessary temporary vegetation and/or mulching and structural measures may be required by the 
board to protect areas exposed during the development. A soil erosion control plan shall be 
submitted as part of the final plan based on accepted standards and measures for soil erosion 
control as noted in the Vermont Handbook for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control on Construction 
Sites, Special Publication No. 3, Vermont Geological Survey, Agency of Environmental 
Conservation, Department of Water Resources and Environmental Conservation, last revised 1987. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2009, § 4) 


APPENDIX D - TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 15, 1998, enacted provisions designated as App. D, 
Telecommunications Facilities, §§ 1—17, herein set forth. Capitalization has been conformed, and words 
in brackets have been added by the editor for clarity. In the event of amendment, the amendatory 
language will be included in the affected section and a history note, parenthetically enclosed, will be 
appended to such section. 


Section 1. - Consistence with federal law. 
    In addition to other findings required by this ordinance, the selectboard shall find that its decision 
regarding an application is intended to be consistent with federal law, particularly the Telecommunications 
Act of 1996. This ordinance: 
A. ?Does not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services; 
B. ?Does not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services; and 
C. ?Does not regulate personal wireless services on the basis of the environmental effects of radio 
frequency emissions to the extent that the regulated serves [services] and facilities comply with 
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations concerning such emissions. 


Section 2. - Permits. 
A. ?Application for a permit for a telecommunications tower or facility shall be made to the Barre Town 
Selectboard. 
B. ?No construction, alteration, addition, modification, or installation of any telecommunications tower or 
facility shall commence until a permit has been issued by the Barre Town Selectboard. This includes 
installation of antennas for new uses, change in the number of buildings or facilities, material change 
in technology used, or addition or change of any equipment resulting in greater visibility or structural 
wind-loading, or additional height of the tower or profile change of the facility due to additional 
antennas not included in the original application. 
C. ?Telecommunications towers or facilities may be permitted upon compliance with this ordinance and 
upon proof of compliance with all other local, state or federal laws applicable to land use and 
development and to such towers or facilities. 
D. ?Upon initial review of the application, the selectboard shall require the applicant to post (before a 
permit is issued) a bond or other financial security to cover facility decommissioning or dismantling 
activities. The amount of the bond or other financial security will be based on estimated 
decommissioning or dismantling expenses. The bond or other financial security will be in an amount, 
in a form, and from a source acceptable to the selectboard. 
E. ?An applicant for a telecommunications tower or facility must be a telecommunications provider or 
must provide a copy of its executed contract to provide land or facilities to an existing 
telecommunications provider. 
F. ?A permit shall not be granted for a facility to be built on speculation. 


Section 3. - Application requirements. 
A. ?An application for a telecommunications tower or facility in the Town of Barre shall include at least 
the following information: 
(1) ?The name(s) and address(es) of each applicant and of their agents. If any applicant is not a 
natural person, the name and address of the business and the state in which it is incorporated 
and has its principle office; 
(2) ?The name(s) and address(es) of the record landowners and their agent(s); 
(3) ?The name(s) and address(es) of the record landowners of each abutting property; 
(4) ?The name(s), address(es), fax/telephone numbers and e-mail address(es) of the persons to be 
contacted who are authorized to act in event of an emergency regarding the structure or safety 
of the tower or facility; 
(5) ?A vicinity map showing the entire vicinity within a 2500 foot radius of the tower or facility site, 
including the location of the telecommunications facility or tower, topography, public and private 
roads and driveways, buildings and structures, utilities, water bodies, wetlands, landscape 
features, historic sites and habitats for endangered species. It shall indicate the property lines of 
the proposed tower site parcel and all easements or rights-of-way needed for access from a 
public way to the tower and/or other structures; 
(6) ?The location of the proposed structure on a USGS Topographic Map or Survey with 20-foot 
elevations or a GIS-generated map compatible with VCGI standards and encompassing the 
area within at least a two-mile radius of the proposed tower site; 
(7) ?Elevations and proposed site plans of the entire development showing all facades and 
indicating all exterior materials and colors of towers, buildings and associated facilities, as well 
as all proposed landscaping, utility wires, guy wires and screening. (All plans shall be drawn at 
a minimum scale of 1 inch = 50 feet); 
(8) ?In the case of a proposed site which is forested, the approximate average height of the existing 
vegetation within 200 feet of the tower base; 
(9) ?Construction sequence and time schedule for completion of each phase of the entire project; 
and 
(10) ?A report from a qualified and licensed engineer that: 
a. ?Describes the tower height, design and elevation; 
b. ?Documents the height above grade for all proposed mounting positions for antennas to be 
collocated on a telecommunications tower and the minimum separation distances between 
antennas; 
c. ?Describes the tower's proposed capacity, including the number, height and types of 
antennas that the tower is proposed to accommodate; 
d. ?Documents the steps the applicant will take to avoid interference with any established 
public safety telecommunications; 
e. ?In the case of new tower proposals, demonstrates that existing telecommunications towers 
and other existing structures within 30 miles of the proposed site cannot reasonably be 
modified to provide adequate coverage and adequate capacity to the community; 
f. ?Describes potential changes or additions to those existing structures or towers that would 
enable them to provide adequate coverage and adequate capacity; 
g. ?Describes the output frequency, number of channels and the power output per channel for 
each proposed antenna; 
h. ?Includes a written five-year plan for use of the proposed telecommunications facility, 
including reasons for seeking capacity in excess of immediate needs (if applicable), as well 
as plans for additional development and coverage within the town; 
i. ?Demonstrates the proposed tower's, facility's and other structure's compliance with the 
standards set forth in this ordinance or other applicable standards; 
j. ?Provides proof that at the proposed site the applicant will be in compliance with all FCC 
regulations, standards and requirements, and includes a statement that the applicant 
commits to continue to maintain compliance with all FCC regulations, standards and 
requirements regarding both radio frequency interference (RFI) and radio frequency 
radiation (RFR). (The selectboard may hire independent engineers to perform evaluations 
of compliance with the FCC regulations, standards and requirements on an annual basis at 
unannounced times.); 
k. ?Includes such other information required by the board or its consultants necessary to 
evaluate the application; and 
l. ?Includes each engineer's stamp and registration number. 
(11) ?A letter of intent committing the tower or facility owner and his or her successors to permit 
shared use of the tower if the additional user(s) agree to meet reasonable terms and conditions 
for shared use, including compliance with all applicable FCC regulations, standards and 
requirements and the provisions of this ordinance and all other applicable laws; 
(12) ?In the case of an application for additional antennas or other equipment to be installed on an 
existing tower or other structure, a copy of the executed contract with the owner of the existing 
structure; 
(13) ?To the extent required by the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and as administered 
by the FCC, a complete environmental assessment (EA) draft or final report describing the 
probable impacts of the proposed facility. 
B. ?Each application shall be signed by the applicant(s) and the contributing engineer(s) under the pains 
and penalties of perjury. 
C. ?Fees for filing an application to build or alter a telecommunications facility shall be $500. 


Section 4. - Provision for independent consultants. 
    The selectboard may require the applicant to pay for reasonable costs of an independent technical 
consultant who shall be chosen by the selectboard. 


Section 5. - Collocation requirements. 
    An application for a new telecommunications tower or facility shall not be approved unless the 
selectboard finds that the antennas and other equipment planned for the proposed tower or facility cannot 
be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or facility due to one of the following reasons: 
A. ?The proposed antennas and other equipment would exceed the structural or spatial capacity of 
the existing or approved tower or facility, as documented by a qualified engineer licensed to 
practice in the State of Vermont, and the existing or approved tower or facility cannot be 
reinforced, modified or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent antennas and 
equipment at a reasonable cost to provide coverage and capacity comparable to that of the 
proposed facility; 
B. ?The proposed antennas and equipment would cause interference materially impacting the 
usefulness of other existing or permitted equipment at the existing or approved tower or facility 
as documented by a qualified engineer licensed to practice in the State of Vermont and such 
interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost; 
C. ?The proposed antennas and equipment, either alone or together with existing facilities, 
equipment or antennas, would create RFI in violation of federal standards or requirements; 
D. ?The proposed antennas and equipment, either alone or together with existing equipment and 
antennas would create RFR in violation of federal standards or requirements; 
E. ?Existing or approved towers and other structures cannot accommodate the planned antennas 
and equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably or are too far from the area of 
needed coverage to function reasonably as documented by a qualified engineer licensed to 
practice in the State of Vermont; 
F. ?Aesthetic considerations make it unreasonable to locate the planned antennas and equipment 
upon an existing or approved tower or building; 
G. ?There is no existing or approved tower or other structure in the area for which coverage is 
sought; or 
H. ?Other unforeseen specific reasons make it unreasonable to locate the planned antennas and 
equipment upon an existing or approved tower or building. Towers shall be designed to allow for 
future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying 
heights where overall permitted height allows. Towers shall be designed structurally, electrically 
and in all other respects to accommodate both the applicant's antennas and additional antennas 
where overall permitted height allows. 


Section 6. - Height and setback requirements. 
A. ?In order to protect public safety and to preserve the scenic character and appearance of the area, 
the height limit for towers, antennas and tower-related fixtures shall be not more than 20 feet above 
the average height of the tree line measured within 100 feet of the highest vertical element of the 
telecommunications facility. Notwithstanding the above, additional height may be approved upon a 
finding by the selectboard that the additional height is necessary in order to provide adequate 
coverage in the Town of Barre or to accomplish collocation of facilities and that the additional height 
will not cause an undue visual impact on the scenic character or appearance of the area. 
B. ?The minimum distance from any telecommunications tower or facility to any property line, dwelling or 
other occupied structure shall be no less than the height of the tower, including antennas or other 
vertical appurtenances. In the event that the communications tower or equipment will be mounted on 
an existing structure such as a silo, church steeple or utility pole, the minimum distance from the 
base of that structure to any property line, dwelling or other occupied structure shall be no less than 
the distance from ground level to the top of the tower, including antennas and other vertical 
appurtenances. 


Section 7. - Lighting and signage requirements. 
A. ?Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not display strobe lights unless such 
lighting is specifically required by FAA or other federal or state law. If any lighting is required solely 
because of the height of a tower, the selectboard may review the plan to determine if the lighting 
requirement can be eliminated by a reduced height or a change in location of the tower. 
B. ?No commercial signs or lettering shall be placed on the tower or its appurtenances. A sign, not 
exceeding 6 square feet, identifying the facility and its owner is permitted. 


Section 8. - Tower and antenna design requirements. 
    All telecommunications towers, antennas and their support structures shall be designed to blend into 
the surrounding environment through the use of color camouflaging, architectural design, and other 
alternative design tower structures as well as by minimal disruption of existing vegetation. Materials used 
for the exterior of any structure shall be of a type, color and location so as to minimize glare and the 
impact on any scenic or historic areas, public vantage points or abutting properties. 


Section 9. - Screening. 
A. ?Screening shall be required at the perimeter of the site. This may be provided by existing natural 
foliage or by planted new foliage or other means approved by the selectboard. A planted or natural 
vegetative screen shall be a minimum of 10 feet in depth with a minimum height of 6 feet and shall 
have the potential to grow to a height of at least 15 feet at maturity. Existing on-site vegetation 
outside the immediate site for the wireless facility shall be preserved or improved. Disturbance to 
existing topography shall be minimized unless the disturbance is demonstrated to result in less visual 
impact on the facility from surrounding properties and other vantage points. 
B. ?The telecommunication facilities shall be secured to protect public safety. If necessary to keep the 
public from climbing towers or alternative design tower structures, the applicant will erect on eight-
foot chainlink fence around the facility site. Said fences shall be inside the perimeter screening 
required by this section. 


Section 10. - Access roads and above-ground utilities. 
    Where telecommunications facilities require construction of a new access road or improvement to 
existing access roads, to the extent practicable, roads shall follow the contour of the land. Access roads, 
when consistent with the purposes of this ordinance and when economically feasible, shall be constructed 
or improved within existing forest or forest fringe areas and not in open fields. Utility or service lines shall 
be designed and located so as to minimize or prevent disruption of the scenic character and beauty of the 
area. 


Section 11. - Protection of scenic ridges and hillsides. 
    The selectboard, in consultation with the applicant and others, shall determine the likely visual 
impact of any proposed telecommunications facility or tower and may require balloon tests, photographs, 
simulations, and any other necessary, helpful and relevant information. Based on the information 
presented, the selectboard may designate an alternative location for the facility or tower or may request a 
redesign in order to minimize the visual impact on the scenic character and beauty of the area. In 
determining whether or not a facility or tower would have an undue adverse visual impact and when 
setting conditions in the permit, the selectboard shall consider: 
A. ?The sensitivity or unique value of the particular view affected by it; 
B. ?The number of members of the traveling public or residents of Barre Town and neighboring 
towns who will be affected by the alteration of the scenic character and beauty of the area; 
C. ?Its distance from key vantage points and the proportion of it which will be visible above the 
skyline or tree line; 
D. ?Background features that will either obscure it or make it more conspicuous; 
E. ?The degree to which it will be screened by existing vegetation, the topography of the land, and 
existing structures; 
F. ?The frequency with which persons traveling on public highways will view the facility; 
G. ?The period of time during which it would be viewed by persons traveling on public highways; 


Section 12. - Continuing obligations. 
A. ?Upon receiving a permit, the applicant shall annually demonstrate that it is in compliance with all 
FCC standards and requirements regarding RFR, the basis for its representations and the date that 
the most recent actual readings of RFR were performed at the site. The applicant shall provide a list 
of RFR readings, their distances from the tower/transmitter, dates of the readings and names of the 
person or company who took the readings. 
B. ?The telecommunications facility or tower owner shall maintain adequate insurance on the facility, 
tower and the entire site. 
C. ?All facility and tower sites shall be properly fenced and identified by signage that indicates the 
presence of RFR and any other appropriate warnings required by the permit conditions. 


Section 13. - Removal of abandoned, unused, obsolete, damaged or dangerous towers or other portions 
of facilities. 
    Abandoned or unused towers or other portions of telecommunications facilities shall be removed as 
follows: 
A. ?The owner of a tower shall annually, on January 15, file a declaration with the selectboard 
certifying the continuing safe operation of the entire tower and other portions of the facility. 
Failure to file a declaration shall mean that it is no longer in use and the selectboard shall 
declare it abandoned. 
B. ?Abandoned or unused towers and facilities shall be removed within 180 days of cessation of 
operations unless a time extension is approved by the selectboard. If the tower is not removed 
within 180 days of cessation of operations at a site, the municipality shall notify the owner and 
may remove the tower and all associated facilities. Costs of removal shall be assessed against 
the property owner, tower owner and/or facility owner. (See section 2, paragraph D for bonding 
requirements.) 
C. ?Unused portions of towers shall be removed within 180 days of the time that such portion is no 
longer used. Replacement of portions of a tower previously removed shall require a new permit. 
D. ?An owner who has failed to file an annual declaration with the selectboard by January 15 may, 
by February 15, file a declaration of use or intended use and may request the ability to continue 
use of the facility/tower. 


Section 14. - Temporary facilities. 
A. ?Temporary wireless communication facilities may be permitted in the event of: 
(1) ?A public emergency resulting from a manmade or natural disaster; 
(2) ?Special events; 
(3) ?A previously permitted and operating facility is lost due to damage from vandalism or a weather 
disaster. 
B. ?The permit term (length) for temporary wireless communications shall be determined by the 
selectboard, but shall not exceed four (4) months. 
C. ?An applicant for a temporary permit shall submit the information required by section 3.A.1, 2, 4, 7, 9, 
10.a., d, e, f, g, j, k, l and 13. The applicant shall state the reason for the temporary permit and pay 
the fees required by section 3C. 


Section 15. - Enforcement and penalties. 
A. ?The Barre Town Manager shall be the enforcement officer. 
B. ?Penalties shall be a minimum of $100.00 per violation with each day that a violation continues being 
a separate violation. 
C. ?Costs incurred by the Town of Barre pursuant to any enforcement action, including but not limited to 
attorney fees, court costs, and removal of the tower or facility or parts of the tower or facility shall be 
assessed against the property owner and/or tower owner. 
D. ?Enforcement action shall be filed in Washington County Superior Court. 


Section 16. - Severability clause. 
    If any section of this ordinance is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such finding 
shall not invalidate any other part of this ordinance. 


Section 17. - Definitions. 
    Adequate capacity: Capacity is considered to be "adequate" if the grade of service is p.05 or better 
for a least 50% of the days in a preceding month, prior to the date of application, as measured using 
direct traffic measurement of the telecommunications facility in question, where the call blocking is due to 
frequency contention at the antenna(s). 
    Adequate coverage: Coverage is "adequate" within that area surrounding a base station where the 
predicted or measured median field strength of the transmitted signal is such that the majority of the time, 
transceivers properly installed and operated will be able to communicate with the base station without 
objectionable noise (or excessive bit-error-rate for digital) and without calls being dropped. In the case of 
cellular communications in a rural environment, this would be a signal strength of at least -90dBm. It is 
acceptable for there to be holes within the area of adequate coverage as long as the signal regains its 
strength further away from the base station. The outer boundary of the area of adequate coverage, 
however, is that location past which the signal does not regain. 
    Affiliate: When used in relation to an operator, another person who directly or indirectly owns or 
controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or common control with the operator, 
or an operator's principal partners, shareholders, or owners of some other ownership interest; and when 
used in relation to the municipality, any agency, board, authority or political subdivision affiliated with the 
municipality or other person in which the municipality has legal or financial interest. 
    Alternative design tower structure: Artificial trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles, silos and 
similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or 
towers. (See also: Stealth facility.) 
    Antenna: A device which is attached to a tower or other structure for transmitting and receiving 
electromagnetic waves. 
    Antenna height: The vertical distance measured from the base of the antenna support structure at 
grade to the highest point of the structure. If the support structure is on a sloped grade, then the average 
between the highest and lowest grades shall be used in calculating the antenna height. 
    Applicant: A person who applies for a telecommunications facility siting. An applicant may be the 
telecommunications service provider or the owner of the property. 
    Available space: The space on a tower or structure to which antennas of a telecommunications 
provider are both structurally able and electromagnetically able to be attached. 
    Base station: The primary sending and receiving site in a telecommunications facility network. More 
than one base station and/or more than one variety of telecommunications provider can be located on a 
single tower or structure. 
    Cellular service: A telecommunications service that permits customers to use wireless, mobile 
telephones to connect, via low-power radio transmission sites called cell sites, either to the public 
switched network or to other mobile cellular phones. 
    Cellular telecommunications: A commercial low power mobile radio service bandwidth licensed by 
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to providers in a specific geographical area in which the 
radio frequency spectrum is divided into discrete channels which are assigned in groups to geographic 
cells within a service area and which are capable of being reused in different cells within the service area. 
    Cellular telecommunications facility: A cellular telecommunications facility consists of the equipment 
and structures at a particular site involved in receiving telecommunication or radio signals from mobile 
radio communications sources and transmitting those signals to a central switching computer which 
connects the mobile unit with the land-based telephone lines. 
    Channel: The segment of the radiation spectrum to or from an antenna, which carries one signal. An 
antenna may radiate on many channels simultaneously. 
    Collocation: Locating wireless communications equipment from more than one provider on a single 
site. 
    Communications facility: A land facility supporting antennas and microwave dishes that send and/or 
receive radio frequency signals. Communications facilities may include structures, towers or accessory 
buildings. 
    Communication tower: A guyed, monopole, or self-supporting vertical structure, constructed as a free 
standing structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure or equipment, containing 
one or more antennas intended for transmitting and/or receiving television, AM/FM radio, digital, 
microwave, cellular, telephone, or similar forms of electronic communication. 
    Directional antenna: An antenna or array of antennas designed to concentrate a radio signal in a 
particular area. 
    Electromagnetically able: The determination that the signal from and to the proposed new antenna 
will not significantly interfere with the existing signals from and to other facilities or antennas located on 
the same tower or structure as determined by a qualified professional telecommunications engineer. The 
use of available technologies to alleviate such interference shall be considered when making this 
determination. 
    Engineer: An engineer who is licensed to practice in the State of Vermont and who is qualified in the 
relevant field of knowledge or engineering specialty (e.g., a structural engineer in questions of load-
bearing, shear forces, etc.; an electrical engineer in questions of radiation effects, interference, etc.). 
    Facility site: A property, or any part thereof, which is owned or leased by one or more 
telecommunications facility(s) and where required landscaping is located. 
    FCC: Federal Communications Commission. The government agency responsible for regulating 
telecommunications in the United States. 
    Frequency: The number of cycles completed each second by an electromagnetic wave measured in 
Hertz (Hz). 
    GIS: Geographic Information Services. 
    Location: References to site location shall be the exact longitude and latitude, to the nearest tenth of 
a second. Bearing or orientation should be referenced to true North. 
    Modification of an existing facility: Any change, or proposed change in power input or output, number 
of antennas, change in antenna type(s) or model(s), repositioning of antenna(s), change in number of 
channels per antenna above the maximum number approved under an existing permit. 
    Modification of an existing tower: Any change, or proposed change in dimensions of an existing and 
permitted tower or other structure designed to support telecommunications transmission, receiving and/or 
relaying antennas and/or equipment. 
    Monitoring: The measurement, by the use of instruments in the field, of non-ionizing radiation 
exposure from telecommunications facilities, towers, antennas or repeaters. 
    Monitoring protocol: The testing protocol, such as the Cobbs Protocol (or one substantially similar, 
including compliance determined in accordance with the National Council on Radiation Protection and 
Measurements, Reports 86 and 119), which is to be used to monitor the emissions and determine 
exposure risk from telecommunications facilities. 
    Monopole: A single self-supporting vertical pole with no guy wire anchors, usually consisting of a 
galvanized or other unpainted metal, or a wooden pole with below grade foundations. 
    Permit: Embodies the rights and obligations extended by the municipality to an operator to own, 
construct, maintain, and operate its facility within the boundaries of the municipality. 
    Personal wireless services: Commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless exchange access 
services. These services include cellular services, personal communications services, specialized mobile 
radio services, and paging services. 
    Preexisting towers and antennas: Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been issued prior to 
the effective date of these regulations. 
    Repeater: A small receiver/relay transmitter and antenna of relatively low power output designed to 
provide service to areas which are not able to receive adequate coverage directly from a base or primary 
station. 
    Roof and/or building mount facility: A facility in which antennas are mounted to an existing structure 
on the roof (including rooftop appurtenances) or a building face. 
    Scenic view: A wide angle or panoramic field of sight that may include natural and/or manmade 
structures and activities. A scenic view may be from a stationary viewpoint or be seen as one travels 
along a roadway, waterway, or path. A view may be to a far away object, such as a mountain, or a nearby 
object. 
    Stealth facility: Any communications facility which is designed to blend into the surrounding 
environment. Examples include architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted 
antennas painted to match the existing structure, antennas integrated into architectural elements, and 
antenna structures designed to look like light poles. (See also: Alternative design tower structure.) 
    Structurally able: The determination that a tower or structure is capable of carrying the load imposed 
by the proposed new antennas under all reasonable predictable conditions as determined by professional 
structural engineering analysis. 
    System: The communications transmission system operated by a telecommunications service 
provider in the municipality or region. 
    Telecommunications facility: All equipment (including repeaters) and locations of equipment with 
which a telecommunications provider transmits and receives the waves which carry their services. This 
facility may be sited on one or more towers or structure(s) owned and permitted by the provider or 
another owner or entity. 
    Telecommunications provider: An entity licensed by the FCC to provide telecommunications services 
to individuals or institutions. 
    Temporary wireless communication facility: Any tower, pole, antenna, etc., designed for use while a 
permanent wireless facility is under construction, or for a special event or conference where a majority of 
people attending are wireless users. 
    Tower: See Communication tower. 
    USGS: United States Geological Survey. 
    VCGI: Vermont Center for Geographic Information. 
    View corridor: A three-dimensional area extending out from a viewpoint. The width of the view 
corridor depends on the focus of the view. The focus of the view may be a single object, such as a 
mountain, which would result in a narrow corridor, or a group of objects, such as a downtown skyline, 
which would result in a wide corridor. Panoramic views have very wide corridors and may include a 360-
degree perspective. Although the view corridor extends from the viewpoint to the focus of the view, the 
mapped portion of the corridor extends from the viewpoint and is based on the area where base zone 
heights must be limited in order to protect the view. 
    Whip antenna: A vertical antenna that normally transmits signals in 360 degrees. Whip antennas are 
typically cylindrical in shape, narrow (less than 6 inches in diameter) and long (often measure 18 inches 
in height or more). Also called omnidirectional, stick or pipe antennas. 


CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
?This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the town used in this Code. Repealed or 
superseded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Ordinance  
Date 
Section 
?Section  
this Code 
?5-14-74 
Arts. I, II 
5-26, 5-27 

Arts. III, IV 
5-41, 5-42 
?6-18-74 

1-5 
11-11-75 
1 
6-1 

2 
7-26 

3 
7-1 
?2-17-76 

4-26 
Art./Sec.

?4-20-76       
I 
1—4 
3-1—3-4 
      I 
5, 6 
3-6, 3-7 
?5-16-78 

6-21, 6-22 
10-?3-78 

1-5 
?7-17-79 

1-5 
10-30-79 

1-5 

Section 

11-?3-81 
1—5 
5-56—5-60 
11-17-81 
103—109 
2-21—2-27 

201 
2-41 

202 
2-42 

203 
2-43, 2-44 

204 
2-45, 2-46 

205—211 
2-47—2-52 

212 
2-54, 2-55 

213—221 
2-56—2-64 

301—304 
2-81—2-84 
11-16-82 
A(1)—(3) 
8-16—8-18 

A(4) 
8-19, 8-20 

A(5), (6) 
8-21, 8-22 

A(7) 
8-23—8-25 

B 
8-41 

B(1)—(3) 
8-42—8-44 

C(1), (2) 
8-61, 8-62 

D(3) 
8-26 
?7-?1-83 
203A, 
203B 
2-43, 2-44 

204A, 
204B 
2-45, 2-46 
Art./Sec.

?2-28-85       
I 
1—23 
8-81 
      II 
1, 2 
8-82 
      II 
3—5 
8-83—8-85 
      III 
1 
8-151 
      IV 
1 
8-86, 8-87 
      IV 
2—5 
8-106—8-109 
      IV 
6—11, 16 
8-110 
      IV 
12, 13 
8-111, 8-112 
      IV 
14, 15 
8-113 
      V 
1—4 
8-126—8-129 
      V 
5 
8-130, 8-131 
      V 
6—11 
8-132—8-137 
      VII 
1—3 
8-88 
      VIII 
1—3 
8-89 
      X 
1—3 
8-161 
      X 
4—6 
8-162—8-164 

Section 

11-?5-85 
1—3 
4-41—4-43 

4 
4-44—4-47 

5 
4-48 

6 
4-50 

7 
4-49 
12-10-85 

5-59 
?1-?6-87 
I 
4-66, 4-67 

II—VI 
4-69—4-73 

VIII 
4-68 
?3-17-87 

8-161, 8-165 
?8-25-87 
1 
6-1 

2 
7-26 

3 
7-1 
12-?1-87 
1—8 
Adopting ordinance, p. ix 
?5-24-88 

5-56—5-61 
?3-21-89 
1 
8-165(a), (b) 

2—5 
8-165(c)—(f) 
?5-23-89 

5-60 
?6-27-89 

7-40—7-47 
?9-19-89 

4-90—4-100 
?3-27-90 

App. A, § 4.9 
?5-22-90 

App. A, §§ 3.5—3.10, 4.9 
?3-19-91 
2.01—2.10 
6-31—6-41 

3.01—3.10 
6-51—6-60 

4.00—4.24 
6-71—6-95 
12-10-91 
1, 2 
6-1 
12-10-91 
1 
7-26 
?6-?9-92 
1 
4-70(a) 
?7-?7-92 
1 
2-27(m) 
?8-11-92 
1 
App. A, § 4.1(B)(13) 
10-27-92 
1 
App. C, § 203 
11-10-92 
1 
5.1—5.6 
12-?1-92 
1 
App. A, § 4.1(B)(14) 
?6-28-94 
1 
2-45(a) 
?8-?9-94 
1 
7-60—7-64 
11-22-94 
1, 2 
7-44 
11-22-94 
1 
2-22 

2 
2-27(g) 

3 
2-27(n) 

4 
8-26(a), (b) 

5—8 
8-41—8-44 

9 
8-88 

11 
8-106 

12 
8-109, 8-110 

13 
8-112, 8-113 

14 
8-27 

15 
8-129—8-134 

16 
8-165(f) 
11-22-94 
1       Rpld 
App. C 

2       
Added 
App. C 
?1-10-95 
1 
2-27(m) 
?1-10-95 
1 
7-44(b), (c) 
?1-10-95 
1 
7-61(c)—(f) 
?4-?4-95 
1 
7-61(d), (f) 
?7-18-95 
1 
2-27(m) 
?7-18-95 
1 
7-44(b), (c) 
?1-23-96 
1 
7-44(b) 
?1-23-96 
1 
7-61(c) 
?8-28-96 
1, 2 
7-61(e), (f) 

3 
7-61(h) 
?3-25-97 
1 
7-44(b) 
?1-13-98 
1       Rpld 
7-26 

2 
7-20—7-26 


7-28, 7-29 
?3-17-98 
1 
7-44(b) 

2 
7-61(c) 
?6-30-98 
1 
7-22 

2 
7-44(c) 

3 
7-61(c) 
?9-?8-98 
1 
7-65 
12-15-98 
1 
7-44(b) 

2 
7-61(c) 
12-15-98 
2 
App. D 
?2-?1-00 
1, 2 
7-44(b), (c) 

3—5 
7-61(c), (e), (f) 
?6-22-00 
1 
7-44(b) 
?8-29-00 
1 
7-22 
12-19-00 
1 
7-22 
?1-30-01 
1 
7-61(c) 
10-23-01 
1, 2 
4-26 
10-23-01 
1       Rpld 
5-41(b)—(d) 


5-42 

2       
Added 
5-41(b), (c) 


5-42 
10-23-01 
1 
7-22 
10-23-01 
1, 2 
7-61(f), (c) 
10-30-01 
1       Rpld 
4-72(b), (d)—(f) 

2       
Added 
4-72(b), (d), (e) 
10-30-01 
1       Rpld 
5-3—5-6 

2       
Added 
5-3, 5-4 
10-30-01 
1       Rpld 
8-18(a) 


8-85 


8-89(b) 

2       
Added 
8-17(e) 


8-18(a) 


8-27 


8-85 


8-89(b) 


8-113 


8-138 
11-13-01 
1, 2 
7-61(e), (f) 
12-18-01 
1       Rpld 
4-44(1)—(3) 


4-49, 4-50 

2       
Added 
4-44(1), (2) 


4-49 
11-27-01 
1       Rpld 
6-1 

2       
Added 
6-1—6-3 
12-18-01 
1 
6-40(c)—(e) 


6-41 
12-18-01 
1       Rpld 
7-28(e) 


7-29(a) 

2       
Added 
7-28(e) 


7-29(a) 
?4-23-02 
1 
7-44(b) 

2 
7-61(c) 
12-17-02 
1 
7-44(b) 
?1-28-03 
1 
7-61(c) 

2 
7-44(b) 
?6-17-03 
1 
7-61(c) 

2 
7-61(e) 
?8-26-03 
1 
2-27(m)(2), (3), (9) 
?8-26-03 
1       
Added 
3.5-1—3.5-34 
?2?-3-04 
1 
7-61(c), (e), (f) 

2 
7-44(b) 
?1-25-05 
1 
7-44(b) 
?1-31-06 
1 
7-61(c), (f), (h) 

2 
7-44(b) 
?3-28-06 
1 
7-61(c) 

2 
7-44(b) 
?8-31-06 
1 
7-61(c), (e), (f) 

2 
7-44(b) 
?1-30-07 
1 
7-61(e), (f) 
?2-20-07 
1 
4-90, 4-92  
4-94—4-98 
?2-27-07 
1 
6-51—6-60 


6-77, 6-80 
?4-24-07 
1 
3.5-28(b) 

      Added 
3.5-28(b)(27) 

2 
3.5-29(c)(1), (2) 
?8-21-07 
1       
Added 
4-110—4-115 
?4-15-08 
1 
7-44(b) 

2 
7-61(c), (d), (f) 
?8-?5-08 
1       Rpld 
App. A, §§ 1.0—1.6, 2.0—2.7, 3.01—3.10, 4.0—4.12 

2       
Added 
App. A, §§ 1.1—1.8, 2.1—2.4, 3.1—3.15, 4.1—4.21, 5.1—5.8, 6.1—6.6, 7.1—
7.11, 8.0, 8.1 
?9-16-08 
1 
7-22 
?3-10-09 
1 
App. A, § 2.3 

2 
App. A, § 2.5 

3 
App. A, § 3.14 

4 
App. A, §§ 8.0, 8.1 
?9-22-09 
1 
App. A, table 2.2 

2 
App. A, § 3.12 
?9-22-09 
1 
App. C, §§ 101—107 

2 
App. C, §§ 201—213 

3 
App. C, §§ 301—303 

      Added 
App. C, §§ 305, 306 

4 
App. C, §§ 401—419 
10-13-09 
1, 2 
7-44(b), (c) 
11-17-09 
1 
7-44(b) 
11-24-09 
1 
6-2 
?1-26-10 
1 
7-61(c), (e), (f) 
?3-?9-10 
1 
App. A, § 3.7 

2 
App. A, § 4-15 

3 
App. A, § 5.18(D), (E), (G), (I), (N) 

4 
App. A, § 7.2 

5       
Added 
App. A, § 7.12 
?4-13-10 
1 
7-61(e), (f) 
?6-22-10 
1 
7-61(e), (f) 
?6-29-10 
I 
7-22 
?7-?6-10 
1       
Added 
5-70—5-73 
12-21-10 
1 
6-21 

2       
Added 
6-22(t) 

3 
8-26(c)(8) 

4       
Added 
8-112a 
?5-24-11 
1 
7-61(c), (f) 
?9-20-11 
1 
7-44(b) 

2, 3 
7-61(c), (e) 

4 
7-61(f) 
?9-11-12 
1 
7-61(f), (h) 
10-23-12 
1 
7-44(b) 

2 
7-61(c) 
?2-12-13 
1 
8-165 
10-21-14 
1 
2-27(k) 
?4-21-15 
1 
7-44(c) 
?4-28-15 
1 
App. A, § 2.3(A), (B) 

2 
App. A, table 2.1 


App. A, table 2.2 
11-10-15 
1       
Added 
3.5-28(b)(28) 


3.5-28(c) 
?1-26-16 
1 
7-61(c), (f) 
?9-27-16 
1 
7-44(b) 

2 
7-61(c) 
?6-13-17 
1 
7-61(c),(e), (f) 
10-?3-17 
1 
App. A, § 3.8(A) 

2 
App. A, § 4.2 

      Added 
App. A, § 4.22 

3 
App. A, §§ 5.5, 5.6 

4 
App. A, § 6.5 

5 
App. A, § 7.10 

6 
App. A, § 8.0 
 


STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE 
?This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes 
following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 
V.S.A. Title 
Section 
Section this Code 
I 
Art. 5 
3.5-27 


3.5-31 
II 
6, 69 
Pt. I, Pt. II 


3.5-31 
 
V.S.A. Title 
Section 
Section this Code 
1 
310—314 
7-43 


App. A, § 7.1 
3 
810 
App. A, § 7.8 
9 
4501 
App. A, §§ 4.8, 8.0 
10 
Ch. 32 
App. A, § 5.8 

Ch. 153 
App. A, § 4.15 

Ch. 159 
App. A, § 4.17 

753 
App. A, § 5.8 

1021(f) 
App. C, § 107 

1259(f) 
App. C, § 107 

6606a 
App. A, § 4.17 

8504 
App. A, § 7.2 
13 
Chs. 59, 63 
3.5-28 

3701 
8-87 
18 
601 
Ch. 4 
19 
43 
6-21 

Ch. 193 
4-93 
20 
Ch. 201 
5-61 


Ch. 5 

6 
Ch. 3 

2054 
2-27 

2481 
5-60 

3341 
Ch. 4, Art. II 

3801 
Ch. 4, Art. II, Div. 2 
23 
453 
5-70 

4103(4) 
5-70 

Ch. 7 
5-70 


7-47 

1008 
Ch. 7 


7-41 
24 
Ch. 36 
App. A, § 7.1 

Ch. 61 
5-61 


3.5-27 


3.5-31 


App. A, § 4.19 

Ch. 67 
App. A, § 1.0 

Ch. 71 
Ch. 5, Art. II 

Ch. 95 
Ch. 8, Art. II 

Ch. 102 
Ch. 4, Art. III 


4-67 

Ch. 117 
App. A, § 5.1 


App. A, § 5.6 


App. A, § 7.12 


App. C, § 107 

Ch. 117, sub. (6) 
App. C, § 101 

Ch. 129 
8-23 

1127 
2-27 

1154(c) 
App. A, § 7.2 

1971 
Pt. III, Ch. 1 

1974 
1-11 


3.5-29 


3.5-33 


4-72 

1974a 
5-72 


5.8 


App. A, § 7.11 

1977 
3.5-29 


3.5-33 

1977 et seq. 
5-72 


App. A, § 7.11 

2241(7) 
App. A, § 4.19 

2252—2256 
5-71 

2261—2264 
5-71 

2272 
5-72 

2291(1) 
Ch. 6 

2291(2) 
6-1 

2291(4) 
Ch. 7 


7-41 

2291(5) 
Ch. 6 

2291(6) 
Ch. 6 


Ch. 8 

2291(7) 
Ch. 6 

2291(10) 
Ch. 4, Art. II 

2291(11) 
5-57 


5-61 

2291(13), (14) 
Ch. 4 

2295 
App. A, § 5.6 


App. A, § 7.2 

2601 
Ch. 4 

3301 
Ch. 8, Art. II 

3311, 3313 
8-22 

3501 
Ch. 8 


Ch. 8, Art. III 

3601 
Ch. 8 


Ch. 8, Art. III 

4301 
Apps. B, C 

4302 
App. A, § 1.1 


App. C, § 102 

4304(10) 
App. A, § 7.2 

4325 
App. B, Art. I, § A 

4325(4), (5) 
App. B, Art. I, § D 

4325(Bylaws) 
App. B, Art. I, § D 

4345 
App. B, Art. I, § E 

4347 
App. B, Art. I, § E 

4348 
App. B, Art. I, § E 

4381 
Apps. B, C 

4382 
App. B, Art. I, § B 

4383 
App. B, Art. I, § B 

4384—4387 
App. B, Art. I, § C 

4384(c) 
App. A, § 1.5 

4401 
App. A, § 1.1 


App. B, Art. I, § D 


App. C, § 103 

4401(b)(1) 
App. A 

4401(b)(2) 
App. C 

4401(b)(1), 4405, 4461 
App. B, Art. II, § A 

4401(b)(2) 
App. B, Art. II, § B 

4401(b)(3) 
App. B, Art. II, § C 

4411 
App. A, § 1.1 

4411(a)(1) 
App. A, § 4.1 

4412 
App. A, § 1.4 

4412(1) 
3.3 

4412(1)(B), (C) 
App. A, § 4.15 

4412(1)(E), (F) 
App. A, § 4.2 

4412(4) 
App. A, § 4.11 

4412(5) 
App. A, § 4.7 

4412(q) 
App. A, § 8.0 

4413—4425 
App. B, Art. II, § C 

4413 
App. A, § 1.4 


App. A, § 7.2 

4413a 
4.17 

4413d 
App. A, § 7.2 

4413(d) 
App. C, § 107 

4414 
App. A, § 7.10 

4414(3) 
App. A, § 5.5 

4414(3)(A) 
App. A, § 5.5 

4414(3)(B) 
App. A, § 5.5 

4416 
App. A, § 5.6 

4418 
App. C, § 103 


App. C, § 210 

4418(2)(A) 
App. C, § 104 

4418(8) 
App. A, § 7.10 

4422—4425 
App. B, Art. II, § C 

4424 
App. A, § 5.8 

4426 
App. B, Art. II, § D 

4441 
App. A, § 1.5 

4442 
App. A, § 1.5 


App. A, § 1.6 

4444 
App. A, § 2.3 


App. C, § 213 

4445 
App. A, § 2.3 


App. C, § 213 

4446 
App. A, § 1.3 


App. A, § 7.2 


App. A, § 7.3 


App. A, § 7.5 

4448 
App. A, § 7.2 

4449 
App. A, § 7.2 

4449(c) 
App. A, § 7.2 

4449(d) 
App. A, § 7.2 

4451 
App. A, § 5.8 


App. A, § 7.11 

4452 
App. A, § 5.8 

4460 
App. A, § 7.1 

4460(4) 
App. A, § 5.5 

4463(a) 
App. C, § 205 

4463(b) 
App. C, § 208 

4464 
App. A, § 5.5 


App. A, § 7.1 


App. C, § 205 

4464(b) 
App. A, § 7.8 


App. C, § 107 

4464(b)(1) 
App. C, § 206 

4464(c) 
App. C, § 104 

4465 
App. A, § 7.1 


App. A, § 7.8 

4465(b) 
App. C, § 207 

4468 
App. A, § 7.8 

4469 
App. A, § 5.8 


App. A, § 7.9 

4469(a)1—5 
App. A, § 7.9 

4470 
App. A, § 7.8 

4471 
App. C, § 207 

5143 
8-24 
27 
1403 
App. C, § 207 

1404 
App. C, § 207 
30 
Ch. 248 
App. A, § 7.2 
31 
Ch. 7 
5-61 

Ch. 9 
5-61 

301 
5-61 
32 
9905, 9906 
5-61 

Ch. 235 
5-61 
 
