CODE OF ORDINANCES
TOWN OF
COLCHESTER, VERMONT

____________

CHARTER AND
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN

____________

Adopted, February 17, 1976

Effective, March 9, 1976

____________

Published in 1976 by Order of the Town Board

Republished in 2014

____________

 

OFFICIALS

OF THE

TOWN OF COLCHESTER

AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION

____________

Richard J. Derry, Chairman

Hugh Fitzgerald

H. G. Shaefer

Harold Simpers

George Stokes

Board of Selectmen

____________

Ronald G. Coltran

Town Manager

____________

The Firm of

Dinse, Allen & Erdmann

Town Attorneys

____________

Russell H. Smith

Town Clerk

PREFACE

This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the Colchester, Vermont.

Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1976 Code, as supplemented through Supplement Number 38, to include legislation passed July 8, 2014. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1976 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein.

The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code.

Chapter and Section Numbering System

The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters.

Page Numbering System

The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes:

CODE

CD1:1

CODE APPENDIX

CDA:1

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES

CCT:1

STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE

SLT:1

CODE INDEX

CDi:1

 

Index

The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested.

Looseleaf Supplements

A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.

Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes.

Acknowledgments

The publishers are most grateful to all town officers and employees for their cooperation and interest during the preparation of this Code.

The republication of this Code was under the direct supervision of Dennis Sinnett, Vice President of Supplements and Mary Summers, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.

This Code is presented for the use and benefit of the citizens of the Town of Colchester.

December, 2014

MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION
Tallahassee, Florida

ADOPTING ORDINANCE

AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN OF COLCHESTER, VERMONT; ESTABLISHING THE SAME; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN, EXCEPT AS HEREIN EXPRESSLY PROVIDED; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES; AND PROVIDING WHEN THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE.

The Selectmen of the Town of Colchester hereby ordain:

Section 1. That this Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 through 12, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances of the Town of Colchester," and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances passed by the Town Board, prior to October 17, 1974, except such as by reference thereto are expressly saved from repeal or continued in force and effect for any purpose.

Section 2. That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect the 9th day of March, 1976, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the Town of Colchester enacted on final passage on or before October 17, 1974, and not in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance, except as hereinafter provided. That no resolution of the Town, not specifically mentioned, is hereby repealed.

Section 3. That the repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not affect any of the following:

(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance;

(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the Town, or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the Town of any evidence of the Town's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the Town;

(3)  Any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the Town not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such Code;

(4)  Any right of franchise granted by any ordinance;

(5)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the Town;

(6)  The annual appropriation ordinance;

(7)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes;

(8)  Any ordinance prescribing through streets, parking prohibitions, parking limitations, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles, or loading zones, not inconsistent with such Code;

(9)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the Town;

(10)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor;

(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the Town;

(12)  Any ordinance extending the boundaries of the Town;

(13)  Any ordinance enacted after October 17, 1974.

Such repeal shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance.

Section 4. Any and all additions or amendments to such Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Selectmen to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference to the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Colchester shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.

Section 5. A copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk, preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the Town Clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the Town Clerk or someone authorized by him, to insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the Town Board to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the Town of Colchester. This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same and shall be considered the official Code of Ordinances of Colchester.

Section 6. In case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in Section 1-9 of such Code shall apply to the sections as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in such other section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein.

Section 7. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in the Town to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Town of Colchester to be misrepresented thereby. Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-9 of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Colchester.

Section 8. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.

Section 9. This ordinance shall become effective on the 9th day of March, 1976.

Colchester, Vermont

February 17, 1976

ATTEST:
/s/ Russell H. Smith
TOWN CLERK

/s/ Hugh Fitzgerald
/s/ Harold J. Simpers
/s/ George P. Stokes
/s/ H. G. Shaefer
BOARD OF SELECTMEN

PART I  CHARTER [1]
Sec. 1. Ratification.




Sec. 1.   Ratification.

The Charter of the Town of Colchester is hereby amended, as last approved by the voters on March 5, 1985, by striking it in its entirety and inserting in lieu thereof the following:

CHAPTER 1. - POWERS OF THE TOWN

CHAPTER 2. - OFFICERS

CHAPTER 3. - TOWN MEETINGS

CHAPTER 4. - TOWN MANAGER

CHAPTER 5. - DEPARTMENT OF ASSESSMENT

CHAPTER 6. - BUDGET

CHAPTER 7. - TAXATION

CHAPTER 8. - PERSONNEL

CHAPTER 9. - ETHICAL CONDUCT AND CONFLICT OF INTEREST

CHAPTER 10. - AMENDMENT OF CHARTER

CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE

 

FOOTNOTE(S):

--- (1) ---

Editor's note— Part I of this Code consists of the Charter of the Town of Colchester as it was enacted March 5, 1985, and approved by the governor May 7, 1985. Style and capitalization have been made uniform. Obvious misspellings have been corrected. (Back)

Prior to this amendment, this part consisted of the Charter of the Town of Colchester as it was set forth #145, Public Acts of 1969, adopted June 3, 1969, as amended by an ordinance enacted Nov. 8, 1977, §§ 1—22 and 25; and an ordinance enacted March 3, 1981, §§ 1—8. (Back)

State Law reference— Charters, amendment, procedure, Title 24, V.S.A. #702a. (Back)

CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE
This table includes amendments to the Charter subsequent to #145, Public Acts of 1969, signed by the governor on April 18, 1969, and adopted June 3, 1969, from which the original Charter was derived.

Date

Section

Disposition

11- 8-77

1, 2

109, 110

3

202(1)(B)

4       Rpld

202(1)(C)

5

202(3)

6

202(7)

7, 8

202(10), (11)

9, 10

204, 205

11, 12

206(b), (c)

13, 14

404(i), (k)

15—17

502—505

18

507

19

603

20

702

21, 22

801, 802

23, 24       Rpld

[80]3, [80]4

25       Rnbd

[80]5 as 803

 3- 3-81

1

103(e)

2

104(1)(A)

3       Rpld

202(9)

      Rnbd

202(10), (11)

      as

202(9), (10)

4

203(c)

5

205(b)

6

207(a)

7

404(i)

8

505

9       Rpld

602

10       Rnbd

603

      as

602

 3- 5-85

1

101—111

201—211

201—211

301—306

401—404

501—504

601—607

701, 702

801—803

901

1001—1004

 2-11-97

104(7)

 

Election
Date

Section

Disposition
this Charter

11- 4-14

2

101, 104(1)(A), (B), (7), 105(a), 106, 107, 109, 111, 202(a)(1)

      Rpld

202(a)(6)

203, 204, 205(a), 206—211, 302, 304—306, 401—406, 501, 602, 603, 606, 607, 702, 801(b), 802(a)

 3- 3-15

2       Added

703

 3- 6-18

      Dltd

202(a)(5), (6)

      Rnbd

202(a)(7)

      as

202(a)(5)

207(a), 304, 401, 404(b), (l), 406, 602(a)(2), (4)

      Added

602(a)(5)

603, 606, 607

      Added

608

Ch. 9, title

901

      Added

902

1001

CHAPTER 1.  POWERS OF THE TOWN
Sec. 101. Corporate existence retained.

Sec. 102. General law; application.

Sec. 103. Powers of the town.

Sec. 104. Additional powers.

Sec. 105. Ordinances; enforcement; adoption.

Sec. 106. Introduction; first and second readings; public hearing.

Sec. 107. Further consideration; final passage.

Sec. 108. Effective date.

Sec. 109. Filing.

Sec. 110. Annual town report.

Sec. 111. Reservation of powers to the Town.




Sec. 101.   Corporate existence retained.

The area and inhabitants within the current boundaries of the Town of Colchester shall continue to be a municipal corporation by the name of the Town of Colchester.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014)

Sec. 102.   General law; application.

Except when changed or modified by this Charter, or by any lawful regulation or ordinance of the Town of Colchester, all of the statutes of the state relating to municipalities shall apply to the Town of Colchester.

Sec. 103.   Powers of the town.

(a)  The town shall have all the powers granted to towns by the constitution and laws of the state together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution the powers granted; it may enact ordinances consistent with the constitution and laws of the State of Vermont or with this Charter, and impose penalties for violations thereof not in excess of a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) together with the costs of prosecution, or imprisonment for not more than sixty (60) days or both.

(b)  The Town of Colchester may adopt, amend, enforce and repeal ordinances relating to any aspect of municipal concern for the peace, order, health, safety, comfort, protection, morality and general welfare of the town and of its citizens.

(c)  The town may acquire real property within its corporate limits for any town purpose, in fee simple or any lesser interest or estate by purchase, gift, devise, lease or condemnation, or without its corporate limits by purchase, gift, devise, lease, with approval of the voters, consistent with the constitution and laws of the State of Vermont, and may sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage and control such property as its interests may require.

(d)  In this Charter no mention of a particular power shall be construed to be exclusive or to restrict the scope of the powers which the town would have if the particular power were not mentioned.

(e)  The town may merge with political subdivisions within its boundary after approval of the voters in elections to be held by both the town and political subdivision involved.

Sec. 104.   Additional powers.

In addition to powers otherwise conferred upon it by law, the Town is authorized:

(1)  To adopt and enforce ordinances relating to making and installing local improvements including curbs, sidewalks, storm drains, and water and sanitary waste systems; apportioning part of the expense of such improvements against property owners who benefit thereby; providing for the collection of such assessments and penalties for nonpayment; provided however:

(A)  That in absence of an ordinance no assessment shall be made by the Selectboard until it has received a petition in writing from fifty (50) percent of the owners of property fronting on such local improvements as proposed. Upon receiving such petition, the Selectboard may order the proposed improvements to be made.

(B)  That no assessment shall be made in excess of the actual benefit to the land so assessed as determined by the Selectboard after notice to and hearing of the owners of the property assessed.

(C)  That the total assessment made on account of any such improvements shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the cost of such improvement and the remaining cost of such improvement shall be borne by the town.

(2)  To adopt and enforce ordinances requiring the installation of curbs, sidewalks and storm drains in a manner specified by the town as a condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit.

(3)  To adopt and enforce ordinances regulating signs and billboards.

(4)  To adopt and enforce police ordinances regulating the parking, operation and speed of motor vehicles upon town and state aid streets and highways; to adopt police ordinances regulating the use of firearms, air rifles and devices having a capacity to inflict personal injury; to adopt and enforce police ordinances prohibiting the use of firearms, air rifles and devices having a capacity to inflict personal injury in specified areas, but only with approval of the voters.

(5)  To adopt and enforce ordinances relating to regulation, licensing or prohibition of the storage and accumulation of garbage, ashes, rubbish, refuse and waste materials.

(6)  To create and maintain a police department.

(7)  To establish a policy whereby the Selectboard may determine it to be in the public interest to plow those private roads serving two (2) or more year-round residences, which had previous to January 1, 1997, have the Town providing winter road maintenance.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014)

Sec. 105.   Ordinances; enforcement; adoption.

(a)  The Selectboard may provide monetary penalties or injunctive relief for the breach of any ordinance authorized by general law or this chapter; may prosecute any person violating the same through the Town legal counsel or police officers who for such purposes shall be informing officers and may maintain actions to restrain actual or threatened violations of the same. The establishment of any fine or penalty shall be by ordinance.

(b)  Ordinance-makeing authority granted to the Town by this Charter and general law shall be exercised in accordance with Sections 106 through 109 of the Charter.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014)

Sec. 106.   Introduction; first and second readings; public hearing.

(a)  Every ordinance, repeal of an ordinance, or amendment to an ordinance shall be introduced in writing. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be "The Selectboard of the Town of Colchester hereby ordains …". If the Selectboard passes the proposed ordinance upon first reading it shall cause the proposed ordinance to be published in its entirety or a concise summary of it in the Selectboard's designated newspaper of general circulation in the Town at least once, together with a notice of the time and place, when and where there will be a public hearing to consider the same for final passage. The first publication shall be at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of said public hearing.

(b)  At the time and place so designated or at any time and place to which the hearing may from time to time be adjourned, such ordinance shall be available in written form for the public.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014)

Sec. 107.   Further consideration; final passage.

After the hearing, the Selectboard may finally pass such ordinance with or without amendment, except that if the Selectboard makes an amendment it shall cause a summary of the amended ordinance to be published at least once together with a notice of the time and place of a public hearing at which such amended ordinance will be further considered, which publication shall be at least three (3) days prior to the public hearing. At the time so designated or at any time and place to which such meeting may be adjourned, the amended ordinance shall be read in full, and after such hearing the Selectboard may finally pass such amended ordinance, or again amend it subject to the same procedure as outlined herein.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014)

Sec. 108.   Effective date.

Every ordinance shall become effective twenty-one (21) days after passage unless a petition is filed in accordance with Section 305 of this Chapter; or, if the ordinance is conditioned upon approval of the voters of the town, then upon a favorable vote of a majority of those voting thereon at a meeting duly warned for the purpose.

Sec. 109.   Filing.

The Town Clerk shall prepare and keep in the Town Clerk's office the original signed copy of all ordinances and/or any changes, adopted by the Selectboard. This original file shall be indexed by subject matter and shall note in the record procedural information relating to the enactment of each original or changed ordinance. The Town Manager shall arrange for publishing, and updating of codified sets of all ordinances, for distribution and use by Town officials.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014)

Sec. 110.   Annual town report.

The annual town report shall be made available for general distribution not later than ten (10) days prior to the annual meeting.

Sec. 111.   Reservation of powers to the Town.

Nothing in this subchapter shall be so construed as in any way to limit the powers and functions conferred upon the Town of Colchester and the Selectboard of said Town by general or special enactments in force or effect or hereafter enacted; and the powers and functions conferred by this chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to the provisions of such general or special enactments.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014)

CHAPTER 2.  OFFICERS
Sec. 201. Officers generally.

Sec. 202. Elective officers; generally.

Sec. 203. Recall.

Sec. 204. Vacancies.

Sec. 205. Selectboard; organization.

Sec. 206. Meetings of the Selectboard.

Sec. 207. Record of proceedings.

Sec. 208. Appointments.

Sec. 209. Jurisdiction over other officers or employees.

Sec. 210. Compensation of Selectboard; appointees.

Sec. 211. Powers and duties.




Sec. 201.   Officers generally.

The officers of the Town of Colchester shall be these provided by law for towns, except as otherwise provided by this Charter. Such officers shall have all the powers and duties necessary to carry out the provisions of this Charter as well as those provided by law. All officers shall be elected or appointed as hereinafter provided.

Sec. 202.   Elective officers; generally.

(a)  At the annual meeting, the Town shall elect by Australian ballot from among the legally qualified voters thereof the following Town officers, who shall serve until the next annual meeting or until others are chosen.

(1)  Selectboard, number, terms of office, election:

(A)  There shall be a Selectboard consisting of five (5) members, and all Selectboard members shall be elected at large.

(B)  Three (3) members of the Selectboard shall have terms of office of three (3) years; two (2) members shall have terms of office of two (2) years. At each election, one (1) Selectboard member shall be elected for a three-year term and one (1) for a two-year term.

(2)  A moderator.

(3)  A town clerk and treasurer for a term of two (2) years.

(4)  One lister for a term of three (3) years.

(5)  A library trustee for a term of five (5) years.

(b)  In such case as three (3) or more candidates run for the same office and no candidate receives at least forty (40) percent of the votes cast for said office, no one shall be declared elected and a run-off election shall be held. The only candidates in the run-off election shall be the two (2) persons receiving the greatest number of votes for that office. The town clerk shall within seven (7) days warn a run-off election to be held not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days after the date of the warning. The person receiving a plurality of all votes cast in a run-off election shall be declared elected.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014; Amended 2015, No. M-1, § 2, eff. Jan. 27, 2015; approved by voters, Mar. 6, 2018)

Sec. 203.   Recall.

(a)  Any officer elected under Section 202 of this chapter may be removed from office as follows: A petition signed by not less than fifteen (15) percent of the registered voters shall be filed with the Selectboard, requesting a vote on whether the elected officer shall be removed from office. The Selectboard shall call a special Town meeting, to be held within forty-five (45) days of receiving the petition, to vote on whether the elected officer shall be removed. The official shall be removed only if at least as many registered voters of the Town vote as voted in the election wherein the officer was elected, or at least one-third of the registered voters of the Town vote, whichever is greater, and a majority of that number vote for removal.

(b)  If the Town votes for removal of an elected officer, the office shall thereupon become vacant, and the Selectboard shall call a special meeting, to be held within forty-five (45) days of the vote for removal, to fill the vacancy until the term of the officer so removed expires.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014)

Sec. 204.   Vacancies.

In case of a vacancy of any elected Town official, such vacancy shall be filled by the Selectboard until the next annual election. The person then elected shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. If more than one (1) vacancy occurs on an elected board at the same time the vacancy shall be filled by a special Town meeting called for that purpose. Separate filing shall be made for such unexpired term.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014)

Sec. 205.   Selectboard; organization.

(a)  Forthwith after their election and qualification, the Selectboard shall organize and elect a Chairman, Vice Chairman, and a Clerk by a majority vote of the entire Selectboard and file a certificate of such election for record in the office of the Town Clerk.

(b)  The Chairman of the Board, or in the Chairman's absence the Vice Chairman, shall preside at all meetings of the Board and shall be recognized as the head of the Town government for all ceremonial purposes.

(c)  The rules of conduct of all meetings shall be governed by Robert's "Rules of Order."

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014)

Sec. 206.   Meetings of the Selectboard.

(a)  As soon as possible after the election of the Chairman and Vice Chairman, the Selectboard shall fix the time and place of its regular meetings and such meetings shall be held at least once each month.

(b)  The Selectboard shall determine its order of business.

(c)  The presence of three (3) members of the Selectboard shall constitute a quorum.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014)

Sec. 207.   Record of proceedings.

(a)  It shall be the duty of the Selectboard to keep an official record of its proceedings and policies which shall be open for public inspection and published on the Town's website.

(b)  The minutes of each meeting shall be approved by the Selectboard at a subsequent meeting.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014; approved by voters, Mar. 6, 2018)

Sec. 208.   Appointments.

(a)  The Selectboard shall appoint the members of the following permanent Commissions of the Town of Colchester:

(1)  Development Review Board.

(2)  Planning Commission.

(3)  Cemetery Advisory Committee.

(b)  The Selectboard may appoint such additional commissions or committees as it feels to be in best interest of the Town.

(c)  The Selectboard shall appoint legal counsel and a Tree Warden if needed.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014)

Sec. 209.   Jurisdiction over other officers or employees.

Neither the Selectboard, nor any of its members shall direct or request the appointment, by another officer or employee of the Town, of any person to office or employment, or any person's suspension or removal therefrom, or in any manner take part in the appointment, discipline, or removal of subordinates and employees of the Town, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The Selectboard and its members shall deal with that portion of the service of the Town for which the Town Manager is responsible solely through the Town Manager, and neither the Selectboard nor any of its members shall give any orders to or request any action by any subordinate in office. This shall not prohibit the Selectboard from recommending to the Town Manager a prospective employee for the Town Manager's consideration.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014)

Sec. 210.   Compensation of Selectboard; appointees.

(a)  Compensation paid to the Selectboard shall be set by the voters at the annual meeting.

(b)  The Selectboard shall fix the compensation of all officers and employees, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. All fees payable to the Town Clerk shall be paid to the Town Treasury and the compensation fixed by the Selectboard shall be in lieu of any such fees otherwise payable to the Town Clerk.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014)

Sec. 211.   Powers and duties.

(a)  The members of the Selectboard shall constitute the legislative body of the Town of Colchester for all purposes required by statute, and except as otherwise herein specifically provided shall have all the powers and authority given to, and perform all duties required of town legislative bodies or selectboards under the laws of the State of Vermont.

(b)  Within the limitations of the foregoing, the Selectboard shall have the power to:

(1)  Appoint and remove a town manager and supervise, create, change and abolish offices, commissions or departments other than the offices, commissions or departments established by this Charter.

(2)  Assign additional duties to offices, commissions or departments established by this Charter, but may not discontinue or assign to any other office, commission or department duties assigned to a particular office, commission or department established by this Charter.

(3)  Appoint the members of all boards, commissions, committees or similar bodies unless specifically provided otherwise by this Charter.

(4)  Make, amend and repeal ordinances as provided in Sections 106—109 of this Charter.

(5)  Provide for an independent audit by a certified public accountant.

(6)  Inquire into the conduct of any officer, commission or department and investigate any and all municipal affairs.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014)

 
CHAPTER 3.  TOWN MEETINGS
Sec. 301. Application of general laws.

Sec. 302. Time of holding.

Sec. 303. Eligible voters.

Sec. 304. Budget.

Sec. 305. Overrule of ordinances.

Sec. 306. Petition for enactment of ordinance; special meeting.




Sec. 301.   Application of general laws.

Provisions of the laws of the State of Vermont relating to the qualifications of voters, the manner of voting, the duties of election officers and all other particulars respective to preparation for, conduct and management of elections, so far as they may be applicable, shall govern all municipal elections, and all general and special meetings, except as otherwise provided in this Charter.

Sec. 302.   Time of holding.

(a)  An annual Town meeting for the consideration of the budget and other Town business shall be held on the first Tuesday in March unless otherwise legally warned by the Selectboard. However, all business which may be decided without Australian ballot shall take place on the evening before the first Tuesday in March and shall be adjourned when all matters have been decided. The time shall be established by policy of the Selectboard at its annual organizational meeting in consultation with the Colchester School District.

(b)  The election of officers and the voting on all other questions to be decided by the Australian ballot system shall take place on the first Tuesday in March. The ballot boxes shall be open between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or as shall be determined and warned by the Selectboard.

(c)  The Selectboard shall determine which articles are to be voted upon by Australian ballot and which articles are to be voted upon by other methods, and it shall indicate in the warning the questions to be voted by Australian ballot.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014)

Sec. 303.   Eligible voters.

A means for the identification and designation of the eligible voters in town meeting shall be devised and enforced by the board of civil authority.

Sec. 304.   Budget.

An annual Town budget exclusive of school district budget shall become effective after adoption at Town meeting by the vote of the majority of those eligible to vote present at such meeting. After such budget has been adopted, the Selectboard may make emergency appropriations totaling not in excess of four (4) percent of the aggregate budget appropriations following an opportunity for public comment on the matter. Such emergency appropriations shall be reported to the next Town meeting. Any appropriation in excess of such four (4) percent shall require prior approval of a special Town meeting.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014; approved by voters, Mar. 6, 2018)

Sec. 305.   Overrule of ordinances.

All ordinances shall be subject to overrule by a special Town meeting, as follows; if, within twenty (20) days after final passage by the Selectboard of any such ordinance, a petition signed by voters of the Town not less in number than ten (10) percent of the largest number of votes cast by Australian ballot at the last annual Town meeting is filed with the Town Clerk requesting its reference to a special Town meeting, the Selectboard shall fix the time and place of such meeting, which shall be not less than thirty (30) nor more than forty (40) days after the filing of the petition and notice thereof shall be given in the manner provided by law in the calling of a special Town meeting. An ordinance so referred shall become effective upon the conclusion of such meeting unless voters not less in number than ten (10) percent of the largest number of votes cast by Australian ballot at the last annual Town meeting and constituting a majority of those voting thereon, shall have voted against the ordinance.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014)

Sec. 306.   Petition for enactment of ordinance; special meeting.

(a)  Subject to the provisions of Section 305 of this chapter, voters of the Town may at any time petition in the same manner as in Section 305 for the enactment of any proposed lawful ordinance by filing such petition, including the text of such ordinance, with the Town Clerk. The Selectboard shall call a special Town meeting to be held not less than thirty (30) nor more than forty (40) days after the date of such filing, unless prior to such meeting such ordinance is enacted by the Selectboard. The warning for such meeting shall state the proposed ordinance in full and shall provide for an aye and nay vote as to its enactment. Such ordinance shall take effect on the tenth day after the conclusion of such meeting provided that the voters as qualified in Section 305 of this chapter, constituting a majority of those voting thereon, shall have voted in the affirmative.

(b)  Any proposed ordinance shall be examined by the Town Attorney before being submitted to the special Town meeting. The Town Attorney is authorized subject to the approval of the Selectboard to correct such ordinance so as to avoid repetitions, illegalities, and unconstitutional provisions, and to ensure accuracy in its text and references, and clearness and preciseness in its phraseology, but the Attorney shall not materially change its meaning and effect.

(c)  This section shall not apply to appointments of officers, members of commissions, or boards made by the Selectboard or to the appointment or designation of Selectboard members, or to rules governing the procedure of the Selectboard.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014)

CHAPTER 4.  TOWN MANAGER
Sec. 401. Appointment.

Sec. 402. Qualifications.

Sec. 403. Oath.

Sec. 404. Powers and duties.

Sec. 405. Compensation.

Sec. 406. Removal.




Sec. 401.   Appointment.

The Selectboard shall appoint a Town Manager pursuant to 24 V.S.A. §§ 1231—1243.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014; approved by voters, Mar. 6, 2018)

Sec. 402.   Qualifications.

The Town Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of executive and administrative and professional qualifications.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014)

Sec. 403.   Oath.

Before entering upon official duties, the Town Manager shall be sworn to the faithful performance of those duties by the Town Clerk.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014)

Sec. 404.   Powers and duties.

(a)  The Town Manager shall carry out the policies laid down by the Selectboard and to that end the Town Manager shall be the Chief Executive Officer and the head of the administrative branch of the Town government and shall be responsible to the Selectboard for the efficient administration thereof.

(b)  Unless otherwise excused by the Selectboard, the Town Manager or his or her designee shall attend all meetings of the Selectboard and the Town Manager or his or her designee shall keep the Selectboard informed of the financial condition and future needs of the Town and shall make such reports as may be required by law, or ordinance, or which may be requested by the Selectboard. The Town Manager shall make such other reports and recommendations as the Town Manager may deem advisable, but shall not vote. The Town Manager shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this chapter, or required of the Town Manager by law, ordinance, or resolution of the Selectboard not inconsistent with this chapter.

(c)  The Town Manager shall be an ex-officio member of all standing committees but shall not vote.

(d)  The Town Manager shall prepare the annual budget and submit it to the Selectboard and be responsible for its administration after adoption.

(e)  The Town Manager shall compile for general distribution at the end of each fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the Town for the year.

(f)  The Town Manager shall provide to the Selectboard a monthly financial statement, with a copy to the Town Treasurer.

(g)  The Town Manager shall be the general purchasing agent of the Town and purchase all supplies for every department thereof.

(h)  The Town Manager shall be responsible for the system of accounts except where otherwise delegated under this chapter.

(i)  The Town Manager shall perform any other duties assigned by State law not in conflict with this chapter.

(j)  The Town Manager shall be responsible for the operation of all departments of the Town, not otherwise provided for in this chapter.

(k)  The Town Manager shall have authority to appoint, fix the salary of, suspend and remove all employees of the Town, subject to the provisions of this chapter. The Town Manager shall obtain the advice and consent of a majority of the Selectboard before appointing or fixing the salary of the head of any department.

(l)  The Town Manager may, when advisable or proper, delegate to subordinate officers and employees of the Town any duties conferred upon the Town Manager by this chapter or by action of the Selectboard, including, but not limited to, regarding the enforcement of Town ordinances, and hold them responsible for the faithful discharge of such duties.

(m)  The Town Manager shall be responsible for the enforcement of all Town laws and ordinances.

(n)  The Town Manager or his or her designee shall be responsible for the Town cemeteries and will manage, maintain, and operate them with the advice and assistance of a Cemetery Advisory Committee, appointed by the Selectboard. The duties and responsibilities of this Committee are established by the Town Manager and approved by the Selectboard.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014; approved by voters, Mar. 6, 2018)

Sec. 405.   Compensation.

The Town Manager shall receive such pay as may be fixed by the Selectboard, subject to the provisions of this chapter.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014)

Sec. 406.   Removal.

(a)  On ninety (90) days' notice, the Town Manager shall be removed by a majority of the entire Selectboard so voting upon a finding of cause for removal. The Town Manager may be suspended during this period, but the Town Manager's pay shall continue until removal.

(b)  The Selectboard shall adopt a resolution stating its intention to remove the Town Manager and the reasons therefor, a copy of which shall be served forthwith on the Town Manager, along with a notice of termination hearing not less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty (20) days from the date of notice. The Town Manager shall have an opportunity to be heard at the hearing. The Selectboard may thereafter dismiss the Town Manager for cause.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014; approved by voters, Mar. 6, 2018)

CHAPTER 5.  DEPARTMENT OF ASSESSMENT
Sec. 501. Department of Assessment.

Sec. 502. Appraisal of property.

Sec. 503. Duties.

Sec. 504. Appeal.




Sec. 501.   Department of Assessment.

There shall be established a Department of Assessment headed by a professionally qualified real estate appraiser who shall be appointed by the Town Manager with the approval of the Selectboard. The three (3) elected listers shall comprise a Board of Assessment which shall hear assessment grievance appeals.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014)

Sec. 502.   Appraisal of property.

The department of assessment shall appraise all real property for the purpose of establishing the grand list. Appraisals shall be reviewed periodically and updated. Technically qualified individuals or firms may be employed as needed.

Sec. 503.   Duties.

(a)  The department of assessment shall have the same powers, discharge the same duties, proceed in the discharge thereof in the same manner, and be subject to the same liabilities as are prescribed for listers or the board of listers under the laws of the State of Vermont, except as herein otherwise provided.

(b)  The department shall review, or cause to be reviewed, the appraisals of all real property in the town which is subject to taxation, in accordance with the standards for appraising established by the laws of the State of Vermont.

Sec. 504.   Appeal.

If a property owner is dissatisfied with the assessment of the owner's property, the property owner may proceed first to a grievance hearing before the board of assessment, thence secondly to a board of civil authority meeting; and further a subsequent appeal to the director of the property valuation and review division. Any dissatisfied property owner may appeal in the same manner and under the same time restrictions and regulations as set forth in Vermont Statutes Annotated as amended.

CHAPTER 6.  BUDGET
Sec. 601. Fiscal year.

Sec. 602. Preparation and submission.

Sec. 603. Town meeting and budget.

Sec. 604. Appropriation.

Sec. 605. Amount to be raised by taxation.

Sec. 606. Departmental budget.

Sec. 607. Transfers of appropriation.

Sec. 608. Capital budgeting for voter approved fund.




Sec. 601.   Fiscal year.

The fiscal year of the town and town school district shall begin the first day of July and end on the thirtieth day of June of the next calendar year. The fiscal year shall constitute the budget and accounting year as used in this Charter.

Sec. 602.   Preparation and submission.

(a)  The Town Manager, at least seventy-five (75) days before the annual town meeting or at such previous time as the Town Manager may be directed by the Selectboard, shall submit to the Selectboard a budget containing:

(1)  An estimate of the financial condition of the town as of the end of the fiscal year.

(2)  An itemized statement of appropriations recommended for current expenses, and for capital improvements other than those included in multi-year, voter approved capital plans, voter approved financing agreements, voter approved debt, or impact fees adopted in accordance with 24 V.S.A. Chapter 131, during the next fiscal year; with comparative statements of appropriations and estimated expenditures for the current fiscal year and actual appropriations and expenditures for the immediate preceding fiscal year.

(3)  An itemized statement of estimated revenues from all sources, other than taxation, for the next fiscal year; and comparative figures of tax and other sources of revenue for the current and immediate preceding fiscal years.

(4)  For capital to be funded through revenues other than those included in multi-year, voter approved capital plans, voter approved financing agreements, voter approved debt, or impact fees adopted in accordance with 24 V.S.A. Chapter 131, a capital budget for the next five (5) fiscal years, showing anticipated capital expenditures, financing and source of funding.

(b)  The annual budget should be presented as follows:

(1)  The Town Manager shall formally present the Town Manager's budget to the Selectboard at a public meeting, and provide such other information as may be requested by the Selectboard.

(2)  The Selectboard shall have thirty-five (35) days to review, and approve the recommended budget with or without change.

(3)  Not later than forty-five (45) days prior to the annual town meeting the Selectboard shall hold at least one public hearing to present and explain its proposed budget.

(4)  Not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the annual town meeting the Town Manager shall print and distribute the Selectboard's recommended budget and the final warning of the pending town meeting.

(5)  Not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the annual Town meeting, the Town Manager shall also file the proposed capital budget with the Town Clerk and Secretary of the Planning Commission pursuant to 24 V.S.A. § 4443(a).

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014; approved by voters, Mar. 6, 2018)

Sec. 603.   Town meeting and budget.

The budget shall be approved or rejected by the legal voters by Australian ballot, at the annual town meeting or a special town meeting. In the event of rejection of the budget by the legal voters, within 30 days of a vote rejecting the budget, the Selectboard shall set the time and place of the next special Town meeting on the budget.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014; approved by voters, Mar. 6, 2018)

Sec. 604.   Appropriation.

The effective date of the budget shall be July 1 of each year. The budgeted accounts and their corresponding dollar amounts shall be those approved by the legal voters under Section 603 of this Charter.

Sec. 605.   Amount to be raised by taxation.

Upon passage of the budget by the annual town meeting, the amounts stated therein as the amount to be raised by property taxes shall constitute a determination of the amount of the levy for the purposes of the town in the corresponding tax year and the selectmen shall levy such taxes on the grand list furnished by the listers for the corresponding tax year.

Sec. 606.   Departmental budget.

The budget for a department shall include all proposed expenditures as provided in the overall budget adopted at town meeting. Town department heads shall not exceed expenditures as approved by voters, or as altered by the Selectboard or Town Manager, as permitted through this Charter or as permitted by Vermont law.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014; approved by voters, Mar. 6, 2018)

Sec. 607.   Transfers of appropriation.

The Town Manager may at any time transfer an unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof between general classification of expenditures with an office, agency, or department. The Selectboard shall be notified in writing of all such interdepartment transfers. The Selectboard may transfer an unencumbered appropriation balance or a portion thereof between departments. All transfers shall be documented and signed, and distributed to the Town Clerk and Treasurer. Account transfers as noted above must be managed within the total budget, with its constraint as required by Section 304 of this chapter.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014; approved by voters, Mar. 6, 2018)

Sec. 608.   Capital budgeting for voter approved fund.

Capital budgets funded through voter approved multi-year capital plans, voter approved agreements, voter approved debt, or impact fees adopted in accordance with 24 V.S.A. Chapter 131, shall follow the process for approval outlined in Title 24 V.S.A. § 4443.

(Approved by voters, Mar. 6, 2018)

CHAPTER 7.  TAXATION
Sec. 701. Taxes on real and personal property.

Sec. 702. Penalty; interest; Treasurer's powers.

Sec. 703. Local sales, rooms, and meals and alcoholic beverages tax.




Sec. 701.   Taxes on real and personal property.

Taxes on real and personal property shall be paid in three (3) equal payments, one-third due and payable on or before August 15, one-third due and payable on or before November 15, and one-third due and payable on or before March 15 of each fiscal year.

Sec. 702.   Penalty; interest; Treasurer's powers.

(a)  Penalty. Any installment not paid by the due dates established in Section 701 of this chapter shall be delinquent and there shall immediately be added to the amount due a penalty charge for late payment equivalent to five (5) percent of the delinquent installment. If, after the expiration of thirty (30) days from the due date of each installment the installment remains unpaid, an additional three (3) percent penalty shall be added to the amount due. All such charges, fees, interest and other additional amounts shall be cumulative and accrue at the times and in the manner herein specified.

(b)  Interest. An additional interest charge in the amount of one (1) percent of the unpaid tax per month or fraction thereof shall be added to any tax not paid on or before the dates specified in Section 701 of this chapter for the first three (3) months and thereafter one and one-half (1½) percent per month or fraction thereof, from the due date of such tax. Until such time as said tax is paid in full, such interest shall be imposed on a fraction of a month as if it were an entire month.

(c)  Treasurer's powers. The Treasurer shall have all the powers which Treasurers of towns have under the general law of the State, including the power to bring actions of law, conduct tax sales, and bring petitions for foreclosure of tax liens. Such acts shall be done in the name of the Town of Colchester and in the manner provided in general law, except as modified by any provision of this chapter.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014)

Sec. 703.   Local sales, rooms, and meals and alcoholic beverages tax.

(a)  Upon resolution of the Selectboard, or upon receipt of a petition submitted by five (5) percent of the registered voters of the Town, at an annual or special meeting warned for the purpose by a majority of those present and voting, the voters of the Town may vote to assess any or all of the following:

(1)  A one-percent sales tax;

(2)  A one-percent rooms tax; and

(3)  A one-percent meals and alcoholic beverage tax.

(b)  A tax imposed under the authority of this section shall be collected and administered and may be rescinded as provided by the general laws of the State.

(c)  Revenues received through the imposition of a tax imposed under this section shall be used for expenses or financing of voter-approved capital projects within the Town and voter-approved intermunicipal financial support related thereto.

(Approved by voters, Mar. 3, 2015)

CHAPTER 8.  PERSONNEL
Sec. 801. Appointment and removal.

Sec. 802. Personnel rules and regulations.

Sec. 803. Prohibitions.




Sec. 801.   Appointment and removal.

(a)  All town employees, including, but not limited to, the zoning administrator, not elected by the voters shall be appointed, supervised and removed by the town manager unless otherwise specified in this Charter. There shall be no discrimination in employment on account of race, religion or political opinions. Appointments, layoffs, suspensions, promotions, demotions and removals shall be made solely on the basis of training, experience, fitness and performance of duties of the individual, in such manner as to ensure that the responsible administrative officer may secure efficient service.

(b)  Each employee shall have a three- to twelve-month period of probation, as specified in the personnel rules and regulations as established under Section 802 of this chapter, during which time he or she may be freely discharged. After this period(s), he or she must be notified in writing of his or her suspension, demotion, layoff, or removal and of the reason for such action. Within ten (10) days of such notice(s), he or she may request a public or executive hearing before the Selectboard that must hold such hearing not less than ten (10) days or more than twenty (20) days after such request. The Selectboard may support the action of the Town Manager or may modify it.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014)

Sec. 802.   Personnel rules and regulations.

(a)  The Town Manager or the Town Manager's appointee shall be the Personnel Director. The Town Manager shall prepare personnel rules and regulations protecting the interest of the Town and of the employees. These rules and regulations must be approved by the Selectboard and shall include the procedure for amending them and for placing them into practice. Each employee shall receive a copy of these rules and regulations upon being hired.

(b)  The rules and regulations may deal with the following subjects or with other similar matters of personnel administration: job classification, jobs to be filled, tenure, retirement, pensions, leaves of absence, vacation, holidays, hours and days of work, group insurance, salary plans, rules governing hiring, temporary appointment, layoff, reinstatement, promotion, transfer, demotion, settlement of disputes, dismissal, suspension, probationary periods, permanent or continuing status, in-service training, injury, employee records, and further regulation concerning the hearing of appeals.

(Approved by voters, Nov. 4, 2014)

Sec. 803.   Prohibitions.

No person in the service of the town may either directly or indirectly give, render, pay or receive any service or other valuable thing for or on account of or in connection with any appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed promotion.

CHAPTER 9.  ETHICAL CONDUCT AND CONFLICT OF INTEREST [2]
Sec. 901. Ethical conduct.

Sec. 902. Conflict of Interest Policy.




Sec. 901.   Ethical conduct.

Every officer, elected official, employee, or appointee, in the service of the Town shall abide by standards of ethical conduct established by the Town and shall not hold investments or render services that conflict with or impair the proper discharge of that person's duties or voting authority that cannot be remedied by recusal. No person shall receive any gift or remuneration on account of or in connection with proceedings before any municipal agency in which the person has jurisdiction, nor disclose confidential information acquired by that officer or employee in the course of official duties.

(Approved by voters, Mar. 6, 2018)

Sec. 902.   Conflict of Interest Policy.

The Selectboard shall adopt a policy regarding ethics and conflict of interest and the means to adjudicate any potential or reported conflicts. This policy shall be published on the Town's website and provided to and signed by every officer, elected official, employee, and appointee to boards or commissions. This policy shall be reviewed, updated by the Selectboard, and signed by those affected at five-year (5-year) intervals or upon appointment.

(Approved by voters, Mar. 6, 2018)

 

FOOTNOTE(S):

--- (2) ---

Editor's note— As approved by voters on Mar. 6, 2017, Ch. 9 has been amended in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 9, pertained to Miscellaneous Provisions and consisted of § 901. (Back)

CHAPTER 10.  AMENDMENT OF CHARTER
Sec. 1001. Amendment of Charter.

Sec. 1002. Existing ordinances and contracts.

Sec. 1003. Continuation of existing officers' terms.

Sec. 1004. Effective date.




Sec. 1001.   Amendment of Charter.

This Charter shall be reviewed at a maximum five-year (5-year) interval by a committee appointed by the Selectboard and may be amended in accordance with State law.

(Approved by voters, Mar. 6, 2018)

Sec. 1002.   Existing ordinances and contracts.

The passage of the Charter herein enacted shall not affect any act or contract executed or liability incurred prior to its effective date or affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted, to enforce any right, rule, regulation or ordinance or to punish any offense against any such ordinance enacted prior to the passage of this Charter. All ordinances, resolutions, regulations and rules made under any act of the General Assembly shall continue in effect as if such ordinance, resolution, regulation or rule and been enacted under the provisions of this Charter.

Sec. 1003.   Continuation of existing officers' terms.

Officers and members of the board and commissions of the town in office at the time of the taking effect of this Charter shall continue in office until expiration of their term of office or until a vacancy occurs.

Sec. 1004.   Effective date.

This act shall be effective upon passage.

/s/ Ralph G. Wright
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE
OF REPRESENTATIVES

/s/ Peter Smith
PRESIDENT OF THE
SENATE

APPROVED: May 7, 1985
/s/ ;hg;Madeleine M. Kunin
GOVERNOR

CODE OF ORDINANCES

 

Town of

 

COLCHESTER, VERMONT

 

Codified through

 

Amendment of April 27, 2010.

 

Supplement No. 38

 

New ordinances approved after the above supplement date are available in the New Ordinance list

CODE OF ORDINANCES
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapter 2 - AMUSEMENTS

Chapter 3 - BORROW PITS AND QUARRIES

Chapter 4 - BUILDING CODE AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION ORDINANCE

Chapter 5 - CARTERS

Chapter 6 - DOGS AND WOLF-HYBRIDS

Chapter 6½ - FEES FOR PERMITS AND LICENSES GENERALLY

Chapter 7 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION ORDINANCE

Chapter 8 - ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL AND POTABLE WATER SUPPLY REGULATIONS

Chapter 9 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Chapter 10 - SEWERS

Chapter 11 - SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS

Chapter 12 - TRAFFIC

Chapter 13 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS

Chapter 14 - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO LAND DEVELOPMENT

Chapter 15 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DISTRICT

Chapter 16 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT

Chapter 17 - STREET NAMING AND STREET ADDRESSING

Chapter 18 - STORMWATER ORDINANCE

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances and motions of the Town used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table.

Ordinance
Date

Section

Section
this Code

 6- 9-60 (Mo.)

2-1, 2-2

 9-12-60

10-11

 7-23-62

12-1

 3- 4-68

I

4-1—4-3

II

4-5

III

4-6—4-10

IV—VII

4-11—4-14

VIII

4-4, 4-15

IX

4-16

 3-12-68

1—3

9-1

11-11-69

1—4

6-1—6-4

5

6-5—6-8

12-23-69

4-17

 7-13-71

1

8-1

2

8-2

3.01

8-3

4.01

8-4

5.02

8-6

5.03

8-7

6.01—6.07

8-8—8-14

6.09—6.11

8-16—8-18

7

8-19

8

8-20

9.05

8-21

10

8-22

11- 9-71

1—3

9-2

 5- 9-72

1

5-2

2

5-1

4

5-3

5

5-4

7

5-6

 6-27-72

Art. I

App. A, Art. I

II

II

III, §§ 1—7

III, §§ 1—7

IV, 1—8

IV, 1—8

V, 1—4

V, 1—4

VI, 1—4

VI, 1—4

VII,

VII

VIII, 1—4

VIII, 1—4

11-28-72

1

11-2

2

11-1

3

11-3

4

11-4

 6-26-73

101

7-1

102

7-3

103

7-2

104—106

7-4—7-6

108

7-7

12-11-73

1—15

3-1—3-15

 4-30-74

Art. I, § 23

10-1

Art. III, § 1—4

10-3

IV, 1—12

10-4

V, 1—10

10-5

VI, 1

10-6

Art. VII, § 3

10-7

VIII, 1

10-8

IX, 2

10-9

X, 3

10-10

 1- 7-75

12-16(84), (58)

 9- 2-75

1—7

2-16—2-22

 9- 2-75

11-5

12- 9-76

1—8

6-1—6-8

 2-17-76

Adopting ordinance, p. ix

 8-12-76

App. B

 5-17-77

App. A

 7-26-77

6-4, 6-5, 6-9

 7-26-77

6½-1—6½-8

 8-23-77

12-16, 12-33(a)

 9- 6-77

12-31(a)

12-13-77

12-16(2)

 2- 9-78

4—7

App. B, Art. I½ (note)

 3-14-78

12-33(a)

 4-25-78

App. B, §§ 1½.0—1½.3

 5- 9-78

12-16(43)

 8- 1-78

12-31(a)

12- 5-78

6-1(c)

6-4(a), (b)

6-5

      Rnbd

6-9

      as

6-10

      Added

6-9

12- 5-78

12-16

 3- 6-79

12-3

12-31(b)

12-32(b)

 4-17-79

12-33(a)

 9- 4-79

      Rpld

2-1, 2-2

1—6

2-1—2-6

 9- 4-79

6½-4(11.1)

11-27-79

App. B, §§ 9.0, 9.10—9.13, Art. XIII

11-27-79

App. B, §§ 15.0, 15.10—15.24

 1- 8-80

App. A, §§ 411.2, 512

 4-11-80

1—3

9-3

 7- 8-80

12-33(a)

 7- 8-80

1, 2(2.1)—(2.3)

4-1—4-3

(2.5)

Ch. 11 (note)

4—6

4-4—4-7

15—23

4-20—4-28

30—38

4-40—4-48

40—47

4-60—4-67

12-30-80

12-31(a)

 6-16-81

12-31(a), 12-33(a)

 7- 7-81

6½-4

 8-18-81

1—5

7-31—7-35

 9- 1-81

12-33

10-27-81

12-16, 12-31

11-17-81

11-1, 11-11

 1- 5-82

12-16

 1-19-82

6½-4(17), 7-33(2)

 3- 4-82

6-2, 6-12

 3- 9-82

App. B

 7- 6-82

12-16

 3-15-83

1

App B, § 101

2

App. B, § 1002.5

3

App. B, § 1303.6

4

App. B, § 1403.9

10-11-83

App. B, §§ 1819.3, 1819.4

12-16

12-33

 4-24-84

Ch. 4(title), 4-2, 4-3

 2-14-85

A

App. A, § 401.1(7)

 7- 8-86

1

App. B, § 101

2

App. B, § 803.8

3

App. B, § 804.7

4

App. B, § 903.8

5

App. B, § 1709.6

6

App. B, § 1802.4

7

App. B, § 1802.5

8(a)

App. B, § 1806.1

 (b)

App. B, § 1806.4

9—11

App. B, §§ 1833—1835

 6-23-87

12-16

 8-11-87

7-32

 1-12-88

2-3(b)

2-5(c)

2-19

 1-12-88

5-4—5-9

 1-12-88

6½-4

 1-12-88

11-6(c)

 4-12-88

12-16

12-33

12-13-88

12-31

 3-14-89

      Added

6½-4(12)—(15)

      Rnbd

6½-4(12)—(22)

      as

6½-4(16)—(26)

 5- 9-89

6-1—6-12

 9-12-89

6½-4(18)

 9-12-89

App. B, §§ 101

500—505

700—705

      Dltd

800—805

900—905

1100—1105

1200—1205

1300—1305

1400—1405

1500—1503

1600—1603

1819.5

1822

1824

      Added

1827.4

      Rnbd

1827.4—1827.10

      as

1827.5—1827.11

 4-17-90

App. B, §§ 101, 302.2, 304, 501.7, 502.6(b), 603.1, 604

      Dltd

App. B, § 702.7(b)
App. B, §§ 903.1, 904, 905.3
App. B, § 1102.6(c)
App. B, §§ 1103.2, 1104,
1203.2, 1204,
1303.2, 1304,
1403.2,
1404,
1822.1, 1822.2(a)

      Dltd

App. B, §§ 1822(h),
1822.3

 5-22-90

6½-4(7)(a),
(c)1., (8)

      Dltd

6½-4(9), (10)

      Added

6½-4(9)

      Rnbd

6½-4(11)—(23)

      as

6½-4(10)—(22)

      Added

6½-4(26)

6½-5

 6-12-90

12-17

 8-14-90

6½-4(1)(b),
(c)1., (2), (3)

 9-12-90

App. B, §§ 1814.5, 1836

11-13-90

1—9

9-15—9-23

11-13-90

App. B, §§ 1814.5, 1836

 2-12-91

7-1—7-8,
7-18

 3- 5-91

9-3

 4-23-91

1

App. B, § 101

2       Dltd

App. B, §§ 1201.12,
1201.13,
1201.19,
1201.21,
1201.22,
1201.25

 6- 8-91

12-31(a)

 8-27-91

App. B, Table of
Permitted Uses,
§§ 101, 501,
901, 1001,
1003, 1101,
1105, 1201,
1205.3, 1301,
1305.3, 1401,
1801, 1802

 9-10-91

      Rpld

5-1—5-4,
5-8, 5-9

      Added

5-4

      Amd.

5-5, 5-7

      Added

5-8, 5-9

 9-10-91

12-16

10- 8-91

12-16

10- 8-91

12-33(a)

10- 8-91

12-34

11-12-91

      Rpld

7-1—7-8,
7-18, 7-32(b), (c)

11-12-91

9-3(a)(6)

11-12-91

10-1—10-5,
10-7, 10-9

      Added

10-11

      Rnbd

10-11

      as

10-12

 3-10-92

App. A, § 103
App. A, § 512

 4-14-92

App. B, Table of
Permitted Uses

 5-26-92

5-5

 6- 9-92

6-1—6-11

 7-28-92

9-30—9-41

11-10-92

12-32

11-24-92

13-1—13-30

11-24-92

10-11

 6-22-93

12-16

12-31(a),

12-33(a)

10-11-94

7-32, 7-33

10-25-94

16-1—16-9

 6-27-95

6½-4, 6½-5,

6½-9, 6½-10

10-10-95

4-5

6½-11, 6½-12

13-17(b), 13-18(c)

 1-23-96

12-33, 12-34

 2-13-96

6½-4(29)

 2-27-96

12-16

 2-27-96

12-16

 7-23-96

12-33

 9-10-96

1-9

5-8(c)

6-8, 6-9

6½-7

7-34

8-23

9-1(c), 9-2(c)

9-41

11-12

13-21(a)

13-29(c)

16-7

11-26-96

2-31—2-36

 2-11-97

Charter, § 104(7)

 2-25-97

6½-4(1)(b), (2)

 2-25-97

12-31

12-33

 4-22-97

12-18

 6-27-97

17-1—17-9

 7- 8-97

6½-4(17)

 8-12-97

App. B, §§101, 1801

 8-19-97

App. B, §§ 101,

403(3)

      Dltd

700—705

      Added

700-703, 705

      Added

800—805

902(2), (12)

      Dltd

1102(8)(a)

      Rltd

1102(8)(b)—(f)

      as

1102(8)(a)—(e)

1202(10)

1302(6)

1500—1503

1707(6)

1709(6)

1710(2), (4), (8)—(10)

1712(12)

1802(1), (4)

1803, 1803(2), (6)

1806(1)

1808, 1809

1815(b)

1816(1)

1820(4)

1822(2)(c)

1823(1)

1824(4)

1827(9), (11)c.(7)

1829(1)

1831(10)

1837, 1838

1902

1909

 9- 9-97

6-5(c)

 9-27-97

1-9 D.(3)

10-14-97

12-16, 12-33(a)

11-11-97

6½-20—6½-27

 3-24-98

6½-4(30)

 5-26-98

7-33(3)

 7-14-98

1-9A.(1)

 8-11-98

12-16

12-22-98

6½-4(8)(c)

12-22-98

6½-4(30)

 1-12-99

12-33

 2-23-99

12-16

 3-16-99

App. B, § 101

App. B, § 804(1)(b)

App. B, Table 1.450

App. B, § 1500

App. B, § 1504

App. B, § 1710(11)

App. B, § 1803(1)(a)

      Added

App. B, § 1803(2)(f)—(h)

      Rltd

App. B, § 1803(2)(f)—(h)

      as

App. B, § 1803(2)(i)—(k)

App. B, § 1807(1)

App. B, § 1810

App. B, § 1823

App. B, § 1839

 3-14-99

12-19

 4-13-99

7-32(c),

7-33(3)—(5)

 6- 1-99

12-16, 12-17(3)

 9-14-99

12-33

 9-28-99

12-16

11-23-99

12-16

11-23-99

12-33

12-28-99

      Dltd

8-1—8-23

      Added

8-1—8-14

 2-15-00

App. A, § 201.1

App. A, §§ 202.1, 202.1(a)(12)

App. A, § 203.1(5)

App. A, §§ 203.4, 203.6

App. A, § 403

App. A, § 407

App. A, § 409.1

App. A, §§ 413.1, 413.4

App. A, § 502

App. A, § 509—511

App. B, §§ 300—304

App. B, §§ 400—405

App. B, § 1002(4)

App. B, § 1803(1)(a)

App. B, § 1803(2)(l)

App. B, § 1803(4)

App. B, § 1803(7)

App. B, § 1820

App. B, §§ 1840, 1841

App. B, § 1901(1)

 2-22-00

12-31

      Rltd

6-4(b)

      as

6-4(c)

      Added

6-4(b)

6-7(a)

 5-17-00

8-13

10-18-00

12-31

 1- 2-01

12-31

 1-31-01

12-16

 4- 3-01

12-33

 4-18-01

6-1

 4-24-01

      Added

12-31(c)

 9-25-01

12-16

 9-25-01

12-30       Added

12-20

 3-12-02

9-31

      Added

9-38(A)

9-40

 3-12-02

12-16

12-31

12-33

 7-23-02

12-31

 8-27-02

App. B, § 101

1

App. B, § 1826(2), (5)

2

App. B, § 1820(2)

3

App. B, § 1801

4

App. B, § 1203

5       Added

App. B, § 1842

App. B, § 101

      Dltd

App. B, § 902(12)

6

App. B, § 1808

7

App. B, § 903

8

App. B, § 1827(11)(a)

9

App. B, § 103

10

App. B, § 1710, 1711

11

App. B, § 1002(6)

12

App. B, § 1835

13

App. B, Table of Permissible Uses

App. B, § 101

14

App. B, § 101

15

App. B, § 1812

16

App. B, § 1503(2)

App. B, § 1603(4)

 9-10-02

App. B, § 101

1

App. B, § 1826(2), (5)

2

App. B, § 1820(2)

3

App. B, § 1801

App. B, § 1203

10-22-02

12-16

 2-11-03

12-16

 4- 8-03

6½-4

6½-11, 6½-12

 4- 8-03

2

10-2

3

10-3

4

10-8

5       Added

10-13—10-22

12-16-03

12-16

 2-24-04

1-9

      Added

1-10

 2-24-04

4-1—4-67

 2-24-04

8-1—8-14

 2-24-04

      Added

14-1—14-12

 2-24-04

      Rpld

App. A, §§ 101—607

      Added

App. A, §§ 101—505

 2-24-04

      Added

App. B, § 203

App. B, § 1820

App. B, §§ 1901—1909

 2-24-04

      Added

App. C, §§ 1—22

 6- 8-04

12-18

 6-22-04

12-16

 6-22-04

12-18

11-30-04

App. B

 7-27-04

12-16

 2-22-05

6½-4(1)—(3), (7), (8), (19), (23)

      Added

6½-4(28), (29)

 7-26-05

      Added

18-1—18-15

 9-13-05(1)

1-10

 9-13-05(2)

12-33(a)

 9-13-05(3)

App. B, § 2.05.B., K.

      Dltd

App. B, § 2.09.B.2.(g)

11-22-05

      Dltd

7-1—7-35

      Added

7-1—7-92

 3-28-06

      Dltd

18-1—18-15

      Added

18-1—18-41

 6-27-06

1—11       Added

9-71—9-81

 8-22-06(1)

12-33

 8-22-06(2)

App. B, § 2.06.E

App. B, § 2.19

App. B, Table A-2

 2-27-07

6½-4(1), (4), (5), (7), (11), (13), (15), (19), (24), (25)

      Added

6½-4(27)

 4-24-07(1)

12-16

 4-24-07(2)

12-33(a)

 6-17-07

8-2

 4-14-08(1)

12-16

 4-14-08(2)

12-31(a)

 4-14-08(3)

12-33(a)

 8-12-08

14-10

10-28-08

1

7-92

 8-25-09

12-16

12-33(a)

 9- 8-09

12-16

12-33(a)

12- 8-09(Amd.)

      Dltd

4-1—4-7

4-20—4-27

4-40—4-47

4-60—4-67

      Added

4-1—4-7

4-20—4-27

4-40—4-47

4-60—4-67

 1-12-10

12-33

 1-12-10

12-16

12-31(a)

12-33(a)

 1-12-10

      Dltd

14-1—14-12

      Added

14-0—14-6

14-10—14-12

 1-12-10

18-22

18-33(c)

 2- 9-10

1-9(d)(3), 1-10

 3-23-10(Amd.)

12-16

 4-27-10(Amd.)

      Dltd

6-1—6-12

      Added

6-1—6-12

 6-22-10

1-10

 6-22-10

4-2, 4-3(b), 4-5(c), (d), 4-25(a)

 1-25-11

12-16, 12-33(a)

 2-22-11

12-16, 12-31(a), 12-33(a)

 3- 8-11

Ch. 7

 4-26-11

6½-4(21)

 6-14-11

12-33(a)

 1-10-12

12-16, 12-31(a), 12-33(a), 12-34(a)

 7-24-12

6½-1, 6½-4

 7-24-12

8-2, 8-6

12-11-12

12-31(a)

 1- 8-13

12-16, 12-31(a), 12-33(a)

 2-12-13

12-16, 12-31(a), 12-33(a)

 5-14-13

1-9, 1-10

Chs. 4, 7, 8

 8-13-13

      Added

12-21

 8-13-13

12-16, 12-31(a), 12-33(a)

 8-13-13

14-5

 7- 8-14

      Rpld

10-1—10-22

      Added

10-1—10-34

11-11-14

12-16, 12-31(a), 12-34(a)

 5-26-15

9-3

 9-22-15

      Dltd

9-30—9-41

      Added

9-30—9-62

 9-22-15

12-31(a)

12- 8-15

1-10

      Added

9-4

12- 8-15

6½-1—6½-27

12- 8-15

12-34(a)

 8- 9-16

1-9

 8- 9-16

      Added

12.0, 12-3(c), (d)

12-4—12-14

12-16, 12-18—12-21

      Added

12-22

12-31, 12-32

      Added

12-33

      Rnbd

12-33, 12-34

      as

12-34, 12-35

      Added

12-36, 12-40—12-44, 12-50—12-55

10-25-16

12-16

 8- 8-17

Ch. 6, title

      Rpld

6-1—6-12

      Added

6-1—6-10

 1-10-17

12-16, 12-31(a), 12-34(a)

 3-28-17

12-16, 12-31(a), 12-34(a)

 3-28-17

12-31(a)

 4-25-17

Ch. 18, title

      Rpld

18-1—18-41

      Added

18-1—18-47

12-12-17

12-16, 12-31(a), 12-34(a)

 1-23-18

6½-1—6½-27

10-23-18

12-16, 12-31, 12-34(a)

10-23-18

12-16, 12-31, 13-34(a)

11-13-18

12-16

11-13-18

      Added

12-23

Chapter 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1. How code designated and cited.

Sec. 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.

Sec. 1-3. Catchlines of sections.

Sec. 1-4. Amendments to code.

Sec. 1-5. Supplementation of code.

Sec. 1-6. Effect of repeals.

Sec. 1-7. Altering code.

Sec. 1-8. Severability of parts of code.

Sec. 1-9. General penalty; violations.

Sec. 1-10. Municipal official; enforcement of municipal ordinances.




Sec. 1-1.   How code designated and cited.

The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances of the Town of Colchester, Vermont," and may be so cited.

Sec. 1-2.   Definitions and rules of construction.

In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Town Board:

County. The term "County" or "this County" shall mean the County of Chittenden, Vermont.

Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall not be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall be counted.

Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other city officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise.

Gender. A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender shall extend and be applied to both the masculine and feminine genders, and to firms, partnerships and corporations.

Highway. The term "highway" shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway in the Town dedicated as a public highway by the United States Department of Transportation.

Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee.

Number. A word importing the singular may extend and be applied to the plural, and vice versa.

Oath. The word "oath" shall include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed."

Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it.

Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land.

Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.

Personal property includes every species of property except real property as herein defined.

Property. The word "property" shall include real, personal and mixed property.

Real property shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.

Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.

Signature or subscription includes a mark when the person cannot write.

State. The words "the State" or "this State" shall mean the State of Vermont.

Street. The word "street" shall embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways in the Town.

Tenant, occupant. The words "tenant" or "occupant" applied to a building or land shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or with others.

Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.

Town. The words "the Town" or "this Town" shall mean the Town of Colchester, and shall extend to and include its several officers, agents and employees.

Town Board, Board. The term "Town Board" or "Board" shall mean the Selectboard of the Town of Colchester, Vermont.

Written or in writing shall include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.

Sec. 1-3.   Catchlines of sections.

The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.

Sec. 1-4.   Amendments to code.

(a)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the Section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section ___ of the Code of the Town of Colchester, Vermont, is hereby amended to read as follows:… (Set out new provisions in full).…"

(b)  In the event a new Section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of the Town of Colchester, Vermont, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article, chapter or other designation as the case may be), to be numbered ___, which reads as follows:… (Set out new provisions in full).…"

Sec. 1-5.   Supplementation of code.

(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the Town Board. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the Town Board or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.

(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages.

(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:

(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;

(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;

(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers;

(4)  Change the words "this Ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this Chapter," "this Article," "this Division," etc., as the case may be, or to "Sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and

(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.

Sec. 1-6.   Effect of repeals.

The repeal of an ordinance or portion of this Code shall not revive any ordinance or portion of this Code in force before or at the time the provision repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance or a portion of this Code shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the provisions repealed.

Sec. 1-7.   Altering code.

It shall be unlawful for any person to amend or alter any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete any page or portion thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Town of Colchester, Vermont, to be misrepresented thereby.

Sec. 1-8.   Severability of parts of code.

It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Town Board that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code.

Sec. 1-9.   General penalty; violations.

Except for violations of Chapter 12 of this Code that fall under 23 V.S.A. § 1007/1008, whenever in this Code, or in any ordinance of the Town, any act is prohibited; or is made or declared to be unlawful, an offense, or a misdemeanor; or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful; and where no specific penalty is provided therefore; the violation of any such provision of this Code or ordinance shall be punished as outlined below.

This section shall be known and may be cited and referred to as "Civil Enforcement Ordinance of the Town of Colchester."

(a)  Civil ordinance violations jurisdiction; enforcement of civil ordinance violations:

(1)  A civil penalty (a fine not more than that allowed by law) may be imposed for a violation of a civil ordinance. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. The following penalties may be assessed for all municipal complaints:

First offense ..... $50.00

Second offense ..... 100.00

Third and subsequent offenses ..... 150.00

Waiver fee (first offense) ..... 25.00

Waiver fee (second offense) ..... 50.00

Waiver fee (third and subsequent offenses) ..... 100.00

(2)  All civil ordinance violations, except municipal parking violations, and all continuing civil ordinance violations, where the penalty is five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less, shall be brought before the traffic and municipal ordinance bureau pursuant to Chapter 24 of Title 23 [of Vermont Statutes Annotated].

(b)  Civil ordinance violation complaint; complaint for municipal civil ordinance violations:

(1)  The summons and complaint shall be a form known as the "municipal complaint."

(2)  The complaint shall be signed by the issuing municipal official. The original copy shall be filed with the traffic and municipal ordinance bureau, a copy shall be retained by the issuing municipal official and two (2) copies shall be given to the defendant.

(3)  The municipal official may void or amend the municipal complaint issued by that official by so marking the complaint and sending it to the traffic and municipal ordinance bureau.

(4)  The complaint shall contain a description of the ordinance allegedly violated, the allegations, the amount of the penalty and an explanation of rights and instructions on answering the allegations. The complaint shall contain, in boldface print, the following:

"IF YOU ADMIT TO A VIOLATION OF THE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN/CITY/VILLAGE OF OR IF YOU DO NOT CONTEST THE ALLEGATIONS, SIGN THE COMPLAINT ADMITTING THE VIOLATION OR STATING THAT THE ALLEGATIONS ARE NOT CONTESTED AND SEND IT TO THE TRAFFIC AND MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE BUREAU WITHIN 20 DAYS.

"IF YOU WANT TO DENY THE ALLEGATIONS IN THIS COMPLAINT, YOU MUST SEND A SIGNED DENIAL TO THE TRAFFIC AND MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE BUREAU WITHIN 20 DAYS.

"IF YOU DO NOT ANSWER THIS COMPLAINT WITHIN 20 DAYS, A DEFAULT JUDGEMENT WILL BE ENTERED. THE FAILURE TO PAY THE PENALTY ASSESSED WILL RESULT IN FURTHER LEGAL ACTION AGAINST YOU.

"IF YOU ADMIT OR DO NOT CONTEST OR DO NOT ANSWER, YOU WILL BE LIABLE FOR THE AMOUNT INDICATED IN THE COMPLAINT."

(c)  Civil ordinance violation response; answer to municipal complaint; default:

(1)  A person who is charged with a municipal civil ordinance violation shall have twenty (20) days from the date the municipal complaint is issued to admit or deny the allegations or to state that he or she does not contest the allegations in the complaint.

(2)  A person who admits or does not contest the allegations may so indicate and sign the complaint. The traffic and municipal ordinance bureau shall accept the admission or statement that the allegations are not contested and accept payment of the waiver fee.

(3)  If the person sends in the amount of the penalty without signing the complaint, the traffic and municipal ordinance bureau shall accept the payment indicating that payment was made and that the allegations were not contested. If the person who admits the violation fails to pay the waiver fee, the traffic and municipal ordinance bureau shall enter a default judgement against the person.

(4)  A person who denies the allegations may so indicate and sign the complaint. Upon receipt, the traffic and municipal ordinance bureau shall schedule a hearing.

(5)  If a person fails to appeal or answer a municipal ordinance complaint or fails to appear at a municipal ordinance hearing, the traffic and municipal ordinance bureau shall enter a default judgement against the person if the penalty does not exceed one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00). The bureau shall mail a notice to the person that a default judgement has been entered. A default judgement may be set aside by the hearing officer for good cause shown.

(d)  Civil ordinance violation hearing:

(1)  The traffic and municipal ordinance bureau shall notify the person charged and the issuing official of the time and place for the hearing.

(2)  The hearing shall be held before a hearing officer and conducted in an impartial manner. The hearing officer may, by subpoena, compel the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of books and records. All witnesses shall be sworn. The burden of proof shall be on the municipality to prove the allegations by clear and convincing evidence. As used in this section, "clear and convincing evidence" means evidence which establishes that the truth of the facts asserted is highly probable.

(3)  The municipality may be represented by a municipal official. "Municipal official" shall be defined as being any Colchester Police Officer, the zoning administrator, the building inspector, the town planner, the development review coordinator, the life safety inspector, the health officer, the sign administrator, and the designated animal control officer.

(4)  At the hearing, the municipal official may dismiss or amend the complaint, subject to the approval of the hearing officer.

(5)  The hearing officer shall make findings which shall be stated on the record or, if more time is needed, shall make written findings at a later date. The hearing officer may make a finding that the person has committed a lesser-included violation.

(e)  Civil ordinance violation appeals:

(1)  A decision of the hearing officer may be appealed to the district court. The proceeding before the district court shall be on the record, or at the option of the defendant, de novo. If the appeal is de novo, the defendant shall have the right to trial by jury. An appeal shall stay payment of a penalty.

(2)  If a decision is appealed, the municipal attorney shall represent the municipality.

(3)  No appeal as of right exists to the Supreme Court. On motion made to the Supreme Court by a party, the Supreme Court may allow an appeal to be taken to it from the district court.

(4)  If an appellant prevails on an appeal to the district court, the Town will reimburse the filing fee paid.

(Ord. of 9-10-96; Ord. of 9-27-97; Ord. of 7-14-98; Ord. of 2-24-04; Ord. of 2-9-10; Ord. of 5-14-13; Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 1-10.   Municipal official; enforcement of municipal ordinances.

In accordance with and pursuant to 24 V.S.A. Chapter 59, all Colchester Police Officers are hereby designated to enforce the provisions of the Code of Ordinances. In accordance with and pursuant to 24 V.S.A. Chapter 59, the following Town officers are hereby designated and appointed as "Municipal Officials," as that term is used in Chapter 59; and as such each is hereby granted the authority, subject to the direction of the Town Manager, to enforce the provisions of the Code of Ordinances, as specified below, and specifically to issue municipal civil complaints alleging violations of said Code of Ordinances:

Ordinance Provision

Designated Municipal Official

Zoning regulations

Zoning Administrator, Director of Planning and Zoning, Building Inspector, and Assistant Building Inspector

Subdivision regulations

Zoning Administrator, Director of Planning And Zoning, Building Inspector, Assistant Building Inspector

Building Code and Building Code Construction Ordinance

Building Inspector and Assistant Building Inspector

Fire prevention and protection

Building Inspector and Assistant Building Inspector. Section 7-14 shall also be extended to all law enforcement officers

Onsite sewage disposal regulations

Wastewater Official

Chapter 18—Stormwater

Building Inspector and Assistant Building Inspector

 

(Ord. of 2-24-04; Ord. of 9-13-05(1); Ord. of 2-9-10; Ord. of 6-22-10; Ord. of 5-14-13; Ord. of 12-8-15)

Chapter 2 AMUSEMENTS [1]
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

ARTICLE II. - DRIVE-IN THEATERS

ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC INDECENCY

 

FOOTNOTE(S):

--- (1) ---

Cross reference— Fees for licenses and permits generally, Ch. 6½. (Back)

ARTICLE I.   IN GENERAL [2]
Sec. 2-1. License required.

Sec. 2-2. Certain organizations exempt.

Sec. 2-3. Term and fees.

Sec. 2-4. Application and review.

Sec. 2-5. Issuance.

Sec. 2-6. Revocation of license.

Secs. 2-7—2-15. Reserved.




Sec. 2-1.   License required.

The owners or operators of all amusement and entertainment establishments, including, but not limited to, street parades, carnivals/circuses, golf clubs, skating rinks, bowling alleys and dining establishments offering entertainment and/or dancing, shall obtain a license as herein provided from the Selectboard.

(Ord. of 9-4-79, § 1)

Sec. 2-2.   Certain organizations exempt.

This Chapter shall not apply to the establishments operated wholly by and for the benefit of churches, fire companies, schools, service or fraternal organizations and for other charitable purposes.

(Ord. of 9-4-79, § 2)

Sec. 2-3.   Term and fees.

The license periods shall be from June 1 to May 31 annually:

(a)  Limited term licenses shall be for a period less than thirty (30) days in any one-year period.

(b)  The permit fee shall be listed in the Fee Ordinance, Chapter 6½.

(Ord. of 9-4-79, § 3; Ord. of 1-12-88)

Sec. 2-4.   Application and review.

Applications must be submitted to the Town Clerk's office with the accompanying fee by May 15, annually and shall state:

(a)  The name and address and phone number of applicant.

(b)  Location and name of premises.

(c)  A detailed description of the type of activity for which permit is sought.

(d)  Hours and dates of operation.

(e)  Any special conditions or provisions to address parking, traffic, sanitary or security requirements.

(Ord. of 9-4-79, § 4)

Sec. 2-5.   Issuance.

(a)  The Selectboard of the Town shall issue a license hereunder whenever it finds the operation of the establishment will not adversely affect the health, safety, and welfare and morals of the general public and citizens of Colchester.

(b)  The Selectboard may attach conditions and stipulations to a permit as may be required under the following criteria:

(1)  Effect of hours of operation, lights, sounds, volume of people and other aspects on the character, appearance and habits of the neighboring area;

(2)  Effect on highway use and congestion; and

(3)  Burden on the ability of the local governments to provide municipal or governmental services.

(c)  No permit shall be issued unless such proposed use conforms to applicable zoning requirements.

(Ord. of 9-4-79, § 5; Ord. of 1-12-88)

Sec. 2-6.   Revocation of license.

The Selectboard shall, after a public hearing, have power to revoke any licenses issued hereunder should any of the provisions of this Article be violated. In the event of the revocation of any license by the Selectboard, the premises upon which such licensed business has been conducted shall not be eligible to receive another license hereunder for a period not to exceed two (2) years from the date of revocation.

(Ord. of 9-4-79, § 6)

Secs. 2-7—2-15.   Reserved.

 

FOOTNOTE(S):

--- (2) ---

Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 4, 1979, deleted §§ 2-1, 2-2, relative to general regulation of amusements and permit requirements therefor. Said sections derived from a motion of June 9, 1960. At the editor's discretion, §§ 1—6 of the ordinance of Sept. 4, 1979, have been codified as §§ 2-1—2-6. (Back)

ARTICLE II.   DRIVE-IN THEATERS [3]
Sec. 2-16. License required.

Sec. 2-17. Definition.

Sec. 2-18. Applications.

Sec. 2-19. Fees.

Sec. 2-20. Issuance.

Sec. 2-21. Standards of operation.

Sec. 2-22. Revocation.

Secs. 2-23—2-30. Reserved.




Sec. 2-16.   License required.

No person shall construct, operate or maintain a drive-in theater within the Town without first obtaining a license as hereinafter provided from the Selectboard.

(Ord. of 9-2-75, § 1)

Sec. 2-17.   Definition.

For the purposes of this Article, a drive-in theater is defined as any premises in which motion pictures are projected upon a screen or theatrical performance given for viewing by patrons seated in automobiles or other vehicles, and for which an admission charge is made.

(Ord. of 9-2-75, § 2)

Sec. 2-18.   Applications.

Applications for licenses hereunder shall be made upon blank forms prepared and made available at the Town Clerk's office and shall state:

(a)  The name, home address and proposed business address of the applicant;

(b)  The name, home address and proposed business address of the owner of the premises;

(c)  The number of automobiles or other vehicles which the drive-in theater is designed to accommodate;

(d)  The proposed hours of operation for said drive-in theater. In addition, any application pursuant to this Article shall be accompanied by a plat or drawing of said drive-in theater showing its location, size, capacity and the location and size of entrances and exits; the kind of ground surface; location, size and construction of all structures; and location, size and construction of all walls, fences or barriers surrounding said premises.

(Ord. of 9-2-75, § 3)

Sec. 2-19.   Fees.

The permit fee shall be as listed in the Fee Ordinance, Chapter 6½.

(Ord. of 9-2-75, § 4; Ord. of 1-12-88)

Sec. 2-20.   Issuance.

The Selectboard of the Town shall issue a license hereunder whenever it shall find that the applicant is of good moral character and capable of operating the proposed business in a manner consistent with the public safety, health and morals, and that the requirements of this Article and of all state statutes have been met and complied with.

(Ord. of 9-2-75, § 5)

Sec. 2-21.   Standards of operation.

The holder of a license pursuant to this Article shall comply with the following requirements and standards of operation:

(a)  The licensee shall maintain quiet and good order upon the premises where any drive-in theater is operated and loitering shall not be permitted in or about the entrances to or exits from such theater.

(b)  The licensee shall not exhibit a motion picture, show or other presentation in violation of the provisions of Title 13 V.S.A. Chapter 63.

(c)  The projection of motion pictures to cease at 1:30 a.m. each night.

(d)  The licensee shall provide access available to public streets or other public ways from at least two (2) points at all times. Such means of access shall be kept clear by the licensee at all times to facilitate departure of persons in vehicles and to permit entrance of fire apparatus or ambulances in case of emergency.

(e)  All drives and areas used by vehicles at such accesses must be satisfactorily paved by the licensee or treated to avoid creating dust. The licensee shall keep all means of access adequately lighted at all times when open to the public.

(f)  The licensee at all times when a drive-in theater is open to the public shall provide an adequate number of attendants on duty at all times who shall patrol exits and entrances and parking spaces to see that order is maintained, that disorderly conduct is prevented, and that entrances and exits are kept free from congestion, and that this Article and all governing statutes pertaining to drive-in theaters are observed.

(g)  The licensee shall not operate the facility unless the premises are constructed and maintained in such a manner that any motion pictures exhibited therein are over half obscured from visibility from any surrounding residence and public highway by fencing and/or trees.

(h)  The licensee shall provide individual speakers for each automobile and no central loudspeaker shall be permitted by the licensee.

(Ord. of 9-2-75, § 6)

Sec. 2-22.   Revocation.

The violation of any provision of this Article shall constitute grounds for the revocation of said license by the Selectboard.

(Ord. of 9-2-75, § 7)

Secs. 2-23—2-30.   Reserved.

 

FOOTNOTE(S):

--- (3) ---

Editor's note— An ordinance of Sept. 2, 1975, did not specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion of §§ 1—7 as Art. II, §§ 2-16—2-22, was at the editor's discretion. It should be noted that § 9 of the ordinance repealed any parts of a motion of June 9, 1960, codified as §§ 2-1, 2-2, that conflict with the new drive-in theater regulations. Said §§ 2-1, 2-2 were subsequently repealed by an ordinance of Sept. 4, 1979. (Back)

ARTICLE III.   PUBLIC INDECENCY
Sec. 2-31. Authority.

Sec. 2-32. Purpose.

Sec. 2-33. Definitions.

Sec. 2-34. Public indecency prohibited.

Sec. 2-35. Penalty for violations.

Sec. 2-36. Other relief.




Sec. 2-31.   Authority.

This Article is enacted pursuant to the authority granted the Town to promote the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience contained in Section 103 of the Town of Colchester Charter.

(Ord. of 11-26-96)

Sec. 2-32.   Purpose.

It is the purpose of this Article to regulate public indecency, including public nudity, which is deemed to be a public nuisance.

(Ord. of 11-26-96)

Sec. 2-33.   Definitions.

(a)  Nudity shall mean the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. This definition shall not include the natural act of a female breast feeding her infant.

(b)  Public place shall mean a place visited by many persons and usually accessible to the neighboring public.

(Ord. of 11-26-96)

Sec. 2-34.   Public indecency prohibited.

(a)  No person shall knowingly or intentionally in a public place:

(1)  Engage in sexual intercourse;

(2)  Appear in a state of nudity;

(3)  Fondle his/her genitals;

(4)  Fondle the genitals of another person; or

(5)  Use technology to display any of the above acts.

(b)  No person who owns, leases or controls property shall knowingly allow any person to engage in the conduct described in subsection (a) above at any time such property is open to the public.

(Ord. of 11-26-96)

Sec. 2-35.   Penalty for violations.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Article shall be fined pursuant to Section 1-9. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate violation.

(Ord. of 11-26-96)

Sec. 2-36.   Other relief.

In addition to the enforcement procedures available before the Traffic and Judicial Bureau, the Town Manager is authorized to commence a civil action to obtain injunctive and other appropriate relief, or to pursue any other remedy authorized by law.

(Ord. of 11-26-96)

Chapter 3 BORROW PITS AND QUARRIES
Sec. 3-1. Short title.

Sec. 3-2. Definitions.

Sec. 3-3. Enforcement authority.

Sec. 3-4. Scope.

Sec. 3-5. Right of entry.

Sec. 3-6. Requirement for permit; fees.

Sec. 3-7. Zoning.

Sec. 3-8. Abandonment.

Sec. 3-9. Permit stipulations.

Sec. 3-10. Escrow and liabilities.

Sec. 3-11. Permit violations, renewals, suspensions, revocations.

Sec. 3-12. Drilling and blasting.

Sec. 3-13. Access roads.

Sec. 3-14. Board of Appeals.

Sec. 3-15. Violations.




Sec. 3-1.   Short title.

This Chapter shall be known as "Regulations Controlling Borrow Pits and Quarries" in the Town.

(Ord. of 12-11-73, § 1)

Sec. 3-2.   Definitions.

For the purposes of this Chapter the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless their context clearly requires otherwise:

Abandoned area means any area in which escrow for quarry or borrow pit operations has been terminated.

Borrow pit means any pit or excavation, for the purpose of removing, for commercial use, any sand, gravel, clay or any other earth material.

Engineer means the engineer for the Town.

Quarry means any pit or excavation, for the purpose of removing, for commercial use, any slate, marble, granite or other stone material.

(Ord. of 12-11-73, § 2)

Sec. 3-3.   Enforcement authority.

This Chapter shall be enforced by the Town Manager.

(Ord. of 12-11-73, § 3)

Sec. 3-4.   Scope.

This Chapter shall be in addition to and not a substitute for any other regulations relating to excavation or removal of natural resources.

(Ord. of 12-11-73, § 4)

Sec. 3-5.   Right of entry.

The Town Engineer, the Zoning Administrator, or any authorized representative of the Town shall have the right to enter the premises of any quarry or borrow pit area, for the purpose of inspection of operations.

(Ord. of 12-11-73, § 5)

Sec. 3-6.   Requirement for permit; fees.

No person shall operate a quarry or borrow pit in the Town without having first obtained a permit from the Town Manager.

Each permit shall be a permanent permit as long as the escrow provided for in Section 3-10 is in effect.

The permit shall be for areas as designated.

The escrow shall be for active areas only.

The permit fee shall be established by a resolution of the Selectboard in an amount not to exceed the reasonable cost of administration and enforcement of this Chapter.

The resolution may be thereafter changed by the Selectboard as necessary to meet conditions existing at the time.

No permit shall be transferred from one (1) premises, person, or operation to another. A permit, or renewal thereof, shall be required so long as an operation continues.

(Ord. of 12-11-73, § 6)

Cross reference— Fees, § 6½-4(8).

Sec. 3-7.   Zoning.

No permit shall be granted unless the area to be used as a quarry or borrow pit complies with the applicable zoning requirements.

(Ord. of 12-11-73, § 7)

Sec. 3-8.   Abandonment.

This Section describes minimum rehabilitation requirements for an abandoned area where a borrow pit operation has occurred:

As each site or portion thereof under permit is abandoned the following must be performed:

(a)  All disturbed land shall be regarded so that no slope exceeds one (1) vertical to one and one-half (1½) horizontal.

(b)  All damming or ponding areas within the abandoned site shall be drained and/or filled.

(c)  The area shall be reasonably graded, seeded and mulched according to Vermont State Highway Department specifications in areas designated by the Town Manager.

(Ord. of 12-11-73, § 8)

Sec. 3-9.   Permit stipulations.

All future quarry and borrow pit operations shall comply with provisions of this Chapter and all existing quarry and borrow pit operations shall have until June 1, 1974, from the effective date of the ordinance codified as this Chapter to obtain compliance.

No permit to operate a quarry or borrow pit shall be issued or renewed until the applicant complies with the following regulations:

(a)  Setback. Each tract shall have and maintain a peripheral area which shall be retained in its present topographic condition, undisturbed by excavation, twenty-five (25) feet measured from any property line.

(b)  Site sketch. Prior to issuance of a permit the applicant shall file a site sketch which sketch shall be corrected annually, showing the following:

(1)  Setback area.

(2)  Portion of tract actually being excavated and proposed excavation area.

(3)  Any buildings.

(4)  Access roads.

(5)  Water supply and sewage disposal, if applicable.

(6)  Settlement pits for pollution control where applicable.

(7)  Stock pile area, if applicable.

(8)  Plan for abandonment. If an area within an active borrow pit is to be abandoned, a plan for that area must be provided to the Town Engineer who shall review the plan for compliance with this Chapter.

(9)  That portion of any borrow pit within a two hundred-foot radius of a residence structure shall be barred by a fence, type and height such as highway right-of-way fence. All quarries shall be completely enclosed with fencing such as highway right-of-way fencing.

(10)  All borrow pits shall have an open face not to exceed ten (10) feet. When excavation of another lift is to be started, all previous faces must be sloped to one (1) on one and one-half (1½) minimum face.

(c)  Pits without permits; procedures. All borrow pits existing that do not apply for a permit must follow the procedures for abandonment as per Section 3-8 by June 1, 1974. If these borrow pits do not comply by this date the Town may institute legal action or complete abandonment procedures as per Section 3-8 and bill owner for same.

(Ord. of 12-11-73, § 9)

Sec. 3-10.   Escrow and liabilities.

The applicant shall file, with the original application and shall renew annually, a liability insurance policy by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state, with minimum coverage of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for bodily injury or death of one (1) person in any one (1) accident and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) coverage for bodily injury or death of two (2) or more persons in any one (1) accident, plus a minimum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) coverage for property damage per accident. There shall also be established an escrow account payable to the Town to be maintained in lieu of a performance bond; the amount of said account shall be computed at a level sufficient to restore the borrow pit, guaranteeing rehabilitation of the abandoned area as provided in Section 3-8.

(Ord. of 12-11-73, § 10)

Sec. 3-11.   Permit violations, renewals, suspensions, revocations.

Upon finding that the holder of a permit has violated any provision of this Chapter the Town Manager shall issue an order or notice directing compliance, to cease the violation, or to correct conditions. The order or notice shall be in writing and shall note the specific violations or conditions which need to be corrected.

Any permit granted hereunder shall be suspended if the holder fails to comply with the order of the Town Manager within twenty (20) days of the date of said order.

(Ord. of 12-11-73, § 11)

Sec. 3-12.   Drilling and blasting.

Operating hours for drilling and blasting of ledge shall be restricted to between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on week days. No operation shall be permitted on Sundays. Variances may be granted by the Town Manager in proven emergencies.

(Ord. of 12-11-73, § 12)

Sec. 3-13.   Access roads.

(a)  Within quarry or borrow pit area. All roads for ingress and egress from the quarry or borrow pit area to public roads shall be treated as needed with preventative to control dust.

(b)  Outside quarry or borrow pit area. When necessary, truck routes to and from the quarry or borrow pit in the quarry or borrow pit vicinity may be designated by the Engineer to prevent damage to public roads, to avoid unsafe traffic conditions and to protect residential areas. The quarry or borrow pit operator shall keep the public roads free of foreign material and spillage at the point of ingress and egress from the quarry or borrow pit area.

(Ord. of 12-11-73, § 13)

Sec. 3-14.   Board of Appeals.

Any person aggrieved by any action or order made hereunder may appeal to the Selectboard within ten (10) days from such order or action. Upon notice, after hearing, the Selectboard shall have authority to affirm, modify, or reverse the order or action. Such appeal shall stay any suspension of a permit but shall not stay denial, revocation, or refusal to renew a permit unless the Selectboard, upon application, may grant or stay such order.

(Ord. of 12-11-73, § 14)

Sec. 3-15.   Violations.

Any person who violates the terms of this Ordinance [Chapter] shall be liable for a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day of said violation, together with the costs of prosecution.

(Ord. of 12-11-73, § 15)

Chapter 4 BUILDING CODE AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION ORDINANCE [1]
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

ARTICLE II. - PERMITS AND FEES

ARTICLE III. - FIRE PROTECTION MEASURES

ARTICLE IV. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES

ARTICLE V. - SWIMMING POOLS

 

FOOTNOTE(S):

--- (1) ---

Editor's note— An ordinance adopted on May 14, 2013, amended Ch. 4 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 4 pertained to similar provisions and derived from ordinances adopted Dec. 8, 2009; June 22, 2010; and Mar. 8, 2011. (Back)

Cross reference— Fire protection and prevention, Ch. 7; health regulations, Ch. 8; sewers, Ch. 10; traffic, Ch. 12. (Back)

ARTICLE I.   IN GENERAL
Sec. 4-1. Short title.

Sec. 4-2. Definitions.

Sec. 4-3. Adoption of building codes and safety standards.

Sec. 4-4. Building Inspector—Appointment.

Sec. 4-5. Building Inspector—Duties and powers.

Sec. 4-6. Appeals.

Sec. 4-7. Penalty for violations.

Secs. 4-8—4-19. Reserved.




Sec. 4-1.   Short title.

This Chapter shall be known as the Colchester Building Code.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-2.   Definitions.

Unless otherwise stated, the definitions as given in the listed codes, adopted in Section 4-3, shall be used for the purpose of this Chapter.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-3.   Adoption of building codes and safety standards.

(a)  Pursuant to Title 24, Chapter 83, Section 3101 and Title 24, Chapter 59, Section 1971 of the Vermont Statutes Annotated (V.S.A.), the Town of Colchester, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations governing the construction, inspection, materials, alteration, relocation, demolition, equipment, repair, use occupancy, maintenance and operation of buildings, structures or premises, and for the prevention of fires, removal of fire hazards, prescribing standards necessary to protect the public, employees and property against harm arising out of or likely to arise out of fire, hereby adopts, the herein listed nationally recognized safety standards except such portions as are specifically hereinafter excluded. The adoption of such herein listed standards are incorporated, and from the date on which this Chapter (Ordinance of April 24, 1984) shall take effect, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the construction alteration, repair and maintenance of all buildings and structures therein contained within the limits of the Town of Colchester.

(b)  The "Vermont Fire and Building Safety Code" as amended from time to time and the International Residential Code, excepting Section P2904, as amended from time to time are herein adopted. Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, provision, or phrase of these Vermont Fire and Building Safety Code and International Residential Code be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other portion of these regulations, except those portions pertaining to the section in question.

(c)  Chapter 7 of the Colchester Code of Ordinances, the Fire Prevention, Fire Protection, and Life Safety Regulations, as amended from time to time is herein adopted and shall supersede the Vermont Fire Prevention and Building Code when in conflict.

(d)  The "Americans with Disabilities Act" is herein adopted.

(e)  Provisions and appendices which are referred to in the adopted articles, sections and chapters shall be utilized to the extent necessary to effectuate the purpose of the adopted articles, sections and chapters and this Chapter.

(f)  In the event there is a conflict between the provisions of the codes adopted by reference in this Section and the other provisions of this Code or ordinances of the Town, the more restrictive Code or ordinance of the Town shall prevail.

(g)  The invalidity of any Section of this Code or of the codes hereby adopted shall not invalidate other Sections or provisions thereof.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-4.   Building Inspector—Appointment.

The Building Inspector (BI) and the Assistant Building Inspector (ABI) shall be appointed by the Town Manager. The Assistant Building Inspector's powers and duties equal those of the Building Inspector. Whenever the BI is designated in this Code, the ABI may fill the same description.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-5.   Building Inspector—Duties and powers.

(a)  The BI is hereby authorized and empowered to enforce the provisions of this Code relating to the construction, alteration, removal, use and inspection of buildings and other structures in the Town. The BI shall administer the provisions of this Code relating to the issue and enforcement of building permits as hereinafter provided.

(b)  The BI shall receive applications required by this Code, issue permits and furnish the prescribed certificates. The BI may examine premises for which permits have been issued and make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of law are complied with and that construction is prosecuted safely. The BI shall enforce all provisions of the building code. The BI shall, when requested by proper authority, or when the public interest so requires, make investigations in connection with matters referred to in the building code and render written reports on the same. The BI shall conduct inspections of the premises to ensure that the rule set forth herein and in Title 24, Chapter 83 of the V.S.A. are being observed. The BI may establish priorities for enforcing these rules based on the relative risks to persons and property. In the course of enforcement of this Code, if the BI finds that a structure, building, facility or construction does not meet the standards found in this Code or in Title 24, Chapter 83 of the V.S.A., the BI may issue an order to repair or rehabilitate a structure, building, facility or construction to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to secure the necessary safeguards during construction, or to require adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures. The BI shall order such changes in the mode or manner of construction and the materials used as the BI deems necessary for the public safety and may order work to cease. With the exception of unsafe facilities discussed in Section below, such order shall not be issued by the BI until the party in violation of this Code has been provided notification of said violation and granted a period of not less than seven (7) days to correct the said violation.

Additionally, pursuant to 24 V.S.A., Chapter 59, authority is granted to "Municipal Officials," the BI shall serve as the "Municipal Official" or "Enforcement Officer" for the Town of Colchester for the purpose of enforcing these building code and building construction regulations. Said Municipal Officials shall possess all the authority granted such Official in the enforcement of said regulations. Town officers, upon being designated as Deputy Municipal Officials by, and subject to the overall direction of, the BI, shall serve as Municipal Officials and shall possess all the authority of a Municipal Official in the enforcement of said regulations.

(c)  All applications required by the Code shall only be issued after the BI has reviewed and found said applications to be in compliance with Chapter 7 of the Colchester Code of Ordinances. Where conflicts occur between this Chapter and Chapter 7 of the Colchester Code of Ordinances, the more restrictive shall prevail.

(d)  Inspections required under the provisions of the building code shall be made by the BI. The BI may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services, after investigation of their qualifications and reliability. No certificate called for by any provisions of the building code shall be issued based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service.

(e)  The BI shall adhere to all legal requirements and shall have benefit of all legal means of inspection now or hereafter required or available under law.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-6.   Appeals.

Appeals in the case of the issuance of a ticket under Section 4-7 below shall be governed by the provisions of 4 V.S.A. Chapter 29. All other appeals shall be governed by Title 24, Chapter 83 of the V.S.A. and the following provisions:

(a)  Any interested person, aggrieved by an order of the BI made in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, may appeal. Interested persons are persons aggrieved by the order on appeal, and include, but are not limited to, the BI, the applicant, the person or entity owning title to the property affected by the decision, and/or the aggrieved person's architect or builder.

(b)  At the discretion of the appellant, an appeal pursuant to this Section 4-6, may be taken to the Board of Arbitrators discussed in subsection (c) below or to the Criminal Division of the Vermont Superior Court. Such appeal shall be filed within five (5) business days after the receipt of the order being appealed. The taking of the appeal shall operate as a stay. The Board of Arbitrators or the court shall have the power to annul, amend, modify, or affirm the order of the Building Inspector.

(c)  Should the appellant choose to appeal to the Board of Arbitrators, the appellant shall file with the BI a notice of appeal setting forth the reasons for the appeal by personal delivery or by leaving said notice of appeal at the office of the BI. A copy of said notice of appeal shall also be provided to the Town Clerk. The Board of Arbitrators shall be assembled and composed as described in 24 V.S.A. § 3110. A decision of a majority of the Board of Arbitrators thus composed, when reduced to writing, sworn to and filed in the BI's office, shall be final and conclusive upon the parties. Upon the filing of such decision, work may be immediately resumed in accordance therewith. The expense of such arbitration shall be paid by the appellant.

(d)  Should the appellant choose to appeal to the Criminal Division of the Vermont Superior Court, the appellant shall file a complaint with the Court, and shall provide copies to the BI and the Town Clerk. Pursuant to 24 V.S.A. § 3111, the Judge shall forthwith inquire into the facts or by committee appointed by the Court, and make such order as the Court deems proper under the circumstances. In the Court's discretion, it may tax costs in favor of the prevailing party and issue execution therefore. Upon the entry of judgment, work may be immediately resumed in accordance therewith.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-7.   Penalty for violations.

A violation of these regulations shall constitute a civil ordinance violation. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Offenses may be prosecuted through the issuance of a Municipal Civil Complaint Ticket as described below.

(a)  Municipal Civil Complaint Ticket. Pursuant to 24 V.S.A. Chapter 59 and 4 V.S.A. Chapter 29, any designated enforcement officer, as referenced in Section 19.02 above, may commence prosecution for any zoning violation by serving two (2) copies of a Municipal Civil Complaint Ticket either in person or by first class mail on the alleged offender, and thereafter promptly filing the original with the Judicial Bureau. The issuing officer shall follow the procedure set forth by the Judicial Bureau for Municipal Complaint Tickets. The first offense ticketed for a violation shall be punishable by a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00), the waiver fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00); a second offense ticketed for the same violation shall be punishable by a fine of four hundred dollars ($400.00), the waiver fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00); a third offense ticketed for the same violation shall be punishable by a fine of eight hundred dollars ($800.00), the waiver fee shall be four hundred dollars ($400.00). Upon the fourth offense, the Town may request that the case be transferred from the Judicial Bureau to the Environmental Court, or any other court of competent jurisdiction.

(b)  Violations by Owners. The owner or mortgagee of a building, structure or premises which is in violation of this Chapter and/or any other person who has assisted in the commission of such violation, shall each be subject to fine as herein provided.

(c)  Appropriate Action. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the Town from instituting an appropriate action or proceeding to prevent an unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, or to prevent the occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to prevent an illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about any premises.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Secs. 4-8—4-19.   Reserved.

ARTICLE II.   PERMITS AND FEES [2]
Sec. 4-20. Permits—Required; plans and estimates to be submitted.

Sec. 4-21. Permits—Sanitary facilities and potable water.

Sec. 4-22. Permits—Conditions for issuance.

Sec. 4-23. Permits—Duration.

Sec. 4-24. Fees.

Sec. 4-25. Exemptions.

Sec. 4-26. Moving of buildings.

Sec. 4-27. Buildings not in conformity to be removed.

Secs. 4-28—4-37. Reserved.




Sec. 4-20.   Permits—Required; plans and estimates to be submitted.

No wall, building or other structure or part thereof shall be built, enlarged, moved, demolished, repaired or occupancy use changed until a plan of the proposed site and work, together with a statement of the materials to be used and an estimate of the total cost of the project, shall have been submitted to the BI; and who shall, if said plan and materials are in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, the building code and the zoning bylaws, issue a permit for the proposed construction.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-21.   Permits—Sanitary facilities and potable water.

No permit for the construction of any building to be used for human habitation or for the alteration of any building so as to render it usable for human habitation shall be issued unless:

(a)  Each dwelling unit is connected to either a municipal sewer main or an approved and permitted private sewage disposal system and shall have at least one (1) approved toilet, one (1) bathroom sink, one (1) tub or shower bath and one (1) kitchen-type sink; and

(b)  Each dwelling unit is connected to an approved potable water supply that serves all plumbing fixtures in subsection 4-21(a).

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-22.   Permits—Conditions for issuance.

No permit shall be granted until the required fee has been paid and until the BI is satisfied that the issuance of such permit will not be in violation of any Town bylaws, ordinances, or regulations.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-23.   Permits—Duration.

No permit granted pursuant to this Article shall be valid after one (1) year, unless fifty (50) percent of the work to be done under it shall have been completed during such period. In any case, all work must be completed within two (2) years from the date of issue of the permit unless an extension has been granted.

The BI may extend the permit for a specified period (not to exceed six (6) months) upon finding of objective evidence of the intent and effort to pursue the project for which the permit was issued.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-24.   Fees.

(a)  Every person applying for a permit shall pay a fee for such permit in accordance with the schedule of fees listed in Chapter 6½ of this Code and as amended by the Selectboard from time to time.

(b)  No significant change in the construction of a project, as authorized by a valid building permit, shall be made until there shall have been submitted to the BI a detailed plan of such proposed changes, an appropriate adjusted fee has been paid, and a supplemental permit or permit amendment has been issued.

(c)  If a building, alteration, extension or repair of a building is begun without the payment of such fee and without such permit, the builder and owner shall both be deemed to have violated the provisions of this Article.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-25.   Exemptions.

(a)  No building permit or building permit fee will be required for minor renovations or repairs when the following conditions are met:

(1)  The cost of the materials is less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00); and

(2)  The work is to the interior or an exterior in-kind repair; and

(3)  The work does not result in a change in the occupancy or use of the structure; and

(4)  The work does not include the installation of a woodstove, pellet stove, or gas stove.

(b)  No permit or fee shall be required for new roof covering, siding, all windows and doors, carpeting, draperies, painting, installation of personal property and floor covering.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-26.   Moving of buildings.

(a)  Permit required. The owner of a building or structure shall not move or cause to be moved such building or structure until a permit has been obtained from the BI.

(b)  Conditions for permit. The permit holder shall be liable for any damage done to any trees, public utilities or any public property within the street right-of-way or damage to any private property; and shall also specify the streets through which, and the time within which, the building shall be moved.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-27.   Buildings not in conformity to be removed.

Buildings or structures hereafter erected or moved without a permit, not in conformity with this Chapter, shall be removed.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Secs. 4-28—4-37.   Reserved.

 

FOOTNOTE(S):

--- (2) ---

Cross reference— Fees for permits and licenses, ch. 6½. (Back)

ARTICLE III.   FIRE PROTECTION MEASURES
Sec. 4-38. Fire protection measures.

Sec. 4-39. Reserved.




Sec. 4-38.   Fire protection measures.

The following shall be required for new structures, existing structures, and renovations of existing structures exceeding twenty-five (25) percent of the total area of the structure within a ten-year period or adding an additional fuel dispensing pump:

(a)  Exemptions: Except as otherwise required in Section 7-10 and 7-11 in Chapter 7 of the Colchester Code of Ordinances, the following are exempt from Section 4-28 herein:

(1)  Accessory structures; and

(2)  Residential structures containing three (3) or less units.

Except as otherwise required in Section 7-10 and 7-11 in Chapter 7 of the Colchester Code of Ordinances, the following are exempt from subsections 4-28(e)—(h) and subsection 4-28(m) herein: Residential structures of four (4) or more units in which the units are primarily accessed directly by an exterior door and not an internal hall.

(b)  New structures. All new structures shall comply with subsections (e) through (m) herein unless said structure is herein exempted.

(c)  Renovations to existing structures. For renovations of existing structures exceeding twenty-five (25) percent of the total area of the structure within a ten-year period the following subsections (e), (f), (h), (i), (j), (k), (l), and (m) herein shall apply unless said structure is exempted.

(d)  Existing structures. All structures shall comply with subsections (e) and (f) herein by January 1, 2012 unless herein exempted. If there is a sprinkler system present in a structure, the system's Standpipes, Fire Department Connection, and Locator Light shall be installed to specifications herein in subsections (j), (k), and (l) by January 1, 2012, unless said structure is herein exempted.

(e)  Access box. A General Electric Company Supra Safe Model 2HSTS or Model 2HSRTS shall be installed immediately adjacent to the primary entrance of a building on its exterior. If an alarm is installed in the structure, the trembler alarm device for the access box shall be connected to the structure's alarm or fire alarm. If there is a gated perimeter fence on the property, the access box shall be located immediately adjacent to the exterior of the gate. The property owner shall be responsible for ensuring that the keys are updated whenever locks are changed. Keys must be provided for all rooms and areas of a facility. Each box shall contain the following keys.

(1)  Perimeter gate access key (where applicable).

(2)  Fire alarm panel access key (where applicable).

(3)  Structure alarm key (where applicable).

(4)  One (1) master key for each floor of the structure.

(5)  Structure sprinkler shutoff key (where applicable).

(6)  Elevator key (where applicable).

(7)  Keys to exterior controls for automatic overhead doors.

(8)  Additional keys as determined necessary by the BI.

(f)  Fire alarms.

(1)  A local fire alarm system shall be designed and installed in accordance with the NFPA 72 National Fire Alarm Code and the local fire alarm system shall retransmit to an approved central station.

(2)  The fire alarm panel shall be located convenient to the primary access of the building.

(3)  Digital fire alarms shall be programmed to indicate location as defined by the BI.

(g)  Elevators. Elevators shall have a minimum two thousand, five hundred (2,500) pound lift capacity to accommodate a standard size stretcher with two (2) attendants. The floor area shall be a minimum of eighty-four (84) inches long and a minimum of fifty-three (53) inches wide. The elevator doors shall be wide enough and positioned correctly so that the twenty-four-inch by eighty-four-inch stretcher may be wheeled into place without needing to tilt the stretcher from the horizontal position.

(h)  Evacuation plans. An evacuation plan for the structure shall be posted within the structure in accordance with NFPA regulations. A copy of the current evacuation plan shall be filed with the Colchester Police Department and appropriate Fire Department.

(i)  Fire suppression systems. All fire suppression systems shall be installed and maintained annually in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications and all applicable NFPA codes and standards. The water service size shall be adequate to serve the suppression system. Fire suppression systems shall be required as follows:

(1)  All fuel dispensing and refueling stations shall install and maintain fire suppression systems as specified in NFPA 1 "Fire Prevention Code," NFPA 101 "Life Safety Code," and NFPA 30 "Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code." Marine refueling facilities shall have at least two (2) portable extinguishers located in two (2) separate places within the refueling area of sufficient size in accordance with NFPA regulations. Fuel dispensing and refueling stations exclusively for fleet vehicles shall be exempted from the installation and maintenance of fire suppression systems.

(2)  Residential structures, except as herein exempted, containing four (4) or more units shall have a sprinkler system installed.

(3)  Structures ten thousand (10,000) square feet or larger shall have a sprinkler system installed. The following structures are exempted from the above-stated requirement: Salt sheds; green houses; plastic tent structures; barns, and plastic riding stables or similar structures as determined by the BI.

(4)  Mechanical rooms shall have a sprinkler system installed.

(5)  Stories fully below grade that are two thousand, five hundred (2,500) square feet or greater shall have a sprinkler system installed.

(j)  Standpipes. All structures that have a sprinkler system installed with three (3) or more floors above the average pre-construction grade shall have standpipes. All structures with standpipes shall install a gated value and two and one-half-inch national standard thread fitting on each standpipe station. Each fitting shall have a cap that incorporates a one and one-half-inch iron pipe standard thread fitting with cap.

(k)  Fire department connection. All sprinkler systems shall be equipped with a four-inch STORZ Fire Department Connection (FDC) located in such a manner as to be accessible from the designated fire-lane per Chapter 7 of the Colchester Code of Ordinances.

(l)  Locator light. A flashing red light shall be mounted on the highest portion of the exterior wall at a point directly above the Fire Department Connection. The light shall be activated when the building fire alarm is activated whether the sprinkler system has activated or not.

(m)  Roof vents. Automatic roof vents shall be required for nonresidential structures of an open nature that are ten thousand (10,000) gross square feet or greater in accordance with Table 910.3 of the 2006 International Building Code.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-39.   Reserved.

ARTICLE IV.   UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
Sec. 4-40. Definition; application.

Sec. 4-41. Removal or making safe upon order.

Sec. 4-42. Restoration.

Sec. 4-43. Notice.

Sec. 4-44. Survey upon failure of owner to comply; report.

Sec. 4-45. Disregard of unsafe notice and survey report.

Sec. 4-46. Vacating unsafe facilities.

Sec. 4-47. Emergency work.

Secs. 4-48—4-59. Reserved.




Sec. 4-40.   Definition; application.

The term "unsafe building or structure" shall apply to buildings or structures, or portions thereof, existing or hereafter erected, as follows:

(a)  Those deemed by the BI or FC to be structurally unsafe; unstable; unsanitary; constituting a fire hazard; unsuitable or improper for the use or occupancy to which they are put; constituting a hazard of health or safety because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment; presence of an imminent hazard or an ongoing event associated with features such as damaged or leaking underground gas mains, railroad cars, aircraft, automotive vehicles, and water craft; or otherwise dangerous to life or other property;

(b)  Vacant buildings or structures, or portions thereof, deemed by the BI or FC to constitute a hazard.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-41.   Removal or making safe upon order.

When a building or structure, or any portion thereof, is found unsafe upon inspection by the BI, the BI shall order such building or structure, or any portion thereof, to be made safe, or closed and secured, or taken down and removed.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-42.   Restoration.

A building or structure, or any part thereof, declared unsafe by the BI may be restored to safe conditions. However, if the damage or cost of reconstruction or restoration is in excess of fifty (50) percent of the value of the building or structure, exclusive of foundations, such buildings or structures, if reconstructed or restored, shall be made to conform with respect to materials and type or construction, to the requirements of this Code. No change of use or occupancy shall be compelled by reason of such reconstruction or restoration.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-43.   Notice.

Upon determining that a building or structure, or portion thereof, is unsafe, the BI shall serve or cause to be served on the owner, or some one of the owners, executors, administrators, agents, lessees, mortgagees, or other persons who may have a vested or contingent interest in the same, a written notice containing a description of the building or structure or portion thereof deemed unsafe, a statement of the particulars in which the building or structure or portion thereof is unsafe, and an order requiring the same to be made safe and secure or removed, as may be deemed necessary by the BI. If the person to whom such notice and order is addressed cannot be found after diligent search, then such notice and order shall be sent by certified or registered mail to the last known address of such person; and a copy of such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises to which it relates. Such mailing and posting shall be deemed adequate service.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-44.   Survey upon failure of owner to comply; report.

If the owner, agent or person interested in such unsafe structure refuses or neglects to comply with the requirements of an order within the time limit specified, a careful survey of the premises shall be made by a Board consisting of a Surveyor, the Chief Engineer of the Fire Department, and one (1) disinterested person to be appointed by the BI. The BI shall fix the fee for services of such person so appointed. A report of such survey shall be made in writing and a copy thereof served on the owner, agent or other person interested.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-45.   Disregard of unsafe notice and survey report.

If the report declares such structure to be unsafe and if the owner, agent or person interested continues such refusal or neglects to remove or make the building safe, the BI may cause the building or structure to be taken down or otherwise made safe. The costs and charges incurred shall constitute a lien upon the land upon which such building is situated, and said owner or person interested shall, for every day's continuance of such refusal or neglect, be subject to a fine as provided by Section 4-7 of this Code.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-46.   Vacating unsafe facilities.

When a building or structure or facility, or portion thereof, is determined by the BI to constitute an unsafe facility, building or structure, the BI in consultation with the Police Department and the Public Works Department may order the closure of such facility and order occupants to immediately vacate the premises, if by doing so the public safety will not be imperiled. If public safety would be imperiled, the BI shall order demolition and removal of the structure, or fencing of the premises. Facility closure may include, but shall not be limited to: closure of public rights-of-way; closure of private ways; closure of buildings, structures and facilities; and closure of areas adjacent to unsafe facilities. Such facilities may be partially or completely open again at such time as deemed safe by the BI. The BI shall use all available media and means of communication to inform occupant(s) and/or the public of facility closure in a timely manner.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-47.   Emergency work.

(a)  Notice. In case there shall be, in the opinion of the BI, actual and immediate danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure or portion thereof so as to endanger person or property, or if the structure would be especially unsafe in case of fire, the BI shall so notify the owner or interested party(ies) and fix in a conspicuous place upon exterior walls a notice of its dangerous condition.

(b)  Action to be taken. Any person notified as provided in subsection (a) shall, within twenty-four (24) hours of the day following the service of such notice, commence to secure or remove such structure, and shall employ sufficient workmen speedily to secure or remove it. However, if the public safety so requires, and if the Selectboard so orders, the BI shall immediately enter upon the premises with the necessary workmen and cause said structure to be shored up, taken down or otherwise secured without delay, and a proper fence or boarding put up for protection of the passers-by.

(c)  Costs. The costs and charges incurred by the Town with respect to this Section 4-47 shall constitute a lien upon the land which such building is situated, and said owner or person interested shall, for every day's continuance of such refusal or neglect, be subject to a fine as provided by Section 4-7 of this Code.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Secs. 4-48—4-59.   Reserved.

ARTICLE V.   SWIMMING POOLS
Sec. 4-60. Definition.

Sec. 4-61. Applicability of Article.

Sec. 4-62. Enclosure required.

Sec. 4-63. Gates and doors.

Sec. 4-64. Modification of requirements permitted.

Sec. 4-65. Pool location.

Sec. 4-66. Electrical installation.

Sec. 4-67. Safety appliances required.




Sec. 4-60.   Definition.

A "swimming pool" is any constructed or prefabricated pool used for swimming or bathing whether private or public located above or below ground, twenty-four (24) inches in depth or greater or with a surface area exceeding two hundred fifty (250) square feet.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-61.   Applicability of Article.

The requirements of this Article shall be applicable to all new and existing swimming pools and no person in possession of land which a pool is or shall be situated shall fail to provide and maintain the equipment, fence or wall and facilities' required herein.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-62.   Enclosure required.

Every outdoor swimming pool shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall of not less than four (4) feet in height which shall be so constructed as not to have openings, holes or gaps larger than four (4) inches in any dimension, except for doors and gates. A dwelling house or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure. However, freestanding pools with essentially smooth, vertical exterior walls at least four (4) feet in height measured on the outside surface shall not require additional enclosures except that all points of pool access which shall comply with Section 4-63.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-63.   Gates and doors.

All gates and doors opening through an enclosure shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices for keeping such gates or doors securely closed at all times when not in use for ingress and egress, except a door of any dwelling which forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped. Any self-latching device accessible from the outside of the pool enclosure shall be located at least four (4) feet above the ground.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-64.   Modification of requirements permitted.

The Health Officer and BI may make modifications in individual cases upon showing of good cause, with respect to the requirements of enclosing swimming pools, so long as the degree of protection afforded by substitute devices or structures is not less than the protection sought by this Article.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-65.   Pool location.

(a)  No swimming pool shall be constructed on a required front yard nor closer to any side or rear property line than allowed by the zoning bylaw for an accessory structure.

(b)  Location of swimming pools other than private pools shall be subject to site plan review by the Development Review Board.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-66.   Electrical installation.

(a)  All electrical connections shall be properly grounded and shall be further protected by a ground-fault circuit interrupter.

(b)  No pool shall be constructed or used that has overhead electrical wires crossing the pool area.

(c)  All lighting used in conjunction with the pool shall be so situated that there is no direct glare beyond the lot line.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 4-67.   Safety appliances required.

Safety appliances, consisting of at least one (1) ring buoy with line the width of the pool attached and one (1) pole longer than half the width of any pool shall be readily accessible and shall be in plain view whenever there is water within a swimming pool.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Chapter 5 CARTERS
Secs. 5-1—5-3. Reserved.

Sec. 5-4. License required.

Sec. 5-5. Proof of insurance required; other specifications.

Sec. 5-6. Vehicle identification.

Sec. 5-7. Minimum standards.

Sec. 5-8. Violations and remedies.

Sec. 5-9. Conflict with other ordinances and effective date.




Secs. 5-1—5-3.   Reserved.

Editor's note— Ord. of 9-10-91, repealed §§ 5-1—5-4, which pertained to definitions and permit regulations and derived from Ord. of 5-9-72, §§ 1, 2, 4, 5 and Ord. of 1-12-88. Said ordinance also enacted § 5-4 to read as herein set out.

Sec. 5-4.   License required.

(a)  License requirement. No person shall collect, transport, or deliver solid waste, as solid waste is defined in 10 V.S.A. Section 6602, within the Town without first obtaining a license to do so from the Colchester Selectboard as provided herein.

(b)  Term of license. Each license shall be valid for a period not to exceed one (1) year and shall expire on June 1 of each year.

(c)  Designation of disposal point in license. The Selectboard shall designate upon each license specific facilities or locations authorized by the Selectboard for the disposal, delivery, or storage of solid waste. No person shall dispose of solid waste at any location or facility other than those specifically permitted and designated on his or her license.

(d)  Changes in designation of disposal point. The Selectboard may, upon reasonable notice to any licensee affected, make reasonable changes in the designation of the facility or location for disposal of solid waste, and by acceptance of such license, each licensee shall be subject to and bound by such changes.

(e)  Licensing fee. The Town hereby imposes a licensing fee in the amount set forth in the Colchester Fee Ordinance, payment of which is a precondition of issuance of a license.

(Ord. of 9-10-91)

Sec. 5-5.   Proof of insurance required; other specifications.

Applicants will be required to submit proof of proper liability insurance coverage; said coverage to be a minimum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)/three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00)/twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) bodily injury and property damage.

Carters shall also indicate that they are operating vehicles with a reverse signal alarm audible above the surrounding noise level.

At any time during the application process or during the term of a license, applicants may be required to provide:

(1)  A performance and payment bond, or other security, in a form acceptable to and approved by the Town, in an amount set by the Selectboard, not to exceed the estimated amount of the licensee's tipping fees for two (2) calendar month's, said security to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Section, including the requirement that the licensee properly dispose of solid waste at a facility designated by the Selectboard. In the event that the board determines that the licensee has failed to deliver solid waste to the designated facility or to pay fees due the Town under this Section, said security shall be forfeited to the Town;

(2)  A list and description of the pick-up routes within the Town, together with the estimated number of customers on each route and the approximate tonnage attributable to said route.

(Ord. of 1-12-88; Ord. of 9-10-91; Ord. of 5-26-92)

Sec. 5-6.   Vehicle identification.

Upon approval of a carter's license, an identification sticker will be issued for each truck to be used in the Town. Such identification shall be affixed to the left side of the front bumper of the vehicle.

(Ord. of 5-9-72, § 7; Ord. of 1-12-88)

Sec. 5-7.   Minimum standards.

Any carter operating such business with a base of operation on property in the Town of Colchester shall comply with the following minimum standards:

(1)  Only those trash hauling vehicle(s) which are registered in the name of the licensed operator shall be parked on the premises.

(2)  That vehicle(s) shall be parked only in the rear yard of the property.

(3)  No dumpsters or other trash receptacles shall be stored on the premises if not contained within a screened storage area in the rear yard of the property.

(4)  All vehicles(s) shall be emptied and no overnight storage of trash in the vehicle(s) shall be permitted on the premises.

(5)  The parking area where the vehicle(s) will be parked shall be within an opaque fence enclosure.

(6)  All repairs to vehicle(s) on premises shall be done entirely within an enclosed structure or within twenty-four (24) hours.

(Ord. of 1-12-88; Ord. of 9-10-91)

Sec. 5-8.   Violations and remedies.

(a)  Revocation of license. After hearing and finding that a licensee has violated this Chapter or any terms, condition, or restriction set forth in the licensee's license, the Selectboard may revoke such license. Upon the revocation of any license issued hereunder, the Selectboard may deny any subsequent application for a license by such person.

(b)  Injunctive relief. In addition to any other remedy provided in this Chapter or available at law or in equity, the Town may seek to enjoin a violation of the terms of any license, the provisions of this Chapter, or the rules and regulations adopted hereunder.

(c)  Fines. Any person who violates this Chapter, or any of the terms and conditions of a license issued hereunder, shall be fined pursuant to Chapter 1, Section 1-9. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.

(d)  Damages. Notwithstanding of the other remedies available to the Town, in the event the Town fails to receive revenues as a result of a person(s) violating the provision of this Chapter, or is damaged in any other manner as a result of actions which violate the terms of this Chapter, the Town shall be entitled to recover all such damages, as well as reasonable attorney's fees and costs incurred in the recovery of said damages.

(Ord. of 9-10-91; Ord. of 9-10-96)

Sec. 5-9.   Conflict with other ordinances and effective date.

(a)  Conflict with other ordinances. The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed to abrogate and annul the provisions of other ordinances or regulations. Where this Chapter imposes a greater restriction than is imposed by any other ordinance or regulation, the restriction(s) of this Chapter shall prevail.

(b)  Effective date. The effective date for this Chapter shall be determined in accordance with the provision and procedures established by the Town Charter.

(Ord. of 9-10-91)

Chapter 6 DOGS AND WOLF-HYBRIDS [1]
Sec. 6-1. Authority.

Sec. 6-2. Purpose.

Sec. 6-3. Definitions.

Sec. 6-4. Nuisances.

Sec. 6-5. Collar and license.

Sec. 6-6. Enforcement.

Sec. 6-7. Penalties and costs.

Sec. 6-8. Impoundment.

Sec. 6-9. Investigation of vicious dogs.

Sec. 6-10. Potentially vicious dogs.




Sec. 6-1.   Authority.

The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted by the Selectboard of the Town of Colchester under authority of 20 V.S.A. § 3549, 24 V.S.A. §§ 2291 (10), (14), and (15), and 24 V.S.A. Chapter 59.

(Ord. of 8-8-17)

Sec. 6-2.   Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the keeping of dogs and wolf hybrids and to provide for their leashing, muzzling, restraint, impoundment and destruction and their running at large, so as to protect the public health and safety of the Town and the quiet enjoyment of its residents' homes and properties.

(Ord. of 8-8-17)

Sec. 6-3.   Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following words and/or phrases shall apply:

Domestic animal means cattle, sheep, goats, equines, deer, American bison, swine, poultry, pheasant, Chukar partridge, Coturnix quail, psittacine birds, ferrets, camelids, ratites (ostriches, rheas, and emus), and water buffalo. The term shall include cultured trout propagated by commercial trout farms.

Domestic pet or pet means any domestic dog, domestic cat, or ferret.

Dog means any member of the canine species. For purposes of this chapter, this term, wherever used, shall also include "wolf-hybrids" and "working farm dogs" except where specifically exempted.

Enforcement Officer means any Town Constable, Police Officer, Animal Control Officer, Humane Officer, or any other person designated as an Enforcement Officer by the Selectboard.

Owner means any person who has actual or constructive possession of a dog. The term also includes those persons who provide food and shelter to a dog.

Potentially vicious dog means a dog running at large that inflicts minor injuries on a person not necessitating medical attention; chases in a menacing manner, threatens to attack or attacks another domestic pet or domestic animal; causes damage to personal property; chases a person; or causes any person to reasonably fear attack or bodily injury from such dog. This definition shall not apply if the dog was protecting or defending itself, its offspring, another domestic pet or animal or a person from attack or assault or the person attacked or threatened by the dog was engaged in teasing, tormenting, battering, assaulting, injuring or otherwise provoking the dog.

Running at large means that a dog is not:

1.  On a leash;

2.  In a vehicle;

3.  On the owner's premises;

4.  On the premises of another person with that person's permission;

5.  Clearly under the verbal or non-verbal control of the owner; or

6.  Hunting with the owner.

Wolf hybrid means:

1.  An animal that is the progeny of a dog and a wolf (Canis lupus or Canis rufus);

2.  An animal that is advertised or otherwise described or represented to be a wolf hybrid; or

3.  An animal that exhibits primary physical and/or behavioral wolf characteristics.

Working farm dog means a dog that is bred or trained to herd or protect livestock or poultry or to protect crops and that is used for those purposes and that is registered as a working farm dog pursuant to State law.

(Ord. of 8-8-17)

Sec. 6-4.   Nuisances.

(a)  Prohibitions. An owner of a dog shall not allow, permit, or suffer such dog to create a nuisance. The following activities shall be deemed nuisances:

Nuisance One: Lack of current license and/or rabies tag. A dog off the premises of the owner without a collar or harness with the current license and/or valid rabies tag securely attached.

Nuisance Two: Running at large. A dog running at large in the Town.

Nuisance Three: Failure to remove waste. A dog that defecates in any public area or on the private premises of another person and whose owner does not immediately remove the fecal material and dispose of it in a sanitary manner.

Nuisance Four: Unconfined dog in heat. A female dog in heat not confined to a building or other secured enclosure, except while under the direct control of the owner.

Nuisance Five: Barking, howling or whining dog. In order to preserve the public health, safety and welfare, it shall be unlawful for a dog to make unreasonable noise. Unreasonable noise shall be defined as noise such as barking, howling or whining in a manner and for a period of time such that the noise disturbs, injures or endangers the health or peace or another or community.

This regulation shall not apply to dogs in a kennel/boarding facility that is lawfully permitted under the Town's Zoning Regulations. Any conditions contained in the permit shall apply and not be affected by this provision.

(b)  Exemptions for working dogs. The provisions of this section pertaining to running at large and disturbing the quiet, comfort and repose of others shall not apply to working farm dogs if:

(1)  The working farm dog is barking in order to herd or protect livestock or poultry or to protect crops; or

(2)  The working farm dog is running at large in order to herd or protect livestock or poultry or to protect crops.

(Ord. of 8-8-17)

Sec. 6-5.   Collar and license.

Each dog shall be licensed according to the laws of this State and shall wear a collar or harness with the current license attached. A dog that is visiting from out of state must wear a collar or harness with a current license from its home state attached. A dog that is found without a collar or harness and license shall be in violation of this chapter and may be immediately impounded.

(Ord. of 8-8-17)

Sec. 6-6.   Enforcement.

The violation of this chapter shall be a civil matter which may be enforced in the Vermont Judicial Bureau or in the Chittenden County Superior Court, at the election of the Enforcement Officer.

Violations enforced in the Judicial Bureau shall be in accordance with the provisions of 24 V.S.A. §§ 1974a and 1977 et seq. For purposes of enforcement in the Judicial Bureau, any Enforcement Officer shall have authority to issue tickets and represent the Town at any hearing.

Violations enforced in the Superior Court shall be in accordance with the Vermont Rules of Civil Procedure. The Town of Colchester may pursue all appropriate injunctive relief.

(Ord. of 8-8-17)

Sec. 6-7.   Penalties and costs.

(a)  The Enforcement Officer is authorized to recover civil penalties for violations of this chapter in the following amounts for each violation:

Lack of current license and/or rabies tag.

1st offense: Warning or $50.00 fine       Waiver fee: $25.00

2nd offense: Impoundment and $100.00 fine       Waiver fee: $50.00

3rd and subsequent offense: Impoundment and $200.00 fine       Waiver fee: $100.00

Running at large.

1st offense: Warning or impoundment and $200.00 fine       Waiver fee: $100.00

2nd offense: Impoundment and $400.00 fine       Waiver fee: $200.00

3rd and subsequent offense: Impoundment and $600.00 fine       Waiver fee: $300.00

Failure to remove waste.

1st offense: Warning or $50.00 fine       Waiver fee: $25.00

2nd offense: Impoundment and $100.00 fine       Waiver fee: $50.00

3rd and subsequent offense: Impoundment and $200.00 fine       Waiver fee: $100.00

Unconfined dog in heat.

1st offense: Warning or impoundment and $200.00 fine       Waiver fee: $100.00

2nd offense: Impoundment and $400.00 fine       Waiver fee: $200.00

3rd and subsequent offense: Impoundment and $600.00 fine       Waiver fee: $300.00

(b)  The Enforcement Officer is authorized to recover a waiver fee, in lieu of a civil penalty, in the stated amount, for any person who declines to contest a municipal complaint and pays the waiver fee.

(c)  For purposes of determining the sequence of offenses, second and third offenses shall be those that occur within the twelve-month period of the anniversary day of the first offense. Any offense occurring after this twelve-month period shall be considered a new first offense.

(d)  Any owner whose dog has been impounded for its initial third offense shall provide the Selectboard with proof of satisfactory completion of a responsible dog owner training course pre-approved by the Selectboard within six (6) months of the anniversary date of impoundment. Failure to provide such certification may result in forfeiture of the offending animal.

(e)  For purposes of calculating the sequence of offenses, offenses shall be counted against the owner.

(Ord. of 8-8-17)

Sec. 6-8.   Impoundment.

(a)  Grounds for impoundment. Any dog may be immediately impounded if the dog:

(1)  Has been determined by an Enforcement Officer to be a "potentially vicious dog," which presents an imminent danger to people or other animals;

(2)  Has reportedly bitten a person off or on the premises of its owner; or

(3)  Is in violation of State licensing law or 20 V.S.A. § 3806.

(b)  Notice of impoundment. The officer who impounds a dog shall, within twenty-four (24) hours, give notice to the owner thereof, either personally, by telephone call, or by written notice at the owner's dwelling. Such notice shall inform the owner of the nature of the violations, the location of the dog and the steps that are necessary to have it returned to the owner.

If the owner of the dog is unknown, the officer who impounds a dog shall, within twenty-four (24) hours of impoundment post a public notice. Notification shall be posted in the Town Clerk's office and other usual places for public notice for a ten-day period. The public notice shall include a description of the dog, including any significant marks of identification, when and where it was impounded or found by the person placing the dog in the Town's custody, and declare that unless the owner claims the dog and pays all expenses incurred by the Town for treatment, boarding and care of the dog, any applicable penalties and takes all necessary remedial action within ten (10) days following posting, the Town may place the dog in an adoptive home, transfer it to a humane society or rescue organization. If the dog cannot be placed in an adoptive home or transferred to a humane society or rescue organization, it may be destroyed in a humane way.

(c)  Release from impoundment. Impounded dogs shall be released to the owner only after payment of all penalties and impoundment fees (including, but not limited to, boarding, food, and veterinary expenses), the final disposition of a potentially vicious dog or vicious dog hearing if applicable, and after all necessary remedial action is taken by the owner. Remedial action shall include, but is not limited to, such actions as providing a collar and current license, and verification of certification of current vaccination against rabies.

If the owner of a dog impounded under the provisions of this chapter refuses to take the remedial action necessary to secure the dog's release within ten (10) days following notice of impoundment or gives notice either personally, by telephone call, or in writing to the Town of forfeiture of ownership before that time, the dog may be placed in an adoptive home, transferred to a humane society or rescue organization, or if the Town is unable to transfer the dog it may be humanely destroyed. The owner of a dog transferred or humanely destroyed shall remain liable for all expenses incurred by the Town for treatment, boarding and care of the dog for the duration of its impoundment and any expenses associated with its transfer or humane disposal.

(d)  [Applicability of section.] The procedures provided in this section shall only apply if the dog is not a rabies suspect. If an official designated by the Selectboard to enforce the provisions of this chapter determines that the dog is a rabies suspect, the Selectboard shall immediately notify the Town Health Officer who shall proceed in accordance with the rules of the Vermont Department of Health.

(Ord. of 8-8-17)

Sec. 6-9.   Investigation of vicious dogs.

(a)  When a dog has bitten a person while the dog is off or on the premises of its owner or keeper, and the person bitten requires medical attention for the attack, such person may file a written complaint with the Selectboard of the municipality. The Chief of Police or his/her designee, upon discovery of a dog bite requiring medical attention for the attack may also file a written complaint with the Selectboard of the municipality. The complaint shall contain the time, date and place where the attack occurred, the name and address of the victim or victims, and any other facts that may assist the Selectboard in conducting its investigation.

(b)  The Selectboard, within fourteen (14) days from receipt of the complaint, may investigate the charges and hold a hearing on the matter. If the owner of the dog which is the subject of the complaint can be ascertained with due diligence, said owner shall be provided with a written notice of the time, date and place of hearing and a copy of the complaint.

(c)  If the dog is found to have bitten the victim without provocation, the Selectboard shall make such order for the protection of persons as the facts and circumstances of the case may require, including, without limitation that the dog is disposed of in a humane way, muzzled, chained, or confined. The order shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested to the owner. A person who, after receiving notice, fails to comply with the terms of the order shall be subject to the penalties provided in 20 V.S.A. § 3550.

(d)  The procedures provided in this section shall only apply if the dog is not a rabies suspect. If a member of the Selectboard or a municipal official designated by the Selectboard determines that the dog is a rabies suspect, the provisions of Subchapter 5 of Title 20 Chapter 193 and the rules of the Vermont Department of Health shall apply. If the dog is deemed healthy, the terms and conditions set forth in the Selectboard's order shall be enforced.

(Ord. of 8-8-17)

Sec. 6-10.   Potentially vicious dogs.

A person claiming a dog is a "potentially vicious dog" may file a written complaint with the Selectboard. The complaint shall contain the time, date and place where the alleged behavior occurred, an identification of the domestic pet or animal threatened or attacked, the name and address of any victim or victims, and any other facts that may assist the Selectboard in conducting its hearing. The Chief of Police or his/her designee, upon discovery of a potentially vicious dog may also file a written complaint with the Selectboard of the municipality. Upon receipt of a "potentially vicious dog" complaint the Selectboard may proceed as in the case of a "vicious dog" complaint with the exception that if the Selectboard determines that the behavior classifies the dog as "potentially vicious" the Selectboard may order any protective measures be taken absent the dog being humanely destroyed.

(Ord. of 8-8-17)

 

FOOTNOTE(S):

--- (1) ---

Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Aug. 8, 2017 amended Ch. 6 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 6 was titled "Animals", consisted of §§ 6-1—6-12, and derived from an amendment adopted Apr. 27, 2010. (Back)

 
Chapter 7 FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION ORDINANCE [1]
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

ARTICLE II. - TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS

ARTICLE III. - FIRE ALARMS

ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL OPEN BURNING REQUIREMENTS

 

FOOTNOTE(S):

--- (1) ---

Editor's note— An ordinance adopted May 14, 2013, amended ch. 7 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 7 pertained to a similar matter, and derived from ordinances adopted Nov. 22, 2005; Oct. 28, 2008; and an amendment adopted Mar. 8, 2011. (Back)

ARTICLE I.   IN GENERAL
Sec. 7-1. Purpose.

Sec. 7-2. Definitions.

Sec. 7-3. Adoption of Fire and Life Safety Codes.

Sec. 7-4. Building Inspector appointment.

Sec. 7-5. Building Inspector duties and powers.

Sec. 7-6. Appeals.

Sec. 7-7. Penalty for violations.




Sec. 7-1.   Purpose.

This Article is to promote the health, safety, and general welfare for all those who live, work, visit, or invest in our community for the protection of life, property and the environment.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 7-2.   Definitions.

For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

(a)  Building Inspector (BI) shall mean the person duly appointed under Colchester Code of Ordinances Sections 7-4 and 4-4 or the Assistant Building Inspector.

(b)  Fire Chief (FC) shall mean the Chief Engineer of the Colchester Center Volunteer Fire Company or the Malletts Bay Fire Department.

(c)  Fire Warden shall mean the person duly appointed by the Selectboard.

(d)  Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ) shall be the BI and FCs with final sign-off by the BI and further subject to provisions of subsection 7-5(d).

(e)  ISO shall mean the Insurance Services Organization.

(f)  NFPA shall mean the National Fire Protection Association.

(g)  Private driveway, Type I shall bean driveways serving one (1) residential dwelling unit that are less than fifty (50) feet in length.

(h)  Private driveway, Type II shall mean driveways, excluding Type I, service four (4) or less residential dwelling units.

(i)  Private driveway, Type III shall mean driveways, excluding Type I and II, that are less than three hundred (300) feet long, are not public roads, and do not serve residential dwelling units.

(j)  Private roads shall mean all driveways, excluding private driveways, Type I, II, and III that are not public roads.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 7-3.   Adoption of Fire and Life Safety Codes.

(a)  Pursuant to Section 103 of the Town of Colchester Municipal Charter, and pursuant to Title 24, Chapter 83, Sections 3101 and Title 24, Chapter 59, Section 1971 of the Vermont Statutes Annotated (V.S.A), the Town of Colchester, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the prevention of fires, removal of fire hazards, prescribing standards necessary to protect the public, employees and property against harm arising out of or likely to arise out of fire, and to promote public safety hereby adopts the herein listed standards.

(b)  The "Vermont Fire and Building Safety Code" and the International Residential Code exempting Section P2904 as amended from time to time are herein adopted. Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, provision or phrase of these Vermont Fire and Building Safety Code be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other portion of these regulations, except those portions pertaining to the section in question.

(c)  Conflict with other regulations or private restrictions. The provisions of these regulations shall not be construed to abrogate or annul the provisions of other ordinances or regulations or to impair private restrictions placed upon property. Where these regulations impose a greater restriction upon land, buildings, or structures than is imposed by any such provision, the restrictions of these regulations shall control.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 7-4.   Building Inspector appointment.

The Building Inspector (BI) and Assistant Building Inspector(s) (ABI) shall be appointed by the Town Manager. The Assistant Building Inspector's powers and duties equal those of the Building Inspector. Whenever the BI is designated in this Code, the ABI may fill the same description.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 7-5.   Building Inspector duties and powers.

The BI and the ABI are hereby authorized, empowered, and required to enforce all provisions of this Code. The BI shall administer the provisions of this Code relating to the issuance and enforcement of permits as herein—after provided and as provided in Title 24, Chapter 83 of the V.S.A.

(a)  The BI shall review applications as required by Chapter 4 of the Colchester Code of Ordinances, Building Code and Building Construction Ordinance for compliance with this Code herein.

(b)  The BI shall receive applications required by this Code, issue permits and furnish the prescribed certificates in accordance with this Code. The BI shall keep records of applications, permits issued, certificates issued, inspections made, reports rendered and notices or orders issued. All such records shall be open to public inspection.

(c)  The BI shall perform investigations in the enforcement and administration of this Code. The BI shall conduct inspections of premises to ensure that the rules set forth herein and in 24 V.S.A. Chapter 83 are being observed. The BI shall issue such written reports or orders as may be necessary to enforce compliance with this Code. The BI may establish priorities for enforcing the rules based on the relative risks to persons and property from fire. The BI may accept reports of inspectors or recognized inspection services, after investigation of their qualifications and reliability.

(d)  The Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ) shall be the BI and FCs. The BI shall have final sign off power. If there is a disagreement, the BI and FCs shall consult with the Vermont Division of Fire Safety for the State's position. If there is still a disagreement, it shall be decided by the Town Manager.

(e)  Open burning shall be prohibited within Colchester except as permitted in subsection 7-14(e).

(f)  In the course of enforcement of this Code, if the BI finds that a structure, building, facility, or construction does not meet the standards found in this Code or in 24 V.S.A. Chapter 83, the BI may issue an order to cease and vacate a structure, building, facility, or construction, or the BI may issue an order to repair or rehabilitate a structure, building, facility, or construction. With the exception of unsafe facilities discussed in subsection 7-5(g) below, such order shall not be issued by the BI until the party in violation of this Code has been provided notification of said violation and granted a period of not less than seven (7) days to correct said violation.

Additionally, pursuant to Title 24, Chapter 59 of V.S.A., authority is granted to "Municipal Officials" for the Town of Colchester for the purpose of enforcing these Fire Prevention, Fire Protection, and Life Safety Regulations. Said Municipal Officials or Enforcement Officers shall possess all the authority granted such official in the enforcement of said regulations.

Town officers, upon being designated as Deputy Municipal Officials by the Town Manager, and subject to the overall direction of the BI, shall serve as Municipal Officials and shall possess all the authority of a Municipal Official in the enforcement of said regulations.

(g)  Vacating unsafe facilities. When a building, structure, or facility, or portion thereof, is determined by the BI to constitute an unsafe facility, building, or structure, the BI in consultation with the Police Department and the Public Works Department may order the closure of such facility and order occupants to immediately vacate the premises, if by doing so the public safety will not be imperiled. If public safety would be imperiled, the BI shall order demolition and removal of the structure, or fencing of the premises. Facility closure shall prohibit or otherwise restrict access to or use of an unsafe facility. Facility closure may include, but shall not be limited to: closure of public rights-of-way; closure of private ways; closure of buildings, structures, and facilities; and closure of areas adjacent to unsafe facilities. Such facilities may be partially or completely opened again at such time as deemed safe by the BI. The BI shall use all available media and means of communication to inform occupant(s) and/or the public of facility closure in a timely manner.

(h)  The BI shall adhere to all legal requirements and shall have benefit of all legal means of inspection now or hereafter required or available under law.

(i)  The AHJ shall review requests for waivers of the requirements of this Chapter. The AHJ shall grant such waivers if, in the opinion of the AHJ, strict compliance with the ordinance would entail practical difficulty, unnecessary hardship, or is otherwise found unwarranted, and granting the waiver would adequately secure the public safety and health. In granting such waivers, the AHJ shall have the authority to impose conditions requiring methods, means or practices to be taken in lieu of compliance with the waived provision(s) to provide protection of the public safety and health equal to that provided by the waived provision(s) of the ordinance. No waivers of this Chapter shall net be granted if such waiver would have the effect of waiving any requirement of the Vermont Fire and Building Safety Code.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 7-6.   Appeals.

Appeals in the case of the issuance of a ticket under Section 7-7 below shall be governed by the provisions of 4 V.S.A. Chapter 29 All other appeals shall be governed by 24 V.S.A. Chapter 83 and the following provisions:

(a)  Any interested person aggrieved by an order of the BI as the AHJ or by the Town Manager made in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter may appeal. Interested persons are persons aggrieved by the order on appeal and include, but are not limited to, the BI, the FC, the applicant, the person or entity owning title to property affected by the decision, and/or the aggrieved person's architect or builder.

(b)  At the discretion of the appellant, an appeal pursuant to this Section 7-6 may be taken to the Board of Arbitrators discussed in subsection (c) below or to the Criminal Division of the Vermont Superior Court. Such appeal shall be tiled within five (5) business days alter the receipt of the order being appealed. The taking of the appeal shall operate as a stay. The Board of Arbitrators or the Court shall have the power to annul, amend, modify, or affirm the order of the Building Inspector.

(c)  Should the appellant choose to appeal to a Board of Arbitrators, the appellant shall file with the BI a notice of appeal setting forth the reasons for the appeal by personal delivery or by leaving said notice of appeal at the office of the BI. A copy of said notice of appeal shall also be provided to the Town Clerk. The Board of Arbitrators shall be assembled and composed as described in 24 V.S.A. Section 3110. A decision of a majority of the Board of Arbitrators thus composed, when reduced to writing, sworn to and filed in the BI's office, shall be final and conclusive upon the parties. Upon the filing of such decision, work may be immediately resumed in accordance therewith. The expense of such arbitration shall be paid by the appellant.

(d)  Should the appellant choose to appeal to the Criminal Division of the Vermont Superior Court, the appellant shall file a complaint with the Court, and shall provide copies to the BI and the Town Clerk. Pursuant to 24 V.S.A. Section 3111, the Judge shall forthwith inquire into the facts or by a committee appointed by the Court, and make such order as it deems proper under the circumstances. In the Court's discretion, it may tax costs in favor of the prevailing party and issue execution therefore. Upon the entry of judgment, work may be immediately resumed in accordance therewith.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 7-7.   Penalty for violations.

A violation of these regulations shall constitute a civil ordinance violation. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Offenses may be prosecuted through the issuance of a Municipal Civil Complaint Ticket or the commencement of an enforcement action as described below.

(a)  Municipal Civil Complaint Ticket. Pursuant to 24 V.S.A. Chapter 59 and 4 V.S.A. Chapter 29, any designated Enforcement Officer, may commence prosecution for any violation of this Chapter 7 of the Code by serving two (2) copies of a Municipal Civil Complaint Ticket either in person or by first class mail on the alleged offender, and thereafter promptly filing the original with the Judicial Bureau. The issuing officer shall follow the procedure set forth by the Judicial Bureau for Municipal Complaint Tickets. The first offense ticketed for a violation shall be punishable by a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00), the waiver fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00); a second offense ticketed for the same violation shall be punishable by a fine of four hundred dollars ($400.00), the waiver fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00); a third offense ticketed for the same violation shall be punishable by a fine of eight hundred dollars ($800.00), the waiver fee shall be four hundred dollars ($400.00). Upon the fourth offense, the town may request that the case be transferred from the Judicial Bureau to any court of competent jurisdiction.

(b)  Violations by owners and others. The owner, or mortgagee, of a structure or premises which is in violation of this Chapter, and/or any other person who has assisted in the commission of such violation, shall each be subject to fines as herein provided.

(c)  Appropriate action. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the Town from instituting an appropriate action or proceeding to prevent an unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, or to prevent the occupancy of a structure or premises, or to prevent an illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about any premises.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

ARTICLE II.   TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS
Sec. 7-8. Fire Department access.

Sec. 7-9. Fire hydrants.

Sec. 7-10. Private driveways and roads requirements.

Sec. 7-11. Areas not served by the public water main distribution systems.




Sec. 7-8.   Fire Department access.

Means of access for Fire Department apparatus shall be provided to all structures and kept passable year round.

(a)  Fire access shall have minimum of twenty-four (24) feet of width for all structures requiring tower truck access. The lane shall be constructed so as to support a forty-thousand-pound vehicle however may be surfaced with pavement, gravel, paving blocks, and grass over a load bearing gravel layer.

(b)  The fire access shall be no closer than twenty (20) feet from the subject structure and no further than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the structure.

(c)  Turns in fire access shall be constructed with a minimum radius of twenty-five (25) feet at the inside curb/shoulder line and a minimum radius of fifty (50) feet at the outside curb/shoulder line.

(d)  At least thirteen (13) feet six (6) inches in overhead clearance shall be provided and maintained over full width of the fire lane.

(e)  Commercial structures, residential structures over three (3) units, and residential structures where the occupants generally can not self-evacuate shall require that the ninety-five-foot tower truck be able to adequately access the structure. Table I below shows the minimum requirements for tower truck accessibility based upon the use and structure height. In measuring accessibility, the tower truck shall be able to park within an approved fire access as specified herein and reach the top of its bucket/ladder level with the highest window, balcony, and floor. Percentages provided in Table I below are the percent of the total exterior facade that shall be accessible to the tower truck.

Table I: Structure Exterior Facade Accessibility

Stories*

Nonresidential
Class A

Residential
Class 8

Residential
Class C

1

50%

50%

50%

2

50%

50%

100%

3

75%

100%

100%

4 or more

100%

100%

100%

 

* Where one (1) story is considered to equal ten (10) vertical feet.

Class A: Commercial structures with no residential units.

Class B: Three (3) or more residential units where the occupants are generally able to self evacuate the building.

Class C: Facilities with three (3) or more residential units where the occupants are generally not able to self evacuate the structure including, but not limited to, nursing homes.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 7-9.   Fire hydrants.

Hydrants shall be installed in accordance with the Colchester Department of Public Works Specifications and Standards. Hydrants for commercial structures shall not exceed a distance of three hundred (300) feet of distance over the roadway from a hydrant to the structure unless a sprinkler system is installed. The minimum flow requirements for each commercial hydrant shall be one thousand (1,000) gallons per minute with a minimum residual pressure of twenty (20) pounds per square inch.

All hydrants shall be equipped with a four-inch STORZ Fire Department Connection (FDC). Where a Fire Department Connection (FDC) is present, an additional hydrant shall be installed by the property owner within seventy-five (75) feet of the FDC.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 7-10.   Private driveways and roads requirements.

This Section pertains to parcels that use or intend to use a private driveway or road to provide access. Each of the following conditions must be met prior to occupancy:

(a)  The length of a private driveway, for the purpose of this Code shall be the distance measured along the centerline of the driveway from the curb cut in the public road to the subject structure. If the private driveway does not extend to the structure, the length of a private driveway is measured along the centerline of the driveway from the curb cut in the public road to fifty (50) feet from the subject structure.

(b)  A private driveway shall be extended to, at minimum, within fifty (50) feet of the structure served.

(c)  All private driveways, excepting private driveways Type I, shall have at least six-foot wide zone on each side of the driveway clear of encumbrances such as trees, structure, and rocks for plowed snow storage area on each side. In driveways under fifty (50) feet and driveways serving commercial structures, designated snow storage areas shall be permissible in lieu of the six-foot wide zone.

(d)  Every private driveway in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet in length shall be provided with approved provisions for the turning around (see Figure 3.5 and 3.6 of the Colchester Public Works Specifications and Standards for dimensional requirements for a turn around).

(e)  A private driveway shall have a minimum of thirteen and one-half-foot height clearance.

(f)  All private driveways, excepting private driveways Type I, shall be constructed so as to support a forty-thousand-pound vehicle.

(g)  All private driveways shall meet the following dimensional requirements unless waived by the AHJ:

Type

Minimum Width

Private driveway Type I

10 feet

Private driveway Type II > 50 feet but
< 300 feet in length

15 feet

Private roads Type II > 300 feet in length

20 feet

Private driveway Type III

20 feet

Private road

Per the requirement of Colchester Code of Ordinance Chapter 14, Public Works Specifications and Standards for roadway design standards as amended from time to time

 

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 7-11.   Areas not served by the public water main distribution systems.

For areas of the Town not served by municipal water mains and their attendant hydrants residential units, excluding developments of up to four (4) single-family or duplex structures within a ten-year period, will be required to construct and maintain an alternative water source in compliance with NFPA 1142 or an approved NFPA 13D sprinkler system for each unit. Once a development exceeds four (4) units within ten (10) years, each unit thereafter shall be required to construct and maintain an approved NFPA 13D sprinkler system with the original four (4) units exempted from sprinklers. The presence of a nearby private hydrant and water reservoir serving a separate private facility will not constitute fire protection for a nearby proposed development.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

ARTICLE III.   FIRE ALARMS
Sec. 7-12. Fire alarms.




Sec. 7-12.   Fire alarms.

Deliberate damage to, or disabling a fire alarm system or any components thereof is prohibited and fines may be levied by the BI in accordance with Section 7-7 of the Colchester Code of Ordinances, "Penalty for Violations". The fine amounts shall be as defined in the Code of Ordinances unless a specific fine amount is included in the text of a specific section.

(a)  The building owner is at all times responsible for having the fire alarm system and all components operating correctly in accordance with the manufacturer's requirements and all applicable regulatory codes and standards.

(b)  Notification shall be transmitted to the Fire/Police Dispatch Center prior to any testing or maintenance that would result in the fire alarm system being disabled for any length of time. The BI may fine a building owner for a failure to make the necessary notification.

(c)  The fire alarm system and all its equipment shall be under full control of the Fire Department during a fire or a false alarm investigation. A person or employer who willingly resets or tampers with the fire alarm system at any time after activation of the alarm, without permission from the Fire Chief may be referred to the BI for enforcement action.

(d)  Noncompliance may result in fines, the immediate shut down of the facility, and the termination of the Certificate of Occupancy by the BI. Failure to remedy the violation in the time frame allotted by the BI may result in fines and shut down of the facility until a new Certificate of Occupancy can be obtained.

(e)  No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given a false alarm of fire, or cause a fire alarm to activate when no fire or smoke is present, or, after an alarm has been given, maliciously and/or falsely proclaim the fire to be extinguished.

(f)  Every person calling in an alarm of the fire shall forthwith give their name and address and a call back telephone number.

(g)  Buildings that are equipped with fire alarms systems shall be permitted two (2) false alarm calls within one (1) calendar month. The BI may fine the building owner the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each instance of a false alarm following the first two (2) false alarms within a calendar month. The owner may contest the fine and request a Court Hearing. The owner may elect to waive the Court Hearing and accept a waiver penalty of a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) fine.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

ARTICLE IV.   MUNICIPAL OPEN BURNING REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 7-13. Definitions.

Sec. 7-14. Open burning.




Sec. 7-13.   Definitions.

For the purposes of this Section on "open burning", the following definitions shall apply:

(a)  Air contaminants shall mean dust, fumes, mist, smoke, other particulate matter, vapor, gas, odorous substances or any combination thereof.

(b)  Emission shall mean a release of air contaminants.

(c)  Fuel shall mean any form of combustible matter, solid, liquid or gas used to produce heat, light, or power by burning, but excluding refuse. Fuel includes, but is not limited to, coal, coke, charcoal, natural gas, propane, gas, fuel oil and wood.

(d)  Open burning shall mean any burning that takes place other than in heating systems, cooking systems, candles or lamps, welding equipment, or burning authorized by specific permit.

(e)  Refuse shall mean all solid or liquid wastes, including, but not limited to, animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food; street cleanings; dead animals; abandoned automobiles; solid market and industrial wastes; paper; cardboard; tin cans; glass; bedding; crockery; plywood composite materials; dimensional lumber; pressure-treated materials; and other building materials.

(f)  Unsafe facilities shall mean buildings, structures, facilities or portions thereof, or areas of the Town deemed by Building Inspector or the Fire Chiefs to constitute: a fire hazard; unsuitable or improper for the use or occupancy to which they are put; constituting a hazard of health or safety because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment; presence of an imminent hazard or an ongoing event associated with features such as damaged or leaking underground gas mains, railroad cars, aircraft, automotive vehicles, and water craft; or other imminent danger to life or property.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 7-14.   Open burning.

(a)  No refuse, grass, leaves, or downed trees shall be burned.

(b)  All open burning shall be extinguished when not attended to.

(c)  No open burning shall occur within a fully enclosed structure.

(d)  The Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ), Fire Warden, or their designee may order any open burn to be extinguished if the AHJ judges the fire or the conditions under which the burning occurs is a threat to public safety or property.

(e)  All open burning shall require a permit obtainable at Police Dispatch except as herein specifically excluded:

(1)  The burning of fuels for cooking purposes;

(2)  Barbecue pits less than thirty (30) inches in diameter; or

(3)  Campfires and bonfires less than thirty (30) inches in diameter.

(f)  At the discretion of the Fire Warden, a permit may be issued for special occasions allowing bonfires greater than thirty (30) inches in diameter.

(g)  Open burning permits and fees. A specific permit may be granted by the Fire Warden or duly appointed designee to engage in open burning in accordance with the following:

(1)  No hazardous condition will be created by such burning and the emission of air contaminants will not create a danger to public safety and health. Permits shall be for specified days, specified location, and for a specified material. The hours within which said burning may take place may be specified on the permit.

(2)  Open burning of leafless brush four (4) inches or less in diameter shall be permitted if the outermost edge of the burning site is:

a.  At least one hundred fifty (150) feet or more from the closest dwelling located in the vicinity of, but not including, the permit holder's dwelling during the months of January and February.

b.  At least (300) feet or more from the nearest dwelling located in the vicinity of, but not including, the permit holder's dwelling during the remainder of the year.

All distances shall be measured from the outermost edge of the burning site in a straight line to the nearest point on the closest dwelling. The minimum distances imposed in subsections (g)(2)a. and (g)(2)b. shall not limit the Fire Warden from imposing greater distances between the site and any structure as a permit condition under subsection (g)(1).

(h)  A violation of this Section shall constitute a civil ordinance violation as described in Sections 7-6 (Appeals) and 7-7 (Penalty for Violations) of this Chapter. In addition to the procedures contained in Sections 7-6 and 7-7, the following shall apply to any civil violation under this Section:

(1)  Any person who violates a provision of this Section 7-14 shall be subject to fees as described in subsection (h)(2). The BI, the ABI or Law Enforcement Officers shall be authorized to act as Issuing Municipal Officials to issue a Municipal Complaint under this Section 7-14.

(2)  Fee schedule:

a.  First offense: Two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus Fire Department expense up to five hundred dollars ($500.00). The waiver fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense.

b.  Second offense: Four hundred dollars ($400.00) plus Fire Department expense up to five hundred dollars ($500.00). The waiver fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense.

c.  Third offense: Eight hundred dollars ($800.00) plus Fire Department expense up to five hundred dollars ($500.00). The waiver fee shall be four hundred dollars ($400.00) for the third offense.

d.  Upon the fourth offense, the Town may request that the case be transferred from the Judicial Bureau to any other Court of Competent Jurisdiction.

(3)  Offenses shall be counted on a calendar year basis.

(4)  In addition to the enforcement procedures available before the Judicial Bureau as described in subsection 7-7(a), the Town Manager or designee is authorized to commence a civil action to obtain injunctive and other appropriate relief, or to pursue any other remedy authorized by law.

(Ord. of 5-14-13; Ord. of 11-13-18)

Chapter 8 ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL AND POTABLE WATER SUPPLY REGULATIONS [1]
Sec. 8-1. Short title.

Sec. 8-2. Adoption of on-site wastewater disposal and potable water supply regulations.

Sec. 8-3. Applicability of regulations.

Sec. 8-4. Definitions.

Sec. 8-5. Performance standards.

Sec. 8-6. Procedure for application for permit.

Sec. 8-7. Innovative/alternative systems and products.

Sec. 8-8. Land development.

Sec. 8-9. Potable water supply.

Sec. 8-10. Reconsideration, revocation and declaratory rulings.

Sec. 8-11. Inspection.

Sec. 8-12. Existing facilities.

Sec. 8-13. Penalty for violations and enforcement.




Sec. 8-1.   Short title.

This Chapter shall be known as the "Colchester On-Site Sewage Disposal and Potable Water Supply Regulations."

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 8-2.   Adoption of on-site wastewater disposal and potable water supply regulations.

(a)  As of December 13, 2005, the Town of Colchester is a "Delegated Municipality" pursuant to the State Wastewater System and Potable Water Supply Rules, Subchapter 7—Delegation (effective January 1, 2005). As such, the Town will be issuing all permits required under the State Wastewater System and Potable Water Supply Rules in accordance with those rules. For the purposes of the State program the Town has been delegated, the only exceptions under the State rules that will be recognized by the Town are those for projects that qualified for them before the date of delegation and the exemptions six (6) through twenty-two (22) as codified in Section 1-304 of the Environmental Protection Rules:

(b)  Except as specified in paragraph (a) of this Section, permits will be required by the Town for all projects except under the State rules.

(c)  Notwithstanding the State delegation, all permits issued under the local permit program requirements of Colchester's Code of Ordinance—Chapter 8 continue to remain in effect unless or until they are amended under the State delegated program.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 8-3.   Applicability of regulations.

No individual subsurface sewage disposal system, no shared or community subsurface sewage disposal system, shall be built, altered, or used except in accordance with these regulations, and only after a permit has been issued by Wastewater Official.

Where a municipal sanitary sewer is not available for connection from a building, and a sewage treatment facility involving an effluent to waters of the State is not available, the building sewer shall be connected to a subsurface sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of these regulations and any other applicable regulations.

In the case of any other applicable regulations, by-law, ordinance or statute which differs from the requirements hereof, the more strict shall apply.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 8-4.   Definitions.

For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless their context clearly requires otherwise:

Shoreline means the line defined by the intersection of the water level with those lands adjacent to Lake Champlain, Colchester Pond, and the Winooski and Lamoille Rivers. Measurements required for isolation from the shoreline shall be made from the normal high water mark.

Wastewater Official means the legally designated on-site septic authority of the Town of Colchester or their authorized representative, as designated by the Town Manager. The Wastewater Official shall serve as Sewage Officer as defined in State Wastewater System and Potable Water Supply Rules. Additionally, under and pursuant to the authority granted by 24 V.S.A., Chapter 59 to "Municipal Officials," the Wastewater Official shall serve as the "Municipal Official" or "Enforcement Officer" for the Town for the purpose of enforcing these On-Site Sewage and Potable Water Supply Regulations, and shall possess all the authority granted such official in the enforcement of said regulations. Town Officers, upon being designated as Deputy Municipal Officials by the Town Manager, and subject to the overall direction of, the Wastewater Official, shall serve as Municipal Officials and shall possess all the authority of a Municipal Official in the enforcement of said regulations.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 8-5.   Performance standards.

The purpose of these regulations is to prevent health hazards and environmental damage caused by the improper treatment and disposal of wastewater. Individual, on-site wastewater treatment and disposal systems shall be designed, constructed and operated so as to:

(1)  Prevent the creation of health hazards; and

(2)  Prevent surfacing sewage or the pollution or contamination of drinking water supplies, groundwater and surface water; and

(3)  Insure the provision of adequate drainage as related to the proper functioning of sewage disposal; and

(4)  Insure that facilities are designed and constructed in a manner which will promote sanitary and healthful conditions during operation and maintenance.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 8-6.   Procedure for application for permit.

The application requirements are specified in Section 1-302 of the "Environmental Protection Rules". The applicant may elect to submit the application on the municipal application form or to use the current Agency of Natural Resources, Department of Environmental Conservation, Wastewater Management Division (ANR, DEC, WWMD) application form.

If the ANR application form is used it must be accompanied by a cover letter stating that the document is being submitted for review by the Town. It is the intent of the Town to simplify the process so that one (1) identical application may be submitted for a parcel that currently requires approval from the Town and the State.

In those cases where there is a lease parcel, the property owner is the applicant, the property owner or their duly certified representative must sign the application. The Town may require a copy of the document certifying that a representative has the authority to sign for the parcel owner. The lease holder of the lease parcel may be a signatory party to the application under terms of the lease between these two (2) parties. From the State and Town point of view, the property owner is the responsible party for the permitted on-site sewage disposal and potable water system.

No person shall design a potable water supply or wastewater system that requires a permit under this Chapter without first obtaining a designer license from the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources.

All fees for permits shall be paid at the time of application in accordance with Chapter 6 of the Colchester Code of Ordinances as permitted by Section 1-604 of the EPR.

(Ord. of 5-14-14)

Sec. 8-7.   Innovative/alternative systems and products.

Only those innovative/alternative systems and products approved for use by the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources shall be eligible for use in the Town.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 8-8.   Land development.

Not withstanding any other provisions set forth in the Environmental Protection Rules, these regulations shall apply to all land development as defined as follows: "land development" means any change in the use of any building or other structure, any construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure, which alters or increases water and/or sewage flows.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 8-9.   Potable water supply.

(a)  A municipal potable water supply development permit is required prior to drilling or otherwise constructing a new potable water supply.

(b)  All new potable water supplies must meet the technical construction standards of the Vermont "Water Supply Rules".

(c)  Existing water supplies such as lake withdrawal, springs, dug wells, shallow drilled wells, and deep drilled wells that have been superseded by an approved potable water source such as a municipal water main connection or a drilled well are considered abandoned water supplies and will not be recognized as "protected water sources". Permit conditions will require that these sources be dismantled or sealed.

(d)  Existing wells used for both domestic potable water consumption and for agricultural purposes such as livestock watering and irrigation that have been partially replaced by a new potable water source may continue in use if the property owner demonstrates that there are no cross-connections between the systems.

(e)  Under no circumstances may there be a cross-connection between a municipal water main and any water supply, or water supply system, that is not under the control of the entity supplying the municipal potable water.

(f)  Under no circumstances may there be a cross-connection between an approved potable water supply and a non-approved potable water supply.

(g)  Existing or new water supply systems that do not meet either the referenced technical standards or the municipal permit requirements will not necessarily receive regulatory acknowledgement or protection.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 8-10.   Reconsideration, revocation and declaratory rulings.

Appeals in the case of the issuance of a ticket under Section 8-14 below shall be governed by the provisions of 4 V.S.A. Chapter 29. All other requests for reconsideration, declaratory rulings, and revocation per subchapter 4 of the State Wastewater System and Potable Water Supply Rules appeals shall be governed by the following provisions:

(1)  The Selectboard shall act as Secretary and Commissioner. The Director of Planning and Zoning shall act as Director of the Division. The Wastewater Official shall act as Regional Office Programs Manager.

(2)  An interested party may request that the Wastewater Official reconsider or revoke an approved permit in accordance with the State Wastewater System and Potable Water Supply Rules.

(3)  In the case of declaratory rulings, the Selectboard shall take into consideration due advice from the State Agency of Natural Resources and the Wastewater Official.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 8-11.   Inspection.

No underground piping, septic tank or leaching facilities shall be covered until they have been inspected and approved for covering by the On-Site Sewage Official or their authorized agent. No building requiring subsurface sewage disposal facilities shall be occupied until such facilities have been certified by the On-Site Sewage Official as being in compliance with these regulations. The Wastewater Official may waive the requirement for an inspection by his or her office.

The certification described in Section 1-303(c) of the EPR is required unless the On-Site Sewage Official provides a written waiver stating otherwise.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 8-12.   Existing facilities.

Where a sewage system exists prior to the effective date of this regulation, and the Wastewater Official determines that it is creating a health hazard or health nuisance the Wastewater Official shall advise the owner (or lessee) of the inadequate sewage system and, when necessary, shall issue a written order for compliance with these regulations. The owner (or lessee) shall submit a proposed modification to the system to the On-Site Sewage Official for review and approval, in accordance with the application procedure outlined in these regulations.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

Sec. 8-13.   Penalty for violations and enforcement.

The Wastewater Official may initiate enforcement in accordance with Subchapter 4, Section 1-405, of the State Wastewater System and Potable Water Supply Rules. Additionally, pursuant to 24 V.S.A. Chapter 59 and 4 V.S.A. Chapter 29, any designated Enforcement Officer, as referenced in Appendix B, Section 1902, may commence prosecution for any zoning violation by serving two (2) copies of a Municipal Civil Complaint Ticket either in person or by first class mail on the alleged offender, and thereafter promptly filing the original with the Judicial Bureau. The Issuing Officer shall follow the procedure set forth by the Judicial Bureau for municipal complaint tickets. The first offense ticketed for a violation shall be punishable by a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00), the waiver fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00); a second offense ticketed for the same violation shall be punishable by a fine of four hundred dollars ($400.00), the waiver fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00); a third offense ticketed for the same violation shall be punishable by a fine of eight hundred dollars ($800.00), the waiver fee shall be four hundred dollars ($400.00). Upon the fourth offense, the Town may request that the case be transferred from the Judicial Bureau to the Environmental Court, or any other Court of Competent Jurisdiction. A violation of these Regulations shall constitute a civil ordinance violation. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.

(Ord. of 5-14-13)

 

FOOTNOTE(S):

--- (1) ---

Editor's note— An ordinance adopted May 14, 2013, amended Ch. 8 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 8 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from ordinances adopted Feb. 24, 2004; June 17, 2007; and July 24, 2012. (Back)

Chapter 9 OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURES AND FEES FOR CONTROL AND CONTAINMENT OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS

ARTICLE III. - REGULATING CONDUCT IN COLCHESTER PARKS

ARTICLE IV. - FALSE ALARMS

ARTICLE I.   IN GENERAL
Sec. 9-1. Hauling and dumping rubbish.

Sec. 9-2. Dumping ice and snow in public areas.

Sec. 9-3. Use of firearms regulated.

Sec. 9-4. Panhandling.

Secs. 9-5—9-14. Reserved.




Sec. 9-1.   Hauling and dumping rubbish.

(a)  Covers required. No person shall convey upon any public highway of the Town at any time in any truck, wagon, cart or other vehicle any ashes, refuse, rubbish, waste or other discarded materials of any type whatsoever unless such vehicle, during such conveyance of such materials or matter is covered by a canvas tarpaulin or other suitable material of such character as to effectively prevent the emission of offensive or noxious odors from the materials or matter conveyed and unless such covering is fastened to such vehicle so as to prevent the falling or dripping of the load or any part thereof upon the highway.

(b)  Compliance prerequisite to dumping. No person who has not complied with subsection (a) of this section shall dump, discard or otherwise dispose of any ashes, refuse, rubbish, waste, discarded materials or other matter of any type whatsoever at the sanitary land fill area.

(c)  Violation; penalty. Any person found to have violated this section shall be fined pursuant to Chapter 1, Section 1-9. If any violation continues, each day's violation shall be deemed a separate violation.

(Ord. of 3-12-68, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 9-10-96)

Sec. 9-2.   Dumping ice and snow in public areas.

(a)  Placing prohibited without permission. No person, by his/her own act, or through his/her agents or employees, shall throw, put, place, push, or otherwise deposit snow, or ice, in the following public areas without the written permission of the manager or his/her designated representatives:

(1)  On the paved or travelled portion of any public street;

(2)  On any Town sidewalk.

(b)  Restrictions may accompany permission. In granting written permission under the previous section, the Manager or his/her representatives may impose such restrictions as are necessary to protect the safety and welfare of the public, and such permission may be revoked at any time.

(c)  Violations; penalty. Any person who shall violate this section or the restrictions imposed by the written permission of the manager or his/her agent shall, upon conviction, be fined pursuant to Chapter 1, Section 1-9, and each twenty-four (24) hours continuance of such violation shall be deemed a separate offense.

(Ord. of 11-9-71, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 9-10-96)

Sec. 9-3.   Use of firearms regulated.

(a)  Definitions.

(1)  Firearm means a mechanical device from which a projectile is forced through and discharged from a metal tube by exploding gunpowder.

(2)  Shotgun means a firearm specifically designed to use shotgun shells containing birdshot, buckshot, or a single projectile.

(3)  Rifle means a firearm that has a rifled barrel that is held against the shoulder when shot.

(4)  Muzzle loader means a firearm that loads from the muzzle and uses black powder or black powder substitute.

(5)  Handgun means a small firearm (such as a revolver or a pistol) designed to be held and shot with one (1) hand.

(6)  Birdshot/Buckshot means a shell loaded with at least three (3) metal pellets called shot.

(b)  Restricted firearms use in certain areas. The following areas of the Town are restricted to the use and discharge of a firearm for hunting purposes using birdshot or buckshot only. No person may shoot or discharge any other firearm into or within a restricted use area.

(1)  All zoning areas within these boundaries:

a.  West of a line from Lake Champlain to Prim Road, Bean Road, and Parsons Road to the Winooski River.

b.  An area bounded by a line north from Prim Road to Lake Champlain, along the shore line to Mallett's Creek, east to Interstate 89, south to Blakely Road, west along Blakely Road and West Lakeshore Drive to Prim Road.

c.  From Interstate 89 to Route 7 between Creek Farm Road and Bay Road.

(2)  The areas zoned Residential 1 within these boundaries:

a.  From Severance Road to the Winooski city line between Route 7 and Essex town line.

(3)  The areas zoned Residential 2 within these boundaries:

a.  The area between Blakely Road, Malletts Bay Avenue and Lavigne Road.

(4)  The areas zoned Residential 3 within these boundaries:

a.  South of a line from Abigail Drive and the Winooski River to the Winooski city line.

b.  South of Blakely Road and Severance Road to the Winooski/South Burlington city lines between Interstate 89 to the Essex town line.

c.  From Bay Road to Blakely Road between Interstate 89 to Route 7 and Poor Farm Road.

d.  From Route 2a to Pond Brook between East Road and Middle Road.

e.  From Route 2a to Indian Brook between Mill Pond Road and the Essex town line.

(5)  All areas zoned Mobile Home Park.

(6)  All areas zoned General Development 2.

(7)  All areas zoned Business District from Severance Road to Winooski city line between Route 7 and the Essex town line.

(8)  All areas zoned Commercial from Malletts Bay Avenue and Lavigne Road to the Essex town line between Blakely Road and Severance Road to the Winooski city line.

(c)  Limited firearms use in certain areas. The following areas of the Town are limited to the use and discharge of a muzzle loaded firearm, handgun or a shotgun using birdshot, buckshot or slug for hunting purposes. No person may shoot or discharge any other firearm into or within a limited use area.

(1)  The area zoned General Development 3 south of Severance Road to Sunderland Hollow Natural Area and between Route 7 and the Essex town line.

(2)  The areas zoned Residential 1, General Development 3 and Business District south of Blakely Road to Interstate 89 and between Route 7 and Interstate 89.

(d)  Winooski Valley Park District and other nonprofit organizations reserve the right to regulate the discharge of firearms on property under their control.

(e)  The use of all firearms in Colchester Town Parks will be regulated by Article III, Section 9-40, Regulating Conduct in Colchester Parks.

Certain uses excepted:

(1)  Nothing shall prevent owners of land from the use of firearms to protect their lands or other property from damage being caused by wild animals or for other reasons which are otherwise lawful.

(2)  Nothing in this section shall prevent police officers from the use of firearms in performance of their legal duties.

(3)  Firing ranges in conformance with zoning regulations and State law are excluded from provisions of this section.

Firarm Use Restrictions Map

(Ord. of 4-11-80, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 3-5-91; Ord. of 11-12-91; Ord. of 5-26-15)

Sec. 9-4.   Panhandling.

It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in panhandling if it involves any of the following conduct:

(a)  Panhandling in a manner that is threatening, intimidating, coercive or obscene;

(b)  Intentionally touching or grabbing the person being solicited;

(c)  Directing fighting words at the person being solicited;

(d)  Intentionally obstructing free passage of cyclists and pedestrians on public sidewalks and paths; or

(e)  Intentionally obstructing, impeding, or otherwise making unsafe the flow of traffic.

Nothing in this section is intended to violate an individual's right of free speech under the First Amendment.

(Ord. of 12-8-15)

Secs. 9-5—9-14.   Reserved.

ARTICLE II.   PROCEDURES AND FEES FOR CONTROL AND CONTAINMENT OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS [1]
Sec. 9-15. Authority.

Sec. 9-16. General purposes.

Sec. 9-17. Application.

Sec. 9-18. Definitions.

Sec. 9-19. Duties of person in possession.

Sec. 9-20. Control, containment and clean up.

Sec. 9-21. Costs.

Sec. 9-22. Use of costs and fees collected.

Sec. 9-23. Enforcement.

Secs. 9-24—9-29. Reserved.




Sec. 9-15.   Authority.

This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the Town by Section 103(a) and Section 104(5) of the Colchester Town Charter as enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Vermont, March 5, 1985.

(Ord. of 11-13-90, § 1)

Sec. 9-16.   General purposes.

It is the purpose of this article to provide for the orderly and expeditious control and clean-up of any hazardous materials which may escape from the control of the person or persons having possession of them, and thereby pose a threat to the Town. Further, it is the purpose of this article to require that any person possessing any such hazardous material shall compensate the Town for all services provided in relation to the control and clean-up of such material, and to reimburse the Town for any costs or damages, direct or indirect, incurred by the Town as a result of its effort to contain, control or clean up such hazardous material.

(Ord. of 11-13-90, § 2)

Sec. 9-17.   Application.

This article applies to all incidents involving hazardous materials within the boundaries of the Town, and to all persons who may possess such materials found within the boundaries of the Town, except as State or Federal law and/or regulation may take precedence and authority over any such incident or person. This article shall be in addition to any and all provisions of said State or Federal law and/or regulation.

(Ord. of 11-13-90, § 3)

Sec. 9-18.   Definitions.

For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the following meanings:

Hazardous materials. Those substances, materials or agents in such quantity, state and form as may constitute a potential risk to the health and safety of the people and environment of the Town and which may constitute a threat to the property of the people, including, without limitation, the following, explosives, radioactive materials, etiologic agents, flammable materials, combustible materials, poisons, oxidizing or corrosive materials, and compressed gases. Also any other materials listed as hazardous by the Office of Hazardous Materials Safety of the United States Department of Transportation in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as amended, or those materials the disposal of which is regulated under 9 V.S.A. Section 2821 et seq., 10 V.S.A. Section 6601 et seq., and 10 V.S.A. Section 7001 et seq.

Person. Any individual, corporation or other entity having the recognized legal status of a person (i.e. association), or any partnership, trust or other legal entity as distinguished from the individual members thereof.

Possession. To possess, own, hold or have within his/her or its control any material defined as hazardous. In the case of any corporation or other legal entity, in addition to the entity itself, its officers, directors or other natural persons having legal responsibility for the control of such entity shall be deemed to be in possession. It is the intention of this article to include within the concept "person in possession" not only the legal owner but also any and all other persons who may at any time come within the chain of control without regard to the issue of legal title. Person in possession shall include not only the owner but any agent, consignee, employee, contractor or representative within a chain of control.

(Ord. of 11-13-90, § 4)

Sec. 9-19.   Duties of person in possession.

The person or persons in possession of any hazardous material shall have the duty to prevent its discharge or release and to assure that any such material is used in a manner which will prevent its escape from safe containment. No person in possession shall discharge, dump, deposit, release or dispose of any hazardous material within the Town. In the event of the discharge or release of any hazardous material from safe containment, the person in possession at the time of discharge shall immediately report the same to the Colchester Police Department.

(Ord. of 11-13-90, § 5)

Sec. 9-20.   Control, containment and clean up.

The Town shall promptly respond to each such reported incident and shall take such action as is necessary to protect public health, safety, welfare, property and environment. The primary goals of the Town shall be to bring the material under control in safe containment and to minimize the damage caused by such material.

(Ord. of 11-13-90, § 6)

Sec. 9-21.   Costs.

The person or persons in possession of any hazardous material shall pay a response fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) and in addition shall be strictly liable to the Town for all costs incurred by the Town in the control, containment and clean-up of the materials which may have been discharged or released. If such material was possessed by more than one (1) person, then all shall be jointly and severally liable and the costs incurred by the Town may be recovered from any one (1) of them by suit brought in any court of competent jurisdiction.

(Ord. of 11-13-90, § 7)

Sec. 9-22.   Use of costs and fees collected.

All costs and fees collected under this article shall be placed in a special hazardous materials account and expended by the Town Manager in accordance to the policies and limits established by the Selectboard.

(Ord. of 11-13-90, § 8)

Sec. 9-23.   Enforcement.

The Town Manager shall be responsible for administering and enforcing this article.

(Ord. of 11-13-90, § 9)

Secs. 9-24—9-29.   Reserved.

 

FOOTNOTE(S):

--- (1) ---

Editor's note— Being not specifically amendatory of the Code, the provisions enacted by §§ 1—9 of a Nov. 13, 1990, ordinance have been incorporated herein as Art. II to Ch. 9, §§ 9-15—9-23, at the editor's discretion. (Back)

ARTICLE III.   REGULATING CONDUCT IN COLCHESTER PARKS [2]
Sec. 9-30. Purpose and authority.

Sec. 9-31. Definitions.

Sec. 9-32. Park hours and closures.

Sec. 9-33. Buildings and other property.

Sec. 9-34. Park usage.

Sec. 9-35. Use of cameras and recording devices.

Sec. 9-36. Authority to rent or lease parks and equipment.

Sec. 9-37. Fees.

Sec. 9-38. Reserved areas.

Sec. 9-39. Permit system.

Sec. 9-40. Picketing or demonstrations.

Sec. 9-41. Commercial activities.

Sec. 9-42. Noise and amplified sound.

Sec. 9-43. Fireworks and explosives.

Sec. 9-44. Litter.

Sec. 9-45. Distribution of printed material.

Sec. 9-46. Motor vehicles and bicycles.

Sec. 9-47. Parking.

Sec. 9-48. Aircraft and radio-controlled devices.

Sec. 9-49. Firearms and other weapons.

Sec. 9-50. Metal detectors.

Sec. 9-51. Abandoned property.

Sec. 9-52. Pets.

Sec. 9-53. Swimming and wading.

Sec. 9-54. Boating and fishing.

Sec. 9-55. Camping and overnight use.

Sec. 9-56. Fires and firewood.

Sec. 9-57. Personal risk in natural areas.

Sec. 9-58. Natural resource protection and preservation.

Sec. 9-59. Pollution of waters.

Sec. 9-60. Smoking.

Sec. 9-61. Drug and alcohol use.

Sec. 9-62. Enforcement.

Secs. 9-63—9-70. Reserved.




Sec. 9-30.   Purpose and authority.

The purpose of this article is to ensure all Colchester residents that the Town parks will be clean, safe and enjoyable places for people to engage in the recreation pursuits of their choice, and to protect the peace, order, health, safety, comfort, protection, morality, and general welfare of the Town and of its citizens. Because recreation is different things to different people, the following regulations have been developed to facilitate the use of parks for active and passive, scheduled and spontaneous, group and individual recreation activities. This article is adopted pursuant to 24 V.S.A. Ch. 61, Section 103(b), and Sections 105 et seq. of the Colchester Town Charter.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-31.   Definitions.

As used in the article, the following terms shall have the following meanings ascribed to them:

(a)  Town: Town of Colchester, Vermont.

(b)  Department: Colchester Parks and Recreation Department.

(c)  Director: The Director of the Colchester Parks and Recreation Department, or his/her designee.

(d)  Fireworks: The term "fireworks" means any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, including blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, or toy guns in which explosives are used, balloons that are propelled by explosives, firecrackers, torpedoes, sky rockets, Roman candles, cherry bombs, or other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound, or any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance, except sparklers.

(e)  Manager: Town of Colchester Town Manager, or his/her designee.

(f)  Motor vehicle: Any wheeled conveyance (except a wheelchair) for transportation of persons or materials whether powered or drawn by motor such as an automobile, truck, golf cart, recreational vehicle, motorcycle or scooter. "Vehicle" does not include any Town of Colchester fleet or emergency vehicles operating in the course of public safety or official Town of Colchester business.

(g)  Park/park property: May include, but is not limited to, parks, open space, greenspace, natural areas, cultural and historic sites, playgrounds, ball fields, pools, pavilions, greenways, wetlands, floodplains, lakes, rivers, beaches or water areas, and buildings and structures which are under the control of or assigned for inspection, upkeep, maintenance or operation by the Department.

(h)  Permit: A document provided by the Department granting permission for use of reserved park property and which sets forth terms and conditions applicable thereto.

(i)  Person: Any person, firm, association, joint venture, partnership, company, corporation, entity or organization of any kind.

(j)  Pet: Any domesticated animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.

(k)  Plant: Any tree, vine, shrub, flower, fungi or related living organism.

(l)  Special event: Any organized activity open to the public, taking place on park property and having as its purpose entertainment, recreation and/or education, such as a festival or celebration, foot or vehicle race, parade or concert.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-32.   Park hours and closures.

(a)  All parks shall be open to the public during designated hours. The opening and closing hours shall be posted at each park in order to give notice to the public.

(b)  No person shall enter or remain on park property during hours when the park is closed. The provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency personnel or department employees while in the discharge of their duties, or to any person having permission by the Director to be or remain in any part of the parks between such hours.

(c)  In the interest of public safety, the Director may close parks or areas within parks to public entry or otherwise restrict use until such time as the area can be made available for safe public use. Except in emergency circumstances, notice of closure shall be posted, and only authorized persons shall enter closed or restricted areas.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-33.   Buildings and other property.

(a)  No person shall willfully mark, destroy, deface, vandalize or otherwise damage any building or other property belonging to or used by Town of Colchester in any park.

(b)  No person shall construct or erect on park property any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, except as part of a Department program or permitted event.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-34.   Park usage.

(a)  No person shall enter or use any park for which an entrance or use fee has been established unless each person has first paid the fee or is otherwise authorized to enter.

(b)  The Director may establish rules for the proper use of park amenities such as playgrounds, swim areas, skate parks, etc. which shall be enforceable by park personnel.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-35.   Use of cameras and recording devices.

No person shall use any type of camera or similar device to record or produce a visual image in any park restroom, locker room, bath house, shower facility or other area used for dressing or changing clothes.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-36.   Authority to rent or lease parks and equipment.

The Director is authorized to rent or lease the use of park equipment and to charge a fee for the use of park facilities to individuals and private or public organizations.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-37.   Fees.

Reasonable fees may be assessed by the Selectboard for the use of parks by individuals. The Town shall establish a schedule of such fees as approved by the Selectboard.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-38.   Reserved areas.

(a)  Parks and park property shall be reserved only by permit made in accordance with the Department's reservation policy. Said reserved park areas may include athletic fields, group picnic shelters and associated amenities, recreation facility spaces, and those areas requested for the use of special events.

(b)  No person shall use or occupy a reserved space except the person or party for whom the space is reserved.

(c)  Any person having a permit issued by the Department must comply with all applicable rules and regulations. Upon request, confirmation of the reservation must be displayed to department employees charged with supervision or patrolling of parks. Violations of permit requirements may result in immediate suspension or revocation of the permit.

(d)  Department employees, in the course of authorized business, shall have the right to enter the premises of any building, structure or enclosure on park property, including those rented or set aside for the private or exclusive use of any individual or group.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-39.   Permit system.

(a)  Application for any permit or permission issued pursuant to this article shall be made to the Parks and Recreation Department.

(b)  Application for group use of a park shall be made to the Parks and Recreation Department at least fourteen (14) days prior to the proposed activity date. Application for group use of a park shall be made on a form provided by the Parks and Recreation Department.

(c)  The organization of any assembly or group to conduct programs or entertainment in any park is allowed by permit from the Parks and Recreation Department. Said permits shall be carried by the person directing or leading such activity. Failure to follow the conditions of the permit shall void the permit.

(d)  The Parks and Recreation Director or designee shall issue a permit if the applicant's use will not unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment and use of the park by the general public based on the consideration or whether the applicant's activity:

(1)  Will unreasonably detract from residents' entitlement to recreation;

(2)  Will unreasonably infringe on public health, safety or welfare;

(3)  Will unreasonably conflict with facilities reserved for other uses;

(4)  Will unreasonably interfere with traffic or burden police services; or

(5)  Is likely to cause personal or property injury, incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct.

(e)  The Parks and Recreation Director may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of a permit.

(f)  A fee may be imposed by the Selectboard as a condition to the issuance of a permit.

(g)  As a condition of the issuance of a permit, the Parks and Recreation Director may, at his/her discretion, require the individual/group to have in attendance a Law Enforcement Officer, Fire Officer or Rescue Officer.

(h)  Denial of an application shall be accompanied by a statement of reasons for such a denial. An applicant may appeal the action of the Parks and Recreation Director to the Town Manager, within thirty (30) days of notification of a denial.

(i)  Any permit is revocable for violation of any article or for breach of the conditions attached to the permit.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-40.   Picketing or demonstrations.

Any person, group or organization engaged in any picketing, demonstrations, assembly, gathering, procession or other activity protected by the U.S. Constitution shall be prohibited from blocking the ingress and egress of any park or park property, from disrupting or interfering with scheduled events, or preventing or being inconsistent with the intended use of the park at the proposed site of assembly.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-41.   Commercial activities.

(a)  No person shall conduct the commercial sale of, or offer to sell any goods, ware, drinks, food or similar items nor render or offer to render any service for hire, at any park except as authorized by contract or permit issued by the Director.

(b)  Commercial vendors interested in doing business on Town property/parks shall contact the Parks and Recreation Director to complete the proper permit application.

(c)  No person shall place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale, trade or display of any article, material or service within any park area unless approved by the Director in conjunction with a permitted use of a reserved park area.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-42.   Noise and amplified sound.

Patrons shall preserve the peace and quiet enjoyment of the parks by observing all state laws governing noise and amplified sound while on park property.

(a)  All unreasonably loud noise is hereby prohibited in Town parks. Noise shall be deemed to be unreasonable when it disturbs, injures, or endangers the peace or health of another or when it endangers the health, safety, or welfare of park users. A determination of unreasonable shall be made by enforcement personnel based on time/place/density of park usage and other relevant factors.

(b)  The operation or permitting the operation of any musical instrument, radio, television, phonograph, or other device for the production or reproduction of sound is hereby prohibited in all Town parks, unless played in connection with a permit granted by the Director of the Town Department of Parks and Recreation.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-43.   Fireworks and explosives.

No person shall possess or use any kind of firework or other explosive material or system, except by permit, in any park, except as otherwise indicated in Section 9-49 of this article.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-44.   Litter.

(a)  No person shall dump, deposit, place or throw any garbage, glass, coals, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, waste or other trash in any park except in proper receptacles where provided. Where receptacles are not provided, litter shall be carried away from park property by the person or persons responsible for its presence.

(b)  No glass containers are permitted within park boundaries.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-45.   Distribution of printed material.

No person shall hand out, distribute, post, display or affix any printed material or advertisement within any park property or on any vehicle that is calculated to attract the attention of the public. Exceptions to this rule include the direct distribution, without charge to the receiver thereof, of non-commercial handbills to any person willing to accept it; announcements of Department-sponsored or sanctioned events; authorized signs located entirely within concession structures; and signs or distribution of printed materials approved by the Director in conjunction with a permitted use of a reserved park area.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-46.   Motor vehicles and bicycles.

(a)  All applicable state and local motor vehicle laws are enforceable within parks.

(b)  Law enforcement officers may enforce all applicable state and local motor vehicle, traffic and parking laws, and enforce all rules and regulations set forth by the Director within park property. Enforcing officials may direct traffic and enforce the rules and regulations set forth by the Director within park property.

(c)  All vehicles operated on park roads must be street legal by state and local vehicle laws.

(d)  All motorized vehicles of every kind and description are prohibited from driving on Colchester Recreation paths, except as follows:

(1)  Emergency response vehicles and authorized town maintenance and enforcement vehicles;

(2)  Vehicles crossing the path at designated crossing points such as intersections and driveways;

(3)  Vehicles travelling on public roads which share road surface with designated recreation paths;

(4)  Motorized wheelchairs; and

(5)  Segways with permission of Parks and Recreation Director.

(e)  Racing of bicycles is prohibited on recreation paths, unless approved by the Parks and Recreation Director.

(f)  Pedestrians have the right-of-way on recreation paths.

(g)  Users of the recreation paths shall observe and obey the following:

(1)  All users shall stay to the right side of the path except when passing.

(2)  Passing shall be done on the left or the person(s) being passed. Users shall warn others prior to passing them by announcing "passing on your left" or some other suitable warning.

(3)  Users shall travel single file when necessary for safety.

(4)  Users shall obey all applicable traffic rules and regulations, including coming to a complete stop at all stop signs, and shall walk their bicycle in any area posted for walking only.

(5)  All users shall travel only at such speeds and in such a manner as is safe under the circumstances, including current weather conditions and the condition of the path surface.

(6)  All dogs must be leashed on a maximum six-foot leash. Pet waste shall be removed by the person responsible for the dog.

(h)  Bicycles are allowed on concrete or asphalt paths within parks but are prohibited on natural surface trails unless expressly designated as bicycle trails.

(i)  All terrain vehicles (ATV) and snowmobiles are not permitted within the boundaries of parks, except with prior written permission from the Director of Parks and Recreation.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-47.   Parking.

(a)  No person shall park a vehicle on park property at any place other than in the expressly designed space provided for that particular type of vehicle, unless directed otherwise by a Law Enforcement Officer or Department Employee, or by official signs or markings.

(b)  No driver or operator of any vehicle shall leave a vehicle parked on park property after posted closing hours without permission of the Director. Such permission shall be posted in a conspicuous location while the vehicle is parked after hours. If there is no permission vehicle will towed at owner's expense.

(c)  Vehicles parked in unauthorized areas that pose a threat to patron safety may be towed at the owner's expense.

(d)  No vehicle shall be parked on park property when the parked vehicle is for the purposes of sale or repair.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-48.   Aircraft and radio-controlled devices.

(a)  No person shall operate, direct or be responsible for any aircraft, helicopter, glider, balloon, parachute, uav, drone or other aerial apparatus that shall take off from, operate within, or land within park property except in emergency law enforcement situations or when permission has been obtained from the Director.

(b)  No person shall launch or operate any radio-controlled model rocket, airplane, glider, boat, car or similar vehicle without permission from the Director.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-49.   Firearms and other weapons.

(a)  No person shall shoot or otherwise discharge a firearm, weapon, bow, arrow or similar device from within a park, or into any park from beyond the boundaries of such park.

(b)  Subject to the requirements of applicable state law, the Director may permit the use of weapons in a park for recreational, educational, wildlife or natural resource management purposes, or other departmental functions under supervision, written guidelines or agreements.

(c)  Shotguns may be legally discharged in that area of the Causeway Park, which is bordered by water, for the purpose of hunting.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-50.   Metal detectors.

No person shall use a metal detector in any park except for official activities authorized by the Director.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-51.   Abandoned property.

No person shall abandon a vehicle or other personal property in any park. Abandoned property shall be removed, impounded and sold in conformance to Town of Colchester Ordinances.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-52.   Pets.

(a)  Any person bringing a domestic pet within park boundaries or on multipupose paths shall keep the pet on a physical leash, or under the immediate personal supervision and control of the owner. "Under the immediate supervision and control of the owner" means that the pet will stop and come to the owner upon command and that the pet is at all times prevented from causing injury, damage, disturbance or annoyance to park property or other park users. Police K-9 are exempt.

(b)  No exotic animals are permitted at any park.

(c)  No person shall bring a pet into an enclosed park building except those qualified as service animals under the Americans with Disabilities Act, or as part of an authorized program or event.

(d)  Any pet not under the immediate personal supervision and control of a responsible person or any pet creating a disturbance or nuisance, may be restrained, confiscated or removed from the park by authorized personnel.

(e)  No person shall permit a pet for which he or she is responsible to be in the water of a swimming area or designated water play area, and no such person shall permit a pet except for those qualified as service animals under the Americans with Disabilities Act, to be within the land area or beach area adjacent to the water of a swimming area or designated water play area. Pets are not permitted to enter any natural or constructed body of water except in areas dedicated for such purpose.

(f)  Persons bringing pets onto park property are required to carry appropriate material and remove any fecal waste left by their pets.

(g)  Horseback riding shall not be permitted in the parks.

(h)  No pets shall be unattended.

(i)  Current rabies and appropriate inoculation and registration tags must be displayed on pets at all times.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-53.   Swimming and wading.

No person shall swim, wade or play in any natural or built water area within a park except where specifically designated, and in compliance with such rules and regulations set by the Director. All persons swimming in the public parks do so at their own risk.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-54.   Boating and fishing.

Boating or fishing shall not be conducted within two hundred (200) feet of any designated swimming area, in accordance with U.S. Coast Guard regulations.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-55.   Camping and overnight use.

No person may erect a tent or related shelter at any time to camp, sleep or park a vehicle overnight at any park or open space, except as authorized by permit, and only in areas designated or marked for such purpose.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-56.   Fires and firewood.

(a)  No person may light, build or maintain a fire in any park except in a device provided, maintained or designated for such purposes, or as authorized by the Director.

(b)  Grills are provided throughout the parks for patron use; use of any other grill or cooking equipment is prohibited unless otherwise authorized by the Director.

(c)  No person may cut, gather or collect wood or other combustible material at any park for use as firewood or fuel, unless authorized by the Director.

(d)  Fires or lighted grills shall not be left unattended, and any person starting a fire shall not leave the area without extinguishing said fire.

(e)  During periods when a fire hazard has been declared "high" or greater by the State of Vermont or similar agency, the Director may prohibit or restrict fires in park areas.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-57.   Personal risk in natural areas.

Personal risks associated with the natural environment are inherent in parks. Native wild animals, poisonous plants, rough terrain and other natural conditions are considered a part of the visitor's experience. Park users are responsible for their own health and welfare regarding natural elements and other environmental conditions when they elect to enter such areas.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-58.   Natural resource protection and preservation.

(a)  No person shall dig, cut, break, move, excavate, disturb, remove, destroy, harm or tamper with, nor carry within, any soil, rocks, trees, shrubs, plants, mushrooms, down-timber or other wood or materials without authorization from the Director.

(b)  No person shall harm, harass, disturb the breeding grounds or habitat of, hunt, trap or remove any animal, including mammals, fish, insects, birds, reptiles, amphibians or any other living creature, including eggs and nests, from any park except upon authorization of the Director. This subsection shall not apply to fish caught by an individual in possession of a valid Vermont fishing license fishing in an area designated for this activity, in accordance with state fishing regulations.

(c)  No person shall feed any non-domesticated animal in any park unless authorized by the Director.

(d)  Park properties that are primarily in their natural state, yet provide some means of access for visitors, shall be maintained to protect the environment as well as the user.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-59.   Pollution of waters.

(a)  No person shall throw, discharge, disturb or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any lake, river, stream, or other body of water within park property any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.

(b)  No person shall bury, discharge or intentionally dispose of a toxic or hazardous substance in parks or on park property, or the State waters found therein.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-60.   Smoking.

(a)  No person shall smoke on public beaches.

(b)  At no time shall marijuana or any product containing THC be used in the parks or beaches.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-61.   Drug and alcohol use.

(a)  It is unlawful to use, possess or sell any controlled substance in violation of State statutes.

(b)  It is unlawful to serve, possess, consume or bring beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages into a park in kegs, barrels, or other bulk tap quantities without permission of the Director.

(c)  Containers of alcoholic beverages are not permitted on Town beaches.

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Sec. 9-62.   Enforcement.

(a)  This article is a civil ordinance and shall be enforced in the Vermont Judicial Bureau or in the Vermont Superior Court, Civil Division, Chittenden Unit, at the election of the enforcing official, in accordance with 24 V.S.A. §§ 1974a et seq.

(b)  Violations of this article are punishable by a civil penalty of not more than eight hundred dollars ($800.00) per violation. The Selectboard may adopt a separate Schedule of Fines relative to this article.

(c)  The enforcing official may choose to file an enforcement action in the Vermont Superior Court, Civil Division, Chittenden Unit, to seek injunctive relief, and fines as appropriate. Any enforcing official shall have the authority to eject from any of the parks any person acting in violation of any provisions of the ordinance codified in this article or in violation of any permit issued pursuant to this article and may issue a notice against trespass on behalf of the Town of Colchester.

(d)  Waiver fee: An issuing Municipal Official shall have the authority to recover a waiver fee, in lieu of a civil penalty, in the amount set forth in the schedule of fines adopted by Selectboard.

(e)  Enforcement Officials: For the purpose of enforcement in the Judicial Bureau, any Town of Colchester Police Officer, the Director of the Department of Parks and Recreation, or his or her designee, and any person(s) duly appointed by the Selectboard shall have the authority to act as issuing Municipal Officials to issue and pursue before the Judicial Bureau a municipal complaint.

Schedule of Fines

Park Ordinance

Maximum Each Offense

1st Offense

2nd Subsequent Offense

Park Hours, § 9-32

$800.00

$50.00

$100.00

Buildings (vandalism) and other property, § 9-33

$800.00

$200.00

$300.00

Park usage, § 9-34

$800.00

$50.00

$100.00

Use of cameras or recording device, § 9-35

$800.00

$100.00

$200.00

Authority to rent or lease parks and equipment, § 9-3

$800.00

$50.00

$100.00

Reserved areas, § 9-38

$800.00

$100.00

$200.00

Permit system, § 9-39

$800.00

$100.00

$200.00

Picketing or demonstrations, § 9-40

$800.00

$100.00

$200.00

Commercial activities, § 9-41

$800.00

$100.00

$200.00

Noise and amplified sound, § 9-42

$800.00

$100.00

$200.00

Fireworks and explosives, § 9-43

$800.00

$100.00

$200.00

Litter, § 9-44

$800.00

$50.00

$100.00

Distribution of printed material, § 9-45

$800.00

$50.00

$100.00

Motor vehicles and bicycles, § 9-46

$800.00

$100.00

$200.00

Parking, § 9-47

$800.00

$50.00

$100.00

Aircraft and radio controlled devices, § 9-48

$800.00

$50.00

$100.00

Firearms and other weapons, § 9-49

$800.00

$200.00

$300.00

Metal detectors, § 9-50

$800.00

$50.00

$100.00

Abandoned property, § 9-51

$800.00

$100.00

$200.00

Pets, § 9-52

$800.00

$50.00

$100.00

Swimming and wading, § 9-53

$800.00

$50.00

$100.00

Boating and fishing, § 9-54

$800.00

$100.00

$200.00

Camping and overnight use, § 9-54

$800.00

$100.00

$200.00

Fires and firewood, § 9-56

$800.00

$100.00

$200.00

Natural Resource Protection, § 9-58

$800.00

$400.00

$800.00

Pollution of waters, § 9-59

$800.00

$400.00

$800.00

Smoking, § 9-60

$800.00

$50.00

$100.00

Drug and alcohol use, § 9-61

$800.00

$50.00

$100.00

 

(Ord. of 9-22-15)

Secs. 9-63—9-70.   Reserved.

 

FOOTNOTE(S):

--- (2) ---

Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 22, 2015, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III pertained to the same subject matter, consisted of §§ 9-30—9-41, and derived from ordinances adopted July 28, 1992; and March 12, 2002. (Back)

ARTICLE IV.   FALSE ALARMS [3]
Sec. 9-71. Purpose.

Sec. 9-72. Statutory authority.

Sec. 9-73. Definitions.

Sec. 9-74. Persons responsible for false alarms.

Sec. 9-75. Registration of alarm systems.

Sec. 9-76. Prohibited alarms.

Sec. 9-77. Penalties.

Sec. 9-78. Violations or failures to comply.

Sec. 9-79. Liability of the Town of Colchester.

Sec. 9-80. Severability.

Sec. 9-81. Appeals.




Sec. 9-71.   Purpose.

The Colchester Police Department is responding to an inordinate number of false alarms. In many instances, these are repeated false alarms from the same source. The response to each false alarm requires the deployment of personnel and vehicles to non-emergency situations and effectively removes that personnel and equipment from the designated services of protecting life and properties, and causes unnecessary expenditure of public funds.

Responsible regulation of the alarms should result in the significant decrease in false alarms, therefore saving public resources, and the abatement of a public nuisance.

This Article is therefore enacted to encourage the responsible use of alarms by those protected by automatic electronic alarm systems. Responsible use includes proper maintenance of equipment, and training of alarm users.

(Ord. of 6-27-06, § 1)

Sec. 9-72.   Statutory authority.

This article has been promulgated under the authority granted the Town's Selectboard by 24, V.S.A. Section 2291(14), (15).

(Ord. of 6-27-06, § 2)

Sec. 9-73.   Definitions.

Alarm systems: Any assembly of equipment, mechanism or device that is used in a building or on premises for the detection of burglary, unauthorized entry, or any other criminal activity which is designed to transmit to any receiving station a signal, message or warning or other indication of an occurrence requiring a police response.

Alarm system user: Any person, partnership, firm, association, or any other entity in control of any building, structure, premises, or facility where an alarm system is installed.

Audible on-site alarms: Audible on-site alarms which may be heard in any public place, shall be equipped and maintained to shut off automatically no longer than fifteen (15) minutes after being activated.

Chief: The Chief of Police of the Colchester Police Department.

False alarm: For the purpose of this Article, a false alarm is defined as the notification given to the Colchester Police Department by electronic or telephonic means that an emergency exists, when an emergency or other circumstance that could be perceived as an emergency does not exist. Examples of false alarms include, but are not limited to, the following:

(1)  Alarms activated through inadvertence by the alarm used or persons authorized to use or maintain the system;

(2)  Negligence;

(3)  Accident;

(4)  Alarm testing without prior notification to the Police Department;

(5)  Faulty installation or maintenance;

(6)  Improper or unsuited equipment; or

(7)  Equipment malfunction.

(Ord. of 6-27-06, § 3)

Sec. 9-74.   Persons responsible for false alarms.

An alarm system user shall be responsible for false alarms generated by their system or devices.

(Ord. of 6-27-06, § 4)

Sec. 9-75.   Registration of alarm systems.

Any alarm system user who owns, operates, or maintains an alarm system, including on-site alarm systems within the Town of Colchester shall provide the Chief or designee, written information containing the following:

(1)  Name of business/residence owner;

(2)  Address;

(3)  Telephone number;

(4)  Name and telephone number of the alarm company;

(5)  Minimum of three (3) persons who can be notified to secure the premises during any hour of the day or night; and

(6)  Full directions to the business/residence, and any other pertinent information regarding the premises.

The alarm system user shall promptly notify the department, in writing, of any changes in this information.

There shall be a ten-dollar annual fee for registration.

Should any of the above information not be provided, the system shall be considered an unregistered alarm, and shall be subject to penalties for same.

(Ord. of 6-27-06, § 5)

Sec. 9-76.   Prohibited alarms.

It shall be unlawful to install, operate, or maintain an alarm system that transmits via telephone line directly to the Colchester Police Department, a prerecorded message requesting a police response. The owner or lessee of any such alarm system or device shall disconnect or have disconnected such system or device on or before ninety (90) days from the effective date of this Article.

(Ord. of 6-27-06, § 6)

Sec. 9-77.   Penalties.

For a police response to any false alarms (as defined in Section 9-73 above) the Town of Colchester may charge and collect from the person having or maintaining such alarm system on premises or occupied by him/her, waver fees as follows:

(1)  False alarms:

a.  First response. For a response to premises at which no other false alarm (as defined in Section 9-73 above) has occurred within the preceding twelve-month period, hereinafter referred to as "first response," no fee shall be charged, except for false alarms from unregistered alarm systems.

b.  Subsequent response(s). For a second response to a false alarm to premises within twelve (12) months after the first response, a waiver fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be charged. For each succeeding response thereafter within twelve (12) months of the first response, a waiver fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be charged.

c.  Additional penalties. An additional penalty of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be assessed for any audible false alarm or audible alarm that does not shut off automatically with fifteen (15) minutes.

(2)  Failure to register: A waiver fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) will be assessed for each alarm, whether or not it is false or an actual emergency, if the alarm is not registered in accordance with Section 9-75 above, or if the information on the registration form is out of date.

(3)  Payment deadline: All fees must be paid within ten (10) days of receipt of notice. If fees are paid after the ten (10) days, an additional fee of ten dollars ($10.00) will be charged.

(d)  Use of prohibited alarm: If the Police Department is called to respond through the user of a prohibited alarm as defined in Section 9-76 above, a waiver fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) will be charged in addition to the fees provided for in Section 9-76 above, regardless of whether or not the call was false.

(Ord. of 6-27-06, § 7)

Sec. 9-78.   Violations or failures to comply.

A violation of this Article shall be a civil matter enforced in accordance with the provisions of 24 V.S.A. 1974 (a) and 1977 et seq. Anyone convicted of a violation or failure to comply with any provisions of this Article, including failure to pay any fee, may be subject to civil penalty of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) in addition to the waiver fees outlined in Section 9-77 above. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.

(Ord. of 6-27-06, § 8)

Sec. 9-79.   Liability of the Town of Colchester.

The Town of Colchester regulation of alarm systems shall not constitute acceptance by the Town of any liability to maintain any equipment, to answer alarms or anything in connection therewith.

(Ord. of 6-27-06, § 9)

Sec. 9-80.   Severability.

If any section, sentence, or phrase of this Article shall for any reason be held invalid or unconstitutional by a decree or decision of any Court of Competent Jurisdiction, such decree or decision shall not affect or impair the validity of any other section or remaining portion of this Article.

(Ord. of 6-27-06, § 10)

Sec. 9-81.   Appeals.

(a)  Initial administrative appeal: An alarm system user shall have the right to appeal any waiver fee to the Chief of Police. An appeal must be filed within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the fee or violation notice. The decision of the Chief of Police may be appealed to the Colchester Selectboard within ten (10) days of receipt of the Chief's decision. In the event such appeal is not satisfactorily resolved before the Selectboard, civil enforcement proceedings may be brought by the Town pursuant to 24 V.S.A. Section 1974(a).

(b)  Enforcement before the Judicial Bureau: In the event an alarm system user violates this Article and fails to either pay the waiver fee or to taken an appeal as hereinabove described, civil enforcement proceedings may be brought pursuant to 24 V.S.A. Section 1974(a).

(Ord. of 6-27-06, § 11)

 

FOOTNOTE(S):

--- (3) ---

Editor's note— An ordinance dated June 27, 2006, amended the Code by enacting new provisions designated as Ch. 9, Art. IV. In order to preserve the format and allow for expansion of the Code, such provisions have been designated as §§ 9-71—9-81 at the editor's discretion. (Back)

Chapter 10 SEWERS [1]
ARTICLE I. - DEFINITIONS

ARTICLE II. - IN GENERAL

ARTICLE III. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS

ARTICLE IV. - POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS

ARTICLE V. - PENALTIES

ARTICLE VI. - RATES

ARTICLE VII. - WASTEWATER ALLOCATION

 

FOOTNOTE(S):

--- (1) ---

Editor's note— An amendment adopted July 8, 2014, amended Ch. 10 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 10 consisted of §§ 10-1—10-22, pertained to the same subject matter and derived from ordinances adopted September 12, 1960; April 30, 1974; November 12, 1991; November 24, 1992; and April 8, 2003. (Back)

Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; on-site sewage disposal and potable water supply regulations, Ch. 8; swimming pools, Ch. 12. (Back)

ARTICLE I.   DEFINITIONS
Sec. 10-1. Definitions.




Sec. 10-1.   Definitions.

For the purposes of this Chapter the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless their context clearly requires otherwise:

Actual flow shall mean that actual wastewater flow as measured by the Town from system flow meters and wastewater pumping stations.

Allocation shall mean a commitment, issued to an applicant pursuant to this Chapter, of a certain number of gallons per day ("gpd") from the Town's reserve wastewater treatment capacity for use in connection with a land development project.

Board shall mean the Board of Sewage Disposal Commissioners of the Town of Colchester established pursuant to 24 V.S.A. Section 3614.

BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at 200°C expressed in milligrams per liter.

Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, (beginning five (5) feet/one and one-half (1.5) meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.

Building Inspector shall mean the Building Inspector for the Town as per the Colchester Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4.

Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, including any portion thereof, within public right-of-way or easements meaning in general the sewer line from the building to a collector or trunk sewer main.

Connection shall mean a physical connection between the land development project, or any part thereof, and the municipal wastewater system that allows the transfer of wastewater to the system.

Connection fee shall mean the fee, established by the Board, due upon the issuance of the allocation.

Debt Retirement Charge shall mean the charge established by the Board and quarterly assessed for each allocation issued.

Delinquency shall mean the failure of the person responsible for the payment of the bill or charge to tender payment for a valid bill or charge within thirty (30) days of the postmark date of that bill or charge, or by a "due date" at least thirty (30) days after mailing which due date shall be clearly printed on the bill and which shall control in the absence of a postmark. If payment is mailed, the postmark date shall constitute the date of payment.

Designated Enforcement Officer means those Municipal Officials designated and appointed in accordance with and pursuant to 24 V.S.A. Chapter 59; and as such is granted the authority, subject to the direction of the Town Manager, to enforce the provisions of the Code of Ordinances, and specifically to issue Municipal Civil Complaints alleging violations of said Code of Ordinances.

Designated Wastewater Service Area shall mean that area or areas designated by the Board, from time to time, as wastewater service areas as illustrated in Figure 1 [located at end of this Chapter].

Director means the Director of Public Works of the Town or his/her authorized deputy, agency or representative.

Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.

Effective date means the effective date of amendments to this Chapter which occurred on April 8, 2003.

Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.

Land development shall mean the construction, reconstruction, conversion, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure, or any change in the use of any building or structure, for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes to the extent that such construction, modification or change of use generates new or additional wastewater flows or types.

May means permissive.

Natural outlet means an outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater.

Permitted reserve shall mean a specific capacity allocated by the Town to land development whereby the capacity has not yet been physically connected to the sewer system.

Person shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group.

pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.

Projected wastewater flow shall mean the volume of wastewater flow for a land development project based upon the requirements of the Environmental Protection Rules, Chapter 1, as amended, hereafter from time to time.

Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (½) inch (1.27 centimeters) in dimension.

Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.

Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.

Sewage means a combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and stormwaters as may be present.

Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.

Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.

Shall means mandatory.

Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.

Slug means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.

Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer") means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.

Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering.

Town Health Regulations means regulations duly adopted by the Colchester Board of Health in accordance with Title 18 V.S.A. Section 613, and approved by the State Board of Health.

Town reserve shall mean the sum of sewer capacity determined by subtracting both the permitted reserve and actual flow from the Town's total available sewer capacity.

User charge shall mean the charge established by the Board and quarterly assessed to each user based upon their metered use of the system.

Wastewater Official shall be the Wastewater Official for the Town as per the Colchester Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8.

Zoning Administrator shall be the Zoning Administrator for the Town as per the Colchester Code of Ordinances, Appendix B, Zoning Regulations.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Editor's note— Appendix B, Zoning Regulations, are not incorporated herein but are on file with the Town.

ARTICLE II.   IN GENERAL
Sec. 10-2. Purpose.

Sec. 10-3. Applicability.

Sec. 10-4. Municipal Sewage Disposal Department.

Sec. 10-5. Responsibility for Administration.

Sec. 10-6. Severability.

Sec. 10-7. Relation to other ordinances of the Town of Colchester.




Sec. 10-2.   Purpose.

An ordinance regulating the use of public wastewater collection and treatment systems, allocation of wastewater treatment capacity, the installation and connection of building sewers, and the discharge of waters and wastes into the public wastewater collection and treatment systems, and providing penalties for violation thereof in the Town of Colchester, County of Chittenden, State of Vermont.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-3.   Applicability.

This Chapter shall apply to all property within the Town of Colchester, and shall apply specifically as indicated in the articles within this Chapter.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-4.   Municipal Sewage Disposal Department.

There is hereby established within the Town a Municipal Sewage Disposal Department. In accordance with Title 24 V.S.A., Section 3506, the Selectboard shall constitute the Board of Sewage Disposal Commissioners.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-5.   Responsibility for Administration.

The Director of Public Works shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Director of Public Works may be delegated by the Director to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the Town of Colchester.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-6.   Severability.

The provisions of this Chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any provisions, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this Chapter or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, it shall not affect the validity or application of other provisions of this Chapter.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-7.   Relation to other ordinances of the Town of Colchester.

If the provisions of these regulations conflict with the provisions of any other valid and enforceable Colchester Ordinance(s), the stricter shall prevail.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

ARTICLE III.   USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
Sec. 10-8. Use of public sewers required.

Sec. 10-9. Private sewage disposal.

Sec. 10-10. Building sewers and connections.

Sec. 10-11. Use of the public sewers.

Sec. 10-12. Protection from damage.




Sec. 10-8.   Use of public sewers required.

It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the Town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Town, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.

It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Town, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this Chapter and the laws of the State of Vermont.

Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, subsurface sewage disposal system, or other sewage treatment facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.

The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the Town and abutting on any street, alley, right-of-way or easement in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the Town, is hereby required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper sewer in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so.

Notwithstanding any requirement in this Chapter 10 to the contrary, upon application and submission of an on-site septic system plan, approved pursuant to all applicable local and State laws and regulations, the Board may, but shall not be required to, waive the obligation to obtain allocation and to connect to the Municipal Wastewater System, as otherwise required herein.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-9.   Private sewage disposal.

Where a public sanitary sewer is not available, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system which complies with the Health Regulations of the Town.

As such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this Chapter and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sewage and abandoned in accordance with the Environmental Protection Rules at the property owner's expense.

The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the Town.

No statement contained in this Section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Town's Health Regulations and Health Officer.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-10.   Building sewers and connections.

No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Director. Any person proposing a new discharge into the system or a substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants that are being discharged into the system shall notify the Director at least forty-five (45) days prior to the proposed change or connection.

There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits:

(a)  For residential and commercial service, and

(b)  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or their agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the Town. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Director. A permit and inspection fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for a residential, commercial, and industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the Town at the time the application is filed. This fee shall be reduced to five dollars ($5.00) in such cases where an adequate building sewer already exists from the trunk or collector sewer main to the property line.

All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, maintenance, and repair of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the Town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation, connection, maintenance, and repair of the building sewer.

A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one (1) building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway. The building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one (1) building sewer.

Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the Director, to meet all requirements of this Chapter.

The size, slope, location, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the Colchester Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4, Building Code and Building Code Construction, Colchester Code of Ordinances, Chapter 14, Construction Standards Applicable to Land Development, Department of Public Works Specifications and Standards, or other applicable rules and regulations of the Town. In the absence of Code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing Materials and Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, "Design and Construction of Sanitary and Storm Sewers" shall apply. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Director before installation.

Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means approved by the Director and discharged to the building sewer.

No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior and interior foundation drains, areaway drains, cellar drains, basement sumps, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly to a public sanitary sewer.

No sewer connection shall be opened, no pipe laid, and no joints made, except under the inspection of the Building Inspector.

Any work not conforming to the provisions of this Section shall be removed.

Streets, sidewalks, parks, and other public property shall not be disturbed for building sewer installations without first obtaining a written excavation permit in accordance with Town ordinances and regulations and pursuant to Title 19 V.S.A., Chapter 11.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-11.   Use of the public sewers.

No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.

Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers if approved by the Director.

No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:

(a)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.

(b)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including, but not limited to, cyanides in excess of two (2) mg/l of CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.

(c)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and one-half (5.5), or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.

(d)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.

No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the Director that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance.

In forming his/her opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Director shall give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:

(a)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F)/sixty-five degrees centigrade (65°C).

(b)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F)/zero (0) to sixty-five degrees centigrade (65°C).

(c)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (¾) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) and greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director.

(d)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.

(e)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Director for such materials.

(f)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the Director as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the State, Federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.

(g)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life, or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Director in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.

(h)  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of nine and one-half (9.5).

(i)  Materials which exert or cause:

(1)  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).

(2)  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).

(3)  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works.

(4)  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes instituting "slugs" as defined herein.

(j)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.

If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in this Section, and which in the judgment of the Director, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Director may:

(a)  Reject the wastes,

(b)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers,

(c)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or

(d)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges.

If the Director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws, and to the Municipal Discharge Permit.

Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Director, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.

Where installed, all grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his/her expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. Materials collected shall not be reintroduced into the public sewage system.

Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his/her expense.

When required by the Director, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Director. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his/her expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times.

All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform such monitoring of their discharges as the Director may reasonably require, including installation, use and maintenance of monitoring equipment, keeping records and reporting the results of such monitoring to the Director. Such records shall be made available, upon request by the Director, to other agencies having jurisdiction over discharging to the receiving waters. Where industrial pretreatment permits are issued by the State of Vermont, monitoring records must also be submitted to the Secretary of Natural Resources in accord with such permit. Records of any monitoring will be supplied by the Director to the Secretary of Natural Resources on request.

All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this Chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.

Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty-four-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty-four-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples.

No statement contained in this Section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the Town and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Town for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-12.   Protection from damage.

No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this Section on conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

ARTICLE IV.   POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS
Sec. 10-13. Right of entry.

Sec. 10-14. Access to easements.




Sec. 10-13.   Right of entry.

The Director, Building Inspector, Wastewater Official, and other duly authorized employees of the Town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. The Director or his/her representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-14.   Access to easements.

The Director, Building Inspector, Wastewater Official, and other duly authorized employees of the Town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the Town holds an easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private property involved.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

ARTICLE V.   PENALTIES
Sec. 10-15. Enforcement remedies.

Sec. 10-16. Remedies not exclusive.

Sec. 10-17. Judicial Bureau Municipal Civil Complaint Ticket.

Sec. 10-18. Other enforcement remedies generally; fines, injunctive relief.




Sec. 10-15.   Enforcement remedies.

The Town, by and through its authorized agents, shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this Chapter, and any orders, violation notices, or enforcement orders issued hereunder, and may pursue all civil and criminal remedies in connection with any violation hereunder.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-16.   Remedies not exclusive.

The remedies set forth herein are not exclusive of any other remedies available, including criminal prosecution, under any applicable Federal, State or local law. Election of one (1) remedy shall not preclude pursuing other remedies and nothing herein shall prohibit the Town from seeking multiple remedies.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-17.   Judicial Bureau Municipal Civil Complaint Ticket.

Pursuant to 24 V.S.A., Chapters 59 and 61 and 4 V.S.A., Chapter 29, a Designated Enforcement Officer may commence prosecution in the Judicial Bureau for any violation of this Chapter by serving two (2) copies of a Municipal Civil Complaint Ticket either in person or by first class mail on the alleged offender, and thereafter promptly filing the original with the Judicial Bureau. The Issuing Officer shall follow the procedure set forth by the Judicial Bureau for Municipal Complaint Tickets. The first offense ticketed for a violation shall be punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00), the waiver fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00); a second offense ticketed for the same violation shall be punishable by a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00), the waiver fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00); a third offense ticketed for the same violation shall be punishable by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00), the waiver fee shall be two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00). Upon the fourth offense, the Town may request that the case be transferred to the Superior Court, or any other Court of Competent Jurisdiction.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-18.   Other enforcement remedies generally; fines, injunctive relief.

(1)  Fines. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to fines as outlined in Article V. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this Section, any person, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be required to bear the expense of such restoration.

(2)  Injunctive relief. An action, injunction, or other enforcement proceeding may be instituted by the Town to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate any violation or activity causing a violation. The relief sought may include the right to enter onto private property to abate or correct the violation, to restrain any activity that would create further violations, or to compel a person or persons to perform abatement or remediation of the violation; and to seek damages for all costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the Town in pursuing and obtaining such relief.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

ARTICLE VI.   RATES
Sec. 10-19. Sewage disposal charges.

Sec. 10-20. Reserve funds.

Sec. 10-21. Rates.




Sec. 10-19.   Sewage disposal charges.

Pursuant to Title 24, V.S.A. Sections 3615 and 3616, the Board of Sewage Disposal Commissioners ("the Board" or "the Commissioners") may establish charges to be called "sewage disposal charges" to be paid at such times and in such manner as the Board may prescribe. The Board may change the rates of such charges from time to time as may be reasonably required. Said charges and receipts of the sewage disposal department shall be used and applied only to pay the interest and principal of sewage disposal bonds of the Town as well as the expense of maintenance and operation of the Sewage Disposal Department or other expenses of the sewage system.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-20.   Reserve funds.

Additionally, pursuant to 24 V.S.A. Section 3616, the Board is hereby authorized to create by written resolution a fund dedicated to the purpose of financing major rehabilitation, major maintenance and upgrade costs for the sewer system. Said fund shall be separate from other funds and shall be used only for such limited purpose. The Board upon the creation of said fund shall make and establish charges to be collected and placed in said dedicated fund. Said funds shall be subject to the following requirements and controls:

(a)  The annual set aside for such fund shall be not greater than fifteen (15) percent of the costs of the system for normal operations, maintenance and bond payment, except with respect to subsurface leach field systems, in which case the annual set-aside shall not exceed one hundred (100) percent of said costs;

(b)  The fund shall not exceed the estimated future major rehabilitation, major maintenance, or upgrade costs for the system;

(c)  The fund shall be insured at least to the level provided by FDIC and withdrawals shall be made only for the purposes for which the fund was established; and

(d)  The resolution of the Board shall specify any other controls, requirements, or limitations the Board deems appropriate.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-21.   Rates.

(a)  The Board of Sewer Commissioners shall establish the user charge and industrial cost recovery system (if required) in accordance with appropriate Federal and State rules and regulations.

(b)  The Board of Sewer Commissioners shall establish the debt retirement charge in accordance with the Town's Wastewater Debt Retirement System as adopted by the Colchester Selectboard.

(c)  The Board of Sewer Commissioners may establish a Connection Fee to be charged to new customers upon the issuance of an allocation.

(d)  The Board of Sewer Commissioners shall, in establishing the rates referred to in Section 10-11, paragraph (a) above, make specific reference to the sewer use rate structure in force at the time of any connection. The sewer use rate structure shall incorporate the requirements of 40 CFR 35.935-13, or 40 CFR 35.2140, and V.S.A. Chapter 101.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

ARTICLE VII.   WASTEWATER ALLOCATION
Sec. 10-22. Purpose.

Sec. 10-23. Ownership and permit.

Sec. 10-24. Introduction to reserve capacity allocation.

Sec. 10-25. Sewer service areas and available capacity.

Sec. 10-26. Allocation required.

Sec. 10-27. Pre-existing allocation.

Sec. 10-28. Application.

Sec. 10-29. Issuance of allocation.

Sec. 10-30. Duration of allocation; forfeiture.

Sec. 10-31. Maximum allocation; transfer of allocation.

Sec. 10-32. Nonpayment; forfeiture.

Sec. 10-33. Lien.

Sec. 10-34. Appeal to Board.




Sec. 10-22.   Purpose.

The purpose of this Article is to provide the Town with a fair and equitable process through which to assign and issue wastewater allocation, an efficient method to manage a limited and valuable resource, a process to ensure that the Town's wastewater allocation is used only within the Town's designated wastewater service areas, and to ensure that the allocation of sewer capacity occurs in a manner which is consistent with the Town Plan, Subdivision Regulations and Zoning Bylaws.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-23.   Ownership and permit.

The Town of Colchester has acquired a total treatment capacity of one million (1,000,000) gallons per day at the Airport Parkway Wastewater Treatment Facility in the City of South Burlington, and an additional nine thousand four hundred five (9,405) gallons per day in the City of Winooski's Wastewater Treatment Facility, for a total wastewater capacity of one million nine thousand four hundred five (1,009,405) gallons per day. A total of three hundred ten thousand (310,000) gallons per day of the capacity from the City of South Burlington has been reserved for the sole use of Colchester Fire District #1 based upon an agreement between the Town of Colchester and the Colchester Fire District #1, dated January 19, 1987, unless otherwise amended by written agreement between the parties. The Town therefore controls a total capacity of six hundred ninety-nine thousand four hundred five (699,405) gallons per day. These facilities are operated in accordance with discharge permits issued by the Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation under the authority granted in 10 V.S.A., Chapter 47. The Board is obligated by law to comply with the conditions of these permits, and to operate and manage the sewer system as a governmental function under and pursuant to 24 V.S.A., Chapters 97 and 101.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-24.   Introduction to reserve capacity allocation.

(a)  The capacity of the Wastewater Treatment Facilities allocated to the Town of Colchester are the property of the Town with the exception of three hundred ten thousand (310,000) gallons per day which is reserved for the sole use of Colchester Fire District #1 based upon an agreement between the Town of Colchester and the Colchester Fire District #1, dated January 19, 1987, unless otherwise amended by written agreement between the parties. The Town's uncommitted reserve capacity shall be allocated in the manner described below. This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of 24 V.S.A., Section 3625; in the manner provided in 24 V.S.A., Chapter 59, and shall not be construed as an abandonment or relinquishment of the authority or responsibility of the Board to regulate, control and supervise all means and methods of sewage collection, treatment and disposal within the Town, nor shall it be construed to impair or inhibit the ability of the Town to contract with persons for the collection, transmission and treatment of sewage.

(b)  Recognizing that there is insufficient capacity to provide sewer service to the entire Town, the Board has created a Designated Wastewater Service Area, (Figure 1 [located at end of this Chapter]) to establish definitive boundaries for the assignment of available wastewater capacity and future expansions of the sanitary sewer system. A study completed by the Town in 2014 estimates total system flow for build-out, and finds that potential connections of existing development to the sanitary sewer system and anticipated new development within the Designated Wastewater Services Area will use up the Town's entire available sewer system capacity of six hundred ninety-nine thousand four hundred five (699,405) gallons per day by year 2034.

(c)  The location and method of allocation for this sewer capacity is set forth in the following sections of this Article.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-25.   Sewer service areas and available capacity.

Within the Town's Designated Wastewater Service Area, there are a total of six (6) sewer service areas. The Board shall assign a specific amount of sewer capacity to each sewer service area within the limits of the Town's total available capacity. The Director shall regularly monitor permitted reserves and actual flows and shall report to the Board as to whether any modifications in allocation procedures are needed.

Planning Areas

Assigned Allocation

Permitted Reserve

Actual Flow

Town Reserve

Exit 16

272,286 gpd

37,403 gpd

118,765 gpd

116,118 gpd

Camp Johnson

42,600 gpd

0 gpd

32,600 gpd

10,000 gpd

Severance Corners

330,114 gpd

74,963 gpd

29,635 gpd

225,516 gpd

Village

45,000 gpd

6,500 gpd

27,921 gpd

10,579 gpd

Brookside

9,405 gpd

0 gpd

4,266

5,139 gpd

Exit 17

0 gpd

0 gpd

0 gpd

0 gpd

Totals

699,405 gpd

118,866 gpd

213,187 gpd

367,352 gpd

 

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-26.   Allocation required.

Within the Town's Designated Wastewater Service Area, as defined herein, no land development, as defined hereinafter, shall be permitted except upon the issuance of allocation in compliance with this Article. No allocation shall be issued to lands outside the designated wastewater service area. Notwithstanding any requirement in this Chapter 10, and specifically Sections 10-8 and 10-9, to the contrary, upon application and submission of an on-site septic system plan, approved pursuant to all applicable local and State laws and regulations, the Board may, but shall not be required to, waive the obligation to obtain allocation and to connect to the municipal wastewater system, as otherwise required herein.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-27.   Pre-existing allocation.

All commitments of allocation issued by the Town of Colchester prior to the effective date of this Chapter ("effective date") are hereby ratified and issued hereunder, and any such commitment (hereinafter "pre-existing allocation") shall continue in effect and shall be valid under this Chapter subject to the following conditions:

At the end of five (5) years following the effective date, if a pre-existing allocation is not then connected to the municipal wastewater system, the Board may, at its election and so long as said allocation remains unconnected, acquire all or any portion of said unconnected pre-existing allocation by tendering to the holder of record of such pre-existing allocation an amount equal to the amount received by the Town for the amount of the pre-existing allocation the Town is acquiring. In making such election, the Board shall first give due consideration to whether the holder will connect the pre-existing allocation to the system in the near future.

Additionally, if at the end of five (5) years [after the effective date] a pre-existing allocation is not connected to the municipal wastewater system, the Board at any time thereafter may give written notice to the holder of record that the Board intends to declare the pre-existing allocation forfeited as of a date specified in the notice. In the event the holder demonstrates to the Board that said pre-existing allocation will be connected to the system within two (2) years next succeeding said notice, the Board shall by writing notify the holder of the specific period of time within which connection shall be made and the Board during such period shall not declare the pre-existing allocation forfeited. Upon the request of the holder, the Board shall hold a hearing on the likelihood of connection within said time period and the Board shall render its written decision within thirty (30) days after the close of the hearing. In the event connection is not made during the specified time period, the Board may declare the allocation forfeited.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-28.   Application.

(1)  Anyone seeking an allocation shall apply to the Director on an application form provided by the Director. At a minimum the application shall be accompanied by the application fee (if so established by action of the Board of Sewer Commissioners) and include:

(2)  A description of the land development for which allocation is sought, together with written confirmation from the Zoning Administrator indicating that:

(a)  The applicant has submitted to the Zoning Administrator a land development project proposal in sufficient detail for the Zoning Administrator to determine whether the proposal is viable under the current Zoning Regulations; and

(b)  The land development project as proposed generally appears to be viable under said regulations, subject to certain approvals.

(3)  A calculation of the Projected Wastewater Flow certified as accurate and in compliance with the applicable rules and regulations by a designer licensed pursuant to 10 V.S.A. Section 1975.

(4)  The flow rate, strength, and any other characteristics of the Projected Wastewater Flow determined to be pertinent by the Director.

(5)  A projection of the time period for completion of the land development project and, if phased over more than one (1) year, a projection as to the number of units to be connected to the municipal wastewater system each year.

A Vermont Professional Engineer or licensed designer shall certify that all calculations of projected wastewater flow comply with the applicable regulations.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-29.   Issuance of allocation.

Upon receipt of the Sewer Allocation Application and supporting documentation, the Director, upon making the following findings, shall issue from the Town's reserve capacity from within the appropriate planning area an allocation of a specific number of gallons per day, and may condition such issuance upon requirements reasonably related to protect the public health, safety, and welfare:

(1)  That the allocation requested is the Projected Wastewater Flow as that term is defined herein;

(2)  That the Proposed Wastewater Flow is of sanitary origin or that the flow and character of the wastewater will not detrimentally effect the municipal waste water system or its proper operation or, alone or in combination with other wastes, cause a violation of any discharge permit, pass through the plant without treatment, interfere or otherwise disrupt the proper quality and disposal of sludge or be injurious in other manner to the municipal wastewater system;

(3)  That there is sufficient reserve capacity to issue said allocation, and

(4)  That the proposed use of the wastewater allocation complies with all provisions set forth in this Chapter and all other ordinances of the Town of Colchester.

The issuance of an allocation shall be in writing on a form approved by the Director. The Director shall provide notification of said issuance by first class mail addressed to the applicant's address on the application and shall record said approval in the Colchester Land Records. Said allocation, and all conditions attached thereto, shall run with the land and the specific land development plans referenced in the application and shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the legal owners of said land, their heirs, successors, and assigns.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-30.   Duration of allocation; forfeiture.

Upon the issuance of allocation and payment therefore, so long as annual charges on such allocations are timely paid, the allocation shall continue for a period of two (2) years from the date of issuance of allocation. The Director may allow a period longer than two (2) years if a developer so requests in writing and the Director after consulting with the Director of Planning and Zoning determines that two (2) years is not a realistic time within which to expect connection to the municipal wastewater system. If, at the end of said period, the allocation, or a portion thereof, is not attached by connection to the municipal wastewater system, then all rights to said unattached portion of the allocation shall expire and the unattached portion of the allocation shall revert to the Town and become a part of its reserve capacity. Anyone who forfeits allocation shall not be entitled to any refund of any amounts paid in connection with such allocation.

Extension. Upon written application by a person having allocation, the Town Manager may extend the initial two-year, or longer, period by up to an additional one (1) year provided that the application for extension is filed with the Director prior to the expiration and the Town Manager finds that the person requesting the extension has been working diligently to complete the project. The Town Manager may similarly grant additional extensions.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-31.   Maximum allocation; transfer of allocation.

(1)  Maximum. No person shall obtain an allocation in excess of the Projected Wastewater Flow as defined hereinabove, except upon express written permission of the Board.

(2)  Transfer. Subject to approval by the Director, a holder of any allocation not yet connected to the municipal system may transfer and assign to another person or entity ("transferee") all or a portion of the allocation held by the holder. Approval by the Director shall be based upon the following:

(a)  Submission of an application to transfer on a form approved by the Director, signed by the holder/transferor and the transferee, and identifying by Municipal Land Record Book and Page all lands affected by the transfer,

(b)  An acknowledgment by the holder/transferor that the transferor voluntarily surrenders all rights to the allocation being transferred and is aware that the transfer may affect the right to develop transferor's land,

(c)  Agreement by the transferee to accept all obligations attached to the allocation being transferred,

(d)  A finding by the Director that the transferee is otherwise eligible for allocation under this Article,

(e)  Recording of the approval at the expense of the transferee in the Colchester Land Records.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-32.   Nonpayment; forfeiture.

In the event a holder of any allocation not yet connected to the municipal wastewater system is delinquent in any payments for allocation, the Town, after notice and thirty (30) days to cure the delinquency, may declare the allocation forfeited, whereupon such allocation shall revert to the Town's reserve capacity.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-33.   Lien.

Any sums due in connection with the issuance of allocation shall constitute a lien, pursuant to 24 V.S.A Section 3612, upon the real estate benefiting from such allocation. The Town may charge interest on all delinquent amounts, as allowed by law, provided interest shall not accrue at a rate greater than twelve (12) percent per annum. The Town may proceed as allowed pursuant to Section 3612, or otherwise, to collect any amounts owed.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Sec. 10-34.   Appeal to Board.

Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Director may appeal such decision to the Board. Provided a written notice of appeal, specifying the basis for the appeal is delivered to the office of the Director no later than thirty (30) days following the Director mailing the decision, the Board shall allow the person aggrieved and the Director to appear and be heard. Following hearing the Board shall uphold, modify, or reverse the decision and shall provide the reasons for its action.

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Wastewater Service Area Map

(Amd. of 7-8-14)

Chapter 11 SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS [1]
Sec. 11-1. License required.

Sec. 11-2. Definitions.

Sec. 11-3. Application.

Sec. 11-4. Investigation.

Sec. 11-5. Granting of license.

Sec. 11-6. License issuance, duration and fees.

Sec. 11-7. Transfer and display; employees.

Sec. 11-8. Loud noises and speaking devices.

Sec. 11-9. Prohibited and regulated locations.

Sec. 11-10. Nonexclusive location; distance from competitors.

Sec. 11-11. Peddling by charitable organizations, etc.

Sec. 11-12. Penalty for violations.




Sec. 11-1.   License required.

It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler, as defined in Section 11-2 of this Chapter, within the Town without first obtaining a license therefor as herein provided.

(Ord. of 11-17-81)

Sec. 11-2.   Definitions.

The word "peddler" as used herein shall include any person, whether a resident of the Town or not, traveling by foot, or utilizing a wagon, automotive vehicle, pushcart, van or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, pastries, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or other provisions, or food, and offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, boat, pushcart, van, railroad car or other vehicle or conveyance. One who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers shall not be deemed a peddler hereunder unless such activity is carried out as part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this Chapter, in which case such person shall be deemed a peddler subject to the provisions of this Chapter. The word "peddler" shall also include the words "hawker", "street vendor" and "huckster", but shall not include a farmer who is selling the produce of his own farm.

(Ord. of 11-17-81)

Sec. 11-3.   Application.

Applicants for a license under this Chapter shall file an application with the Town Clerk. An application for a peddler's license shall include the following information:

(a)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold;

(b)  If employed, name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship;

(c)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;

(d)  If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with the license number or other means of identification;

(e)  A photograph of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of filing the application, which picture shall be two (2) inches by two (2) inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner;

(f)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.

(Ord. of 11-17-81)

Sec. 11-4.   Investigation.

Upon receipt of such application, a copy thereof shall be referred to the Chief of Police, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. The Chief of Police shall make a report of such investigation and return the same to the Town Clerk. Such report shall be considered by the Selectboard in determining whether a license shall be issued or the applicant certified as qualified for the issuance of a peddler's license.

(Ord. of 11-17-81)

Sec. 11-5.   Granting of license.

Applications for peddlers' licenses will be granted or denied by the Selectboard. Application will be granted when it is found that use of license will not adversely affect:

(a)  Traffic;

(b)  Permanent local business;

(c)  Character of area.

(Ord. of 11-17-81)

Sec. 11-6.   License issuance, duration and fees.

(a)  Issuance. There shall be one (1) peddler's license available for issuance under this Chapter for all areas of Colchester.

(b)  Duration. The license year for all licenses granted pursuant to this Chapter shall commence on April 1 and terminate at midnight March 31 of the subsequent year. All license applications submitted by March 1 shall be processed and granted or denied prior to April 1 of such year.

(c)  Fees. All license fees shall be payable in full upon application, to be immediately refunded if the application is denied. Such fees are as listed in the Fee Ordinance, Chapter 6½.

(Ord. of 11-17-81; Ord. of 1-12-88)

Cross reference— Fees for permits and licenses generally, Ch. 6½.

Sec. 11-7.   Transfer and display; employees.

(a)  Display. No license issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall be used or worn at any time by any person other than the one to whom is was issued. A licensee shall display his/her license at all times while peddling. Failure to do so shall be considered cause for revocation of such license.

(b)  Employees. A licensed peddler may utilize the services of one (1) employee. Any applicant for a peddler's license who anticipates the use of an employee shall list upon such application such proposed employee's name and address. The employee shall be investigated in the same fashion as the applicant and the Selectboard shall certify whether a license shall be granted to such employee. Upon issuance, the employee may peddle only as an employee of the applicant. A licensed peddler and his/her employee shall not simultaneously peddle at different locations.

(Ord. of 11-17-81)

Sec. 11-8.   Loud noises and speaking devices.

No peddler, nor any person in his behalf, shall shout, cry out, blow a horn, or use any sound device, including any loud speaking radio or sound amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the Town or upon any private premises in said Town if sufficient volume is produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell.

(Ord. of 11-17-81)

Sec. 11-9.   Prohibited and regulated locations.

Peddling within the Town traveled highway is discouraged. Peddlers that must utilize Town highways shall operate so as not to interfere with the free flow of traffic.

(Ord. of 11-17-81)

Cross reference— Traffic, Ch. 12.

Sec. 11-10.   Nonexclusive location; distance from competitors.

No licensed peddler shall be entitled to any exclusive location nor shall he/she peddle his/her goods within one hundred (100) feet of the entryway to any business location which sells or offers for sale goods, wares, merchandise, food, etc., of the same type and nature as being offered for sale by the peddler. The Town Clerk, subject to written appeal to the Selectboard within one (1) day of the Town Clerk's determination, shall determine in appropriate cases whether such similar goods are being offered for sale. If an appeal to the Selectboard is taken, the determination of such Board will be final.

(Ord. of 11-17-81)

Sec. 11-11.   Peddling by charitable organizations, etc.

Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the Selectboard from issuing permits for peddling by representatives of public, pious or charitable organizations for such periods of time as the Selectboard shall authorize without payment of a license fee.

(Ord. of 11-17-81)

Sec. 11-12.   Penalty for violations.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be fined pursuant to Chapter 1, Section 1-9. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.

(Ord. of 9-10-96)

 

FOOTNOTE(S):

--- (1) ---

Editor's note— An ordinance of Nov. 17, 1981, amended the Code with the addition of a new Art. III, §§ 2-25—2-35 to Ch. 2. For purposes of classification, the editor has redesignated said provisions as Ch. 11, §§ 11-1—11-11. (Back)

Chapter 12 TRAFFIC [1]
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

ARTICLE II. - MOVING VEHICLES

ARTICLE III. - PARKING, STANDING, AND STOPPING

ARTICLE IV. - PEDESTRIANS

ARTICLE V. - BICYCLISTS

 

FOOTNOTE(S):

--- (1) ---

Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 7; on-site sewage disposal and potable water supply regulations, Ch. 8; sewers, Ch. 10; peddling on Town highways, § 11-9. (Back)

ARTICLE I.   IN GENERAL
Sec. 12-0. Purpose.

Sec. 12-1. Signs required.

Sec. 12-2. Exemptions.

Sec. 12-3. Violation; penalty.

Sec. 12-4. Clinging to vehicles.

Sec. 12-5. Duty to drive on right.

Sec. 12-6. Stops at intersections.

Sec. 12-7. Yield right-of-way.

Sec. 12-8. Following fire apparatus and driving over fire hose.

Sec. 12-9. Stop when traffic obstructed—Do not block intersection.

Sec. 12-10. Signal of intention to change lanes required.

Sec. 12-11. Obedience to lane markings required.

Sec. 12-12. Traffic control signals legend and regulations.

Sec. 12-13. Flashing signals.

Sec. 12-14. Signs, signals, markings and devices.

Sec. 12-15. Reserved.




Sec. 12-0.   Purpose.

This chapter is enacted to provide certain regulations for the use of motor vehicles on town highways which promote public safety and provide for the orderly and efficient flow of motor vehicles on the town highways. The Police Department shall have authority to regulate vehicular traffic on all public streets. The Chief of Police or his/her designee in regulating traffic may depart temporarily as far as may be necessary from the traffic regulations of this chapter.

(Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-1.   Signs required.

Suitable signs shall be posted conspicuously by the Town within the highway limits, a reasonable distance from a point where such regulations become effective.

(Ord. of 7-23-62)

Sec. 12-2.   Exemptions.

The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to automotive emergency vehicles when responding to an emergency.

Sec. 12-3.   Violation; penalty.

(a)  Any person who violates any regulations set forth in this chapter, unless otherwise specified, shall be subject to the penalties as provided in Title 23, V.S.A., Chapter 13.

(b)  A Town of Colchester Police Court is hereby established with jurisdiction over parking ordinances of the Town pursuant to Title 23, V.S.A., Chapter 19. The Chief of Police shall be the Judge of the Police Court and shall adjudicate the receiving of waivers of service of process and trial, admission of violation, and fines from violations of the parking ordinance.

(c)  Provisions of this chapter that constitute violations shall be enforced by the Town Police Department and any other law enforcement agency authorized by the Vermont legislature to enforce vehicular laws.

(d)  Any person who violates a provision of this chapter may receive a Vermont Civil Violation Complaint or Vermont Municipal Ordinance ticket, as appropriate. Appeals, payment and adjudication of said tickets are handled by the Vermont Judicial Bureau. The schedule of fines for Municipal Ordinance violations shall be approved by the Selectboard.

(Ord. of 3-6-79; Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-4.   Clinging to vehicles.

No person riding upon a sleigh, wagon, board, scooter, coaster, or other item or vehicle shall attach him/herself or such item or vehicle to any vehicle while upon a public highway as defined in 23 VSA 4.

(Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-5.   Duty to drive on right.

Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall exercise due care and shall keep to the right of the center of the highway so as to pass without interference with other highway users.

(Ord. No. 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-6.   Stops at intersections.

(a)  When stop signs are erected at or near the entrance to any intersection, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign or signal shall stop at or before a clearly marked stop line; or if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection. If no stop line is marked, then drivers shall stop at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control-signal.

(b)  After the driver of a vehicle has stopped in obedience to a stop sign at an intersection where a stop sign is erected at one (1) or more entrances thereto, such driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely on said highway as to constitute an immediate hazard, but said driver having so yielded may proceed and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle so proceeding.

(Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-7.   Yield right-of-way.

The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to such sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions, or shall stop if necessary, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian legally crossing the roadway, and to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard.

(Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-8.   Following fire apparatus and driving over fire hose.

(a)  No operator of a motor vehicle other than an authorized emergency vehicle shall follow any fire apparatus traveling to an emergency closer than five hundred (500) feet, or in such a manner as to interfere with the suppression of a fire or the handling of such emergency, or so as to endanger the life of any occupant of such fire apparatus, or thereafter park a vehicle so as to interfere with the suppression of a fire or the handling of such emergency.

(b)  No motor vehicle shall be operated over any unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down on any street, private driveway or roadway, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command or a law enforcement officer.

(Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-9.   Stop when traffic obstructed—Do not block intersection.

No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to allow the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians without obstruction from any direction, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed.

(Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-10.   Signal of intention to change lanes required.

The operator of any vehicle upon any public highway shall, before turning his/her vehicle from one traffic lane into another traffic lane, indicate by hand signal or directional light his/her intention to do so.

(Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-11.   Obedience to lane markings required.

Where traffic lanes are so marked as to indicate their use for right turn only, left turn only, through traffic only, or a combination of the same, no person shall operate a motor vehicle except in the direction indicated by such markings.

(Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-12.   Traffic control signals legend and regulations.

Whenever traffic is controlled by a traffic-control signal exhibiting different colored lights successively one (1) at a time, or with arrows, the following colors only shall be used and the terms and light shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles, except when otherwise directed by a police officer, and subject to the right-of-way of emergency vehicles, consistent with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.

(a)  Green alone: Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign or pavement marking prohibits either turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles lawfully within the intersection when the signal is exhibited.

(b)  Steady yellow alone: Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red or "Stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and the vehicular traffic, except such vehicles lawfully within the intersection, shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red or "Stop" signal is exhibited.

(c)  Steady red alone: Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop at or before a clearly marked stop line; or if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green is shown alone.

(d)  Steady red with green arrow: Vehicular traffic facing the signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by the arrow and shall yield to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.

(e)  Turn on red after stop: Unless a sign is in place prohibiting a right turn on red or a steady red arrow, vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal may cautiously enter the intersection to make the turn after stopping as required by subsection (c). Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within the adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.

(Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-13.   Flashing signals.

Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:

(a)  Flashing red (stop signal): When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a stop line when marked, or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.

(b)  Flashing yellow (caution signal): When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed only with caution.

(Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-14.   Signs, signals, markings and devices.

(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to deface, injure, move or obstruct or interfere with any official traffic sign, signal, marking or device.

(b)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal; or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic; or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal; and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall there be permitted upon any highway, any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection, upon private property adjacent to highways, of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.

(c)  Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the chief of police is empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice.

(Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-15.   Reserved.

ARTICLE II.   MOVING VEHICLES
Sec. 12-16. Speed limits.

Sec. 12-17. Traffic-control light locations.

Sec. 12-18. School speed zone.

Sec. 12-19. One-way traffic.

Sec. 12-20. Abandoned vehicles.

Sec. 12-21. Turning prohibitions.

Sec. 12-22. Stopping in roadway prohibited.

Sec. 12-23. Authority to prohibit use of streets by trucks.

Secs. 12-24—12-30. Reserved.




Sec. 12-16.   Speed limits.

The maximum speed limit on the streets and highways shall be as follows:

Class 2 Highways:

Bay Road: 35 mph

Barnes Avenue:

•  From Route 15 to Winchester Place: 25 mph

Church Road: 35 mph

Colchester Pond Road:

•  From Depot Road to Sand Road (0.15 miles): 35 mph

Depot Road: 35 mhp

East Road

•  From US Route 2A intersection to north (0.50 miles): 30 mph

•  Continued to Town of Milton Line (2.46 miles): 40 mph

East Lakeshore Drive: 30 mph

Farnsworth Road: 40 mph

Jasper Mine Road:

•  From the east intersection of U.S. Route 2 to Mayo Road (0.35 miles): 40 mph

Johnson Avenue: 25 mph

Lime Kiln Road: 25 mph

Mallets Bay Avenue:

•  From the Winooski city limits to the Thibault Farm (so called) for a distance of approximately 1.4 miles: 30 mph

•  From the Thibault Farm (so called) to the Blakely Road intersection (a distance of approximately 3.44 miles): 35 mph

Mayo Road: 40 mph

Porters Point Road:

•  From the east intersection with Prim Road to Church Road (0.15 miles): 35 mph

Route 127 Including Heineburg Drive, Prim Road, West Lakeshore Drive (Prim Road to East Lakeshore Drive only), and Blakely Road

•  From Burlington city line to the Prim Road and West Lakeshore Drive intersection (2.20 miles): 35 mph

•  From Prim Road and West Lakeshore Drive intersection to the East Lakeshore and Blakely Road intersection (1.01 miles): 25 mph

•  From the intersection of East Lakeshore Drive and Blakely Road for approximately 2.73 miles to the intersection of Blakely Road and Roosevelt Hwy. (U.S. 2/7): 30 mph

•  From the intersection of U.S. Routes 2 and 7 to the Essex town limits: 35 mph

Severance Road: 35 mph

Vt. National Guard Road: 25 mph

West Lakeshore Drive from Prim Road to Church Road: 35 mph

Winchester Place: 25 mph

Class 3 Highways:

Abigail Drive: 25 mph

Acorn Lane: 25 mph

Aikey Lane: 25 mph

Al-Shir Road: 25 mph

Andrea Lane: 25 mph

Annas Court: 25 mph

Arbor Lane: 25 mph

Aurielle Drive: 25 mph

Austin House Road: 30 mph

Barbara Terrace: 25 mph

Barnes Avenue:

•  From Winchester Place to Camp Johnson: 25 mph

Bay View Road: 25 mph

Bean Road: 35 mph

Belair Drive: 25 mph

Belwood Avenue: 25 mph

Birch Drive: 25 mph

Birchwood Drive: 25 mph

Biscayne Heights: 25 mph

Bissette Drive: 25 mph

Blackberry Circle: 25 mph

Bloomfield Drive: 25 mph

Bluebird Drive: 25 mph

Bonanza Park: 25 mph

Braeloch Road: 30 mph

Brentwood Drive: 25 mph

Brickyard Road: 25 mph

Brigham Hill Road 25 mph

Brooke Lane: 25 mph

Brosseau Lane: 25 mph

Buckingham Drive: 25 mph

Burnham Lane: 25 mph

Caleb Court: 25 mph

Camp Kiniya Road: 25 mph

Canyon Road: 25 mph

Canyon Estates Drive: 25 mph

Carriage Way: 25 mph

Casey Lane: 25 mph

Cedar Creek Road: 25 mph

Cedar Ridge Drive: 25 mph

Champlain Drive: 25 mph

Chestnut Lane: 25 mph

Chimney Hill Drive: 25 mph

Churchill Lane: 25 mph

Clay Point Road: 30 mph

Cobbleview Drive: 25 mph

Colchester Point Road:

•  From Porters Point Road intersection west for approximately 1.0 mile: 35 mph

•  For remaining section to Mills Point Road: 30 mph

Colchester Pond Road:

•  From Sand Road intersection to end of public portion (0.70 miles): 25 mph

Colonial Drive: 25 mph

Conquest Circle: 25 mph

Colden Road: 25 mph

Collins Farm Road: 25 mph

Coon Hill Road: 25 mph

Country Meadows: 25 mph

Creek Farm Road:

•  From the intersection of U.S. Routes 2 and 7 for 1.31 miles north: 35 mph

Creek Glen: 25 mph

Crossfield Drive: 25 mph

Curve Hill Road:

•  From Colchester Pond Road intersection south for a distance of one thousand six hundred (1,600) feet: 25 mph

•  For remaining distance to Town of Essex (approximately one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet): 30 mph

Dalton Drive: 25 mph

Deer Lane: 25 mph

Depot Road: 35 mph

Don-Mar Terrace: 25 mph

Dunlop Way: 25 mph

Eagle Park Drive: 25 mph

Edgewood Drive: 25 mph

Emmas Way: 25 mph

Ethan Allen Avenue: 25 mph

Everbreeze Drive: 25 mph

Fastnet Circle: 25 mph

Fern Court: 25 mph

Fieldgreen Drive: 25 mph

Ford Lane: 25 mph

Forman Drive: 25 mph

Fox Run: 25 mph

Galvin Hill Road: 25 mph

Giffin Court: 25 mph

Goodsell Point Road: 35 mph

Granite Creek Drive: 25 mph

Greenwood Drive: 25 mph

Gregg Lane: 25 mph

Grey Birch Drive: 25 mph

Hawkes Way: 25 mph

Hegeman Avenue: 25 mph

Hercules Drive: 30 mph

Heritage Lane: 25 mph

Hillcrest Lane: 25 mph

Hidden Oaks Drive: 25 mph

Hilltop Court: 25 mph

Holbrook Court: 25 mph

Hollow Creek: 25 mph

Holy Cross Road: 35 mph

Horizon View Drive: 25 mph

Hummingbird Drive: 25 mph

Indian Circle: 25 mph

Ira Allen Court: 25 mph

Jason Drive: 25 mph

Jasper Mine Road:

•  From Mayo Road intersection west to road end: 40 mph

Jeffrey Drive: 25 mph

Jen Barry Lane: 25 mph

Jocelyn Court: 25 mph

Joey Drive: 25 mph

Julie Drive: 25 mph

Juniper Drive: 25 mph

Justin Morgan Drive: 25 mph

Kathleen Lane: 25 mph

Kylies Way: 25 mph

Lakewood Court: 25 mph

Landing Avenue: 25 mph

Laura Lane: 25 mph

Lavigne Road: 35 mph

Lawrence J. Drive: 25 mph

Leclair Drive: 25 mph

Leoray Court: 25 mph

Liberty Lane: 25 mph

Lily Lane: 25 mph

Lindale Drive: 25 mph

Logan Drive: 25 mph

Lois Lane: 25 mph

Lomartire Drive: 25 mph

Longwood Circle: 25 mph

Lower Mountain View Drive: 25 mph

Macrae Road: 35 mph

Mainiere Lane: 25 mph

Mallard Drive: 25 mph

Maple Ridge Drive: 25 mph

Marble Island Road (public portion): 25 mph

Marcou Lane: 25 mph

Mariner Heights: 25 mph

Mazza Court: 25 mph

Meadow Drive: 25 mph

Mercier Drive: 25 mph

Middle Road: 30 mph

Midnight Pass: 25 mph

Mill Pond Road: 35 mph

Mills Point Road: 30 mph

Morellen Lane: 25 mph

Morehouse Drive: 25 mph

Mountain View Drive: 30 mph

New England Avenue: 25 mph

Nice Way: 25 mph

North Harbor Road: 25 mph

Northland Court: 25 mph

Norway Drive: 25 mph

Nottingham Court: 25 mph

Oak Circle: 25 mph

Oak Ridge Drive: 25 mph

Old Saw Mill Road: 25 mph

Orchard Circle: 25 mph

Orchard Drive: 25 mph

Orion Drive: 25 mph

Overlake Drive: 25 mph

Parkwood Drive: 25 mph

Parsons Road: 25 mph

Pebble Beach Road: 25 mph

Pine Lane: 25 mph

Pine Island Road: 35 mph

Pine Meadow Drive: 25 mph

Ponderosa Drive: 25 mph

Poor Farm Road: 25 mph

Porters Point Road:

•  From Church Road intersection to Holy Cross intersection: 35 mph

•  From Holy Cross Road to end of Porters Point Road: 25 mph

Pretty Road: 25 mph

Prim Road: 35 mph

Princess Anne: 25 mph

Rathe Road:

•  Public portion: 0.19 miles beginning at Roosevelt Highway (U.S. Route 2/7) to Mountain View Drive: 30 mph

Raymond Road: 25 mph

Red Oak Drive: 25 mph

Renkin Drive: 25 mph

Reynolds Drive: 25 mph

Richfield Lane: 25 mph

River Road: 25 mph

Robin Road: 25 mph

Rudgate Road: 25 mph

Ryan Place: 25 mph

Sand Road:

•  From the Colchester Pond Road intersection (Town Hwy. 6) to the Essex town line: 35 mph

Shady Lane: 25 mph

Shetland Lane: 25 mph

Shore Acres Drive: 25 mph

South Bay Circle: 25 mph

South Oak Circle: 25 mph

South Park Drive: 30 mph

Spauldings Bay: 25 mph

Stone Drive: 25 mph

Sunderland Woods Road: 25 mph

Sunset Road: 25 mph

Tanglewood Drive: 25 mph

Thayer Bay Circle: 25 mph

Thayer Bay Road: 25 mph

Thibault Drive: 25 mph

Thomas Drive: 25 mph

Timberlake Drive: 25 mph

Tower Ridge: 25 mph

Troy Avenue: 25 mph

Turquoise Drive: 25 mph

Valleyfield Drive: 25 mph

Village Drive: 25 mph

Wall Street: 25 mph

Walnut Grove: 25 mph

Water Tower Circle: 25 mph

Waterlefe Way: 25 mph

Watkins Road: 35 mph

West View Road: 25 mph

Waybury Road: 25 mph

Westward Drive: 25 mph

Wheatley Court: 25 mph

Wildflower Lane: 25 mph

Wildlife Loop: 25 mph

Williams Road: 35 mph

Windemere Way: 25 mph

Wintergreen Drive: 25 mph

Woodrose Lane: 25 mph

Woodside Drive: 25 mph

Young Street: 25 mph

Other:

Laker Lane (High School Road): 25 mph

U.S. Route 2A (Main Street):

•  Beginning at the Colchester/Essex Town Line 1.17 miles north to 0.3 miles south of Mill Pond Road: 40 mph

•  From 0.3 miles south of East Road to the intersection of US Routes 2 and 7: 35 mph

U.S. Route 2/U.S. Route 7 (Roosevelt Highway):

•  Beginning at the Winooski city line, .35 miles north to .26 miles south of Hercules Drive: 30 mph

•  From .26 miles south of Hercules Drive to .02 miles north of Rathe Road: 40 mph

•  From five hundred (500) feet south of Bay Road intersection to five hundred (500) feet north of Creek Road intersection: 35 mph

•  For 0.2 miles on the south end and 0.1 miles on the north end: transitional: 40 mph

U.S. Route 15 (College Parkway):

•  From the Town of Essex Line to the entrance of Camp Johnson: 45 mph

•  From the Camp Johnson entrance to the Winooski city line: 35 mph

(Ord. of 11-11-14; Ord. of 8-9-16; Ord. of 10-25-16; Ord. of 1-10-17; Ord. of 3-28-17; Ord. of 12-12-17; Ords. of 10-23-18(2); Ord. of 11-13-18)

Sec. 12-17.   Traffic-control light locations.

Traffic-control light signals are hereby established at the following locations:

(1)  Heineburg Drive, Porters Point Road, Prim Road, Macrae Road.

(2)  Blakely Road and Lakeshore Drive.

(3)  Blakely Road at the school/pedestrian crossing.

(4)  U.S. Route 2 at I-89 south on ramp.

(5)  U.S. Route 2 at I-89 north on ramp.

(6)  U.S. Route 2 at U.S. Route 7.

(7)  U.S. Route 7 at Severance Road.

(8)  U.S. Route 7 at Rathe Road.

(9)  U.S. Route 7 at Hercules Drive.

(10)  U.S. Route 7 at Mountain View Drive.

(11)  U.S. Route 7 at I-89 north on ramp.

(12)  U.S. Route 7 at I-89 south on ramp.

(13)  U.S. Route 7 at South Park Drive.

(14)  U.S. Route 15 at Camp Johnson.

(15)  U.S. Route 15 at Barnes Avenue.

(16)  U.S. Route 15 at Fanny Allen Hospital.

(17)  U.S. Route 15 at St. Michaels College Main Entrance.

(18)  U.S. Route 15 at Lime Kiln Road.

(19)  U.S. Route 15 at St. Michaels College South Entrance.

(20)  U.S. Route 2A (Main Street) at Mill Pond and East Roads.

(Ord. of 1-7-75; Ord. of 8-23-77; Ord. of 12-5-78; Ord. of 10-27-81; Ord. of 1-5-82; Ord. of 7-6-82; Ord. of 10-11-83; Ord. of 6-23-87; Ord. of 4-12-88; Ord. of 6-12-90; Ord. of 9-10-91; Ord. of 10-8-91; Ord. of 6-22-93; Ord. of 2-27-96; Ord. of 10-14-97; Ord. of 8-11-98; Ord. of 2-23-99; Ord. of 6-1-99; Ord. of 9-28-99; Ord. of 11-23-99; Ord. of 1-31-01; Ord. of 9-25-01; Ord. of 3-12-02; Ord. of 10-22-02; Ord. of 2-11-03; Amend. of 12-16-03; Ord. of 6-22-04; Ord. of 7-27-04; Ord. of 4-24-07(1); Ord. of 4-14-08(1); Amend. of 8-25-09; Amend. of 9-8-09; Amend. of 1-12-10; Amend. of 3-23-10; Ord. of 1-25-11; Ord. of 2-22-11; Ord. of 1-10-12; Ord. of 2-12-13; Ords. of 8-13-13; Ord. of 11-11-14; Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-18.   School speed zone.

A speed limit of twenty-five (25) miles per hour shall apply on the following roads when school is in session and warning lights are flashing.

(1)  On Malletts Bay Avenue, from Blakely Road intersection south three hundred (300) feet.

(2)  On Blakely Road beginning three hundred (300) feet west of Laker Lane to two hundred (200) feet east of Quinn Lane.

(3)  On Porters Point Road, beginning three hundred sixteen (316) feet south and two hundred thirty-six (236) feet north of the school property.

(4)  On Main Street, beginning .09 miles south of Middle Road for .26 miles to .19 miles south of U.S. Route 7.

(Ord. of 4-22-97; Ord. of 6-8-04; Ord. of 6-22-04; Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-19.   One-way traffic.

One-way traffic shall be designated at the following locations:

(1)  Along the public access south of the Burnham Memorial Library, beginning at the east boundary of Town-owned land, west to the access drive/U.S. Route 2A (Main Street) intersection where "Do Not Enter" signs shall be placed facing U.S. Route 2A.

(Ord. of 3-14-00; Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-20.   Abandoned vehicles.

(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them:

(1)  Street or highway shall mean the entire width between property lines of every way available for public use for vehicular or pedestrian travel, and designated for such public use by a municipal legislative body, or the appropriate agency of the State of Vermont, or laid out pursuant to Title 19, Vermont Statutes Annotated.

(2)  Vehicle shall mean a machine propelled by other than muscular power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides, and transport persons or property, pull machinery or be pulled by machinery and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, tractors and wagons.

(b)  Leaving dismantled, nonoperating or unregistered vehicles on streets prohibited. No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperative, wrecked, junked or unregistered vehicle on any street or highway within the Town.

(c)  Authority to remove vehicles.

(1)  The Chief of Police, or any Colchester Police Officer, is hereby authorized to remove or have removed any vehicles left at any place within the Town which reasonably appear to be in violation of this section.

(2)  Any vehicle removed by the Chief of Police or his/her agent for violating this section shall be impounded until lawfully claimed by the owner thereof or legally disposed of.

(3)  The costs of impounding and storing any vehicle in violation of this section shall be the responsibility of the owner of the vehicle.

(Ord. of 9-25-01, § 12-30; Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-21.   Turning prohibitions.

(a)  Left turns shall be prohibited for westbound traffic on Blakely Road at Severance Green (a private road).

(b)  Left turns shall be prohibited for southbound traffic on Heineberg Drive at the entrance of 49 Heineberg Drive.

(c)  No operator shall turn right on red after stop where signage indicates that it is not allowed.

(Ord. of 8-13-13; Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-22.   Stopping in roadway prohibited.

No driver shall stop his/her vehicle in the traveled portion of a roadway in a manner that interferes with the flow of traffic for the purpose of solicitation, or any purpose other than temporarily to engage in loading or unloading mail, refuse/recycling, merchandise, or passengers.

(Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-23.   Authority to prohibit use of streets by trucks.

(a)  Trucks as further described in this section shall be prohibited from using the following streets:

•\Thomas Drive

(b)  "Truck" defined. The term "truck" as used in this section, shall mean and include any motor vehicle or combination of vehicles, at least one of which shall be motorized, which vehicle or combination of vehicles has a total vehicle weight in excess of 16,000 pounds. Total vehicle weight shall be computed as required by 23 V.S.A. Chapter 7, Section 367.

(c)  This section shall not apply to trucks making deliveries to or from properties located on such streets, municipal maintenance vehicles, or emergency vehicles. This exemption shall also apply to motor vehicles originating from properties on such streets.

(Ord. of 11-13-18)

Secs. 12-24—12-30.   Reserved.

ARTICLE III.   PARKING, STANDING, AND STOPPING
Sec. 12-31. No-parking zones.

Sec. 12-32. Parking without authorization on public grounds—Snow removal.

Sec. 12-33. Parking ban for emergencies and special events.

Sec. 12-34. Stop signs required.

Sec. 12-35. Yield signs required.

Sec. 12-36. Fire hydrant and fire lane parking prohibited.

Secs. 12-37—12-39. Reserved.




Sec. 12-31.   No-parking zones.

(a)  Designation. There shall be no parking on the following streets and publicly owned land:

There shall be no parking within twenty (20) feet of the intersection of two (2) or more public roads or within twenty (20) feet of the intersection of a public road and private road or drive when signs indicating these prohibitions are provided.

Anna's Court: No parking along the sidewalk (north) side (inner side of loop).

All school property: There shall be no parking in the fire lanes.

Bayside Park: In and along the south and northwest sides of West Lakeshore Drive, from the entrance of Bayside Park to Hazelett Strip Casting Corporation.

Bellwood Avenue: There shall be no parking on the north and south sides of Bellwood Avenue for a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the intersection of Church Road.

Blakely Road: There shall be no parking on the southerly side of Blakely Road within twenty (20) feet of either side of the crosswalk located between the entrances of Colchester Middle School and Colchester High School.

Brooke Lane: No parking along the sidewalk side (east side).

Brosseau Lane: No parking on the west (sidewalk) side of the street.

Caleb Court: No parking on the south side of the street.

Churchill Lane: No parking on both sides of street.

Colchester Point Road: On either side for the distance that it abuts the Town-owned property of Airport Park.

Colchester Pond Road: There shall be no parking on either side of Colchester Pond Road for a distance of three hundred (300) feet on the north side and five hundred (500) feet on the south side of the entrance drive to the parking lot access to Colchester Pond.

Collins Farm Road: No parking on either side of the street.

Church Road: There shall be no parking on the west side of Church Road in front of Holy Cross Church beginning twenty (20) feet south of the south entrance to the property and north to the end of the no parking zone.

Dalton Drive: No parking on the south side of the street.

Eagle Park Drive: There shall be no parking on either side of Eagle Park Drive (Town Hwy 96) for a distance of eighty-five (85) feet from the Severance Road (Town Hwy 7) intersection.

Emmas Way: No parking on the west side of the street.

Ethan Allen Avenue: No parking on the south side of the street.

Ethan Allen Avenue: No parking in bus loading zones as identified by signs.

Fox Run: No parking on the north side of the street.

Granite Creek Road: There shall be no parking on the west side of the street.

Hegeman Avenue: No parking on the south side of the street.

Hegeman Avenue: No parking in bus loading zones as identified by signs.

Heineberg Drive: There shall be no parking on either side of Heineberg Drive from Porters Point Road (Town Hwy. 30) intersection to the Burlington city line.

Jen Barry Lane: No parking on eastern side of street.

Johnson Avenue: There shall be no parking in front of the Handy Apartments on the right side of Johnson Avenue.

Kathleen Lane: No parking on the west side of the street.

Lily Lane: No parking on the north side of the street.

Lomartire Drive: No parking along sidewalk (north/east) side of the street.

Marina District: No parking beginning at Mazza's General Store and continuing along both sides of W. Lakeshore Drive to Bayside Park.

Mills Point Road: There shall be no parking on either side of Mills Point Road from its intersection with the Causeway Bike Path south for a distance of three hundred (300) feet.

Morehouse Drive: No parking on the north side of the street.

Nourses Beach: There shall be no parking on either side of Goodsell Point Road (Town Hwy. 41) for two hundred fifty (250) feet. There shall be no parking on Town Hwy. 1, Bay Road, and Lakeshore Drive on either side of the highway for two hundred fifty (250) feet from the Goodsell Point Road intersection.

Old Sawmill Road: On-street parking shall be limited to residents and guests only.

U.S. Route 2A (Main Street)—Village: There shall be no parking along either side of U.S. Route 2A (Main Street) for a distance of four hundred (400) feet near Our Lady of Grace Church.

South Bay Circle: No parking on the first one hundred sixty-five (165) feet of South Bay Circle on the east/north (sidewalk) side of the street.

Stone Drive: There shall be no parking on the inside of the street from its intersections with Granite Creek Road.

Troy Avenue: No parking on either side of the street.

Wall Street: No parking on the north side of the street from the southern intersection with Severance Road for a distance of 0.2 miles.

Walnut Grove: No parking on the west side of the street.

Waterlefe Way: No parking on the west/north (sidewalk) side of the street.

Westview Drive: There shall be no parking on either side of the street.

Wildlife Loop: No parking along the sidewalk (south/west) side of the street.

Williams Road: There shall be no parking on the south side of the street beginning at the Williams Road/E. Lakeshore Drive intersection for a distance of four hundred (400) feet.

Young Street: No parking along either side of Young Street from Malletts Bay Avenue to the intersection of Colonial Drive, a distance of 0.2 of a mile.

(b)  Penalty. Any motor vehicle parked in violation of subsection (a) shall be ticketed, which ticket shall constitute a penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first violation. The penalty shall increase to fifty dollars ($50.00) for the second or subsequent violation within thirty (30) days of a previous violation; said ticket is to be payable within three (3) days of the offense as provided for in Title 13, V.S.A., Chapter 19. The Ticketing Officer shall have the option of having the motor vehicle parked in violation of subsection (a) towed away at the expense of the owner, which expense shall not exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00). The Officer may have the vehicle towed if, in the Officer's judgment, said vehicle constitutes a traffic hazard or if the vehicle appears to have been abandoned, or if, in the Officer's judgment, the vehicle in that location shall constitute a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town.

(c)  [Loading and unloading zone.] There shall be no parking on the following streets and publicly owned land except for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers from vehicles:

Ethan Allen Avenue: A loading and unloading zone is established on the north side of the street, beginning at the Ethan Allen Avenue/Doyle Street intersection west for one hundred eighty (180) feet. At no time shall vehicles be parked unattended within this zone.

(Ord. of 7-16-68; Ord. of 7-23-68; Ord. of 9-6-77; Ord. of 8-1-78; Ord. of 3-6-79; Ord. of 12-30-80; Ord. of 6-16-81; Ord. of 10-27-81; Ord. of 12-13-88; Ord. of 6-18-91; Ord. of 6-22-93; Ord. of 2-25-97; Ord. of 8-10-99; Ord. of 2-22-00; Ord. of 10-18-00; Ord. of 1-2-01; Ord. of 4-24-01; Ord. of 3-12-02; Ord. of 7-23-02; Ord. of 4-14-08; Ord. of 1-12-10; Ord. of 2-22-11; Ord. of 1-10-12; Ord. of 12-11-12; Ord. of 1-8-13; Ord. of 2-12-13; Ord. of 8-13-13; Ord. of 11-11-14; Ord. of 9-22-15; Ord. of 10-13-15; Ord. of 8-9-16; Ord. of 1-10-17; Ord. of 3-28-17; Ords. of 10-23-18(2))

Sec. 12-32.   Parking without authorization on public grounds—Snow removal.

(a)  Designation of areas. No automobile shall be parked without authorization on publicly owned land within the Town and including, by way of illustration and not limitation, public and municipal parking lots, drives and ways, including the highways of the said Town, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. from the 15th day of November in each year until the following 15th day of March. The Chief of Police or the Director of Public Works may declare a parking ban for weather related emergencies at other times to facilitate efficient snow removal or roadway maintenance.

(b)  Penalty. Any motor vehicle parked in violation of subsection (a) shall be ticketed, which ticket shall constitute a penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first violation. The penalty shall increase to fifty dollars ($50.00) for the second or subsequent violation within thirty (30) days of previous violation; said ticket is payable within three (3) days of the offense as provided for in Title 23, V.S.A. Section 1746. Any police officer of the Town and the Town Manager are hereby authorized to cause vehicles parked in violation of this section to be removed and the owner of any vehicle so removed shall be required to pay a reasonable towing charge not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) for such removal as well as storage charges not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) a day and there is hereby imposed a lien against such vehicle so removed for the payment of the said towing and storage charges.

(Ord. of 3-6-79; Ord. of 11-10-92; Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-33.   Parking ban for emergencies and special events.

(a)  General prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle within any designated town right-of-way anytime of the year during a declared parking ban.

(b)  Authority to declare parking ban. Those listed below may have the authority to declare a parking ban, given that there is a demonstrated need for street maintenance, a hazardous weather event, special events or when situations exist which may threaten public health, safety, or welfare.

(1)  The Director of Public Works or his/her designee has full authority in declaring a parking ban.

(2)  The Town Manager may declare a parking ban after consultation with the Director of Public Works.

(3)  The Chief of Police or his/her designee has full authority in declaring a parking ban.

(c)  With as much advanced warning as practical, the Town shall make reasonable efforts to notify the public of the parking ban. For non-emergency matters such as a special event or planned street maintenance, the Town shall post "no parking" signs twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the parking ban. The temporary no parking signs must state the time during which the parking prohibition is in effect.

(d)  Signage declaring a parking ban shall be of such size and material as approved by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee.

(e)  Vehicles in violation of the no parking ban may be ticketed or towed at the owner's expense.

(Ord. of 8-6-16)

Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Aug. 6, 2016, enacted provisions designated as § 12-33 and renumbered §§ 12-33, 12-34 as §§ 12-34, 12-35.

Sec. 12-34.   Stop signs required.

(a)  Designation. Stop signs shall be erected at the following locations:

Abigail Drive at Malletts Bay Aveune

Abigail Drive at Carriage Way (west)

Abigail Drive at Carriage Way (east)

Acorn Lane and Oak Circle

Aikey Lane at Watkins Road

Al-Shir Road and Bellwood Avenue

Annas Court at Annas Court (where the road reconnects to itself and forms a "T" intersection)

Annas Court at Malletts Bay Avenue

Aurielle Drive and Porters Point Road

Austin House Road and East Road

Barbara Terrace and Holy Cross Road

Bay Road at Roosevelt Highway

Bay Road Extension at Roosevelt Highway

Bay View Road and Williams Road

Bean Road and MacRae Road

Bean Road and Prim Road

Belair Drive at Church Road

Belwood Avenue at Church Road

Birch Drive and Prim Road

Birchwood Drive and U.S. Route 2A (Main Street)

Birchwood Drive at Canyon Estates Drive and Canyon Road

Biscayne Heights and Colchester Point Road

Biscayne Heights at Windemere Way

Bissette Drive and Al-Shir Road

Bissette Drive at Porters Point

Blackberry Circle at Fox Run (east)

Blackberry Circle at Fox Run (west)

Blear Drive at Church Road

Bloomfield Drive at Porters Point Road

Bluebird Drive and Porters Point Road

Bonanza Pk. at Heineburg Drive (Route 127)

Braelock Road and Clay Point Road

Brentwood Drive at U.S. Route 7

Brooke Lane at Macrae Road

Brosseau Lane at Jasper Mine Road

Buckingham Drive at Colchester Point Road

Burnham Lane at Nice Way (north)

Burnham Lane at Nice Way (south)

Caleb Court and Church Road

Camp Kiniya Road and Clay Point Road

Canyon Estates Drive at Canyon Road and Birchwood Drive

Canyon Road and U.S. Route 2A (Main Street)

Canyon Road at Canyon Estates and Birchwood Drive

Carriage Way at Colonial Drive

Carriage Way at Abigail Drive

Casey Lane at Porters Point Road

Casey Lane at Pretty Road

Chestnut Lane and Justin Morgan Drive

Chimney Hill Drive at Mayo Road

Churchill Lane at East Lakeshore Drive

Church Road and Holy Cross Road

Church Road and Porters Point Road

Clay Point Road and U.S. Route 2

Clay Point Road at Jasper Mine Road

Cobbleview Drive and U.S. Route 2A

Colchester Point Road and Porters Point Road

Colden Road and Niquette Bay Road

Collins Farm Road at Roosevelt Highway

Conquest Circle and Timberlake Drive

Coon Hill Road and U.S. Route 7

Creek Farm Road and U.S. Route 7

Creek Glen Road at Deer Lane

Crossfield Drive at Porters Point Road (east)

Crossfield Drive at Porters Point Road (west)

Dalton Drive at Barnes Street

Deer Lane at Creek Farm Road

Depot Road and East Road

Depot Road and Sand Road Extension

Doyle Street at Ethan Allen Avenue

Doyle Street at Hegeman Avenue

Eagle Park Drive and Severance Road

Edgewood Drive at Blakely Road (east)

Edgewood Drive at Blakely Road (west)

Emmas Way and Porters Point Road

Ethan Allen Avenue at Barnes Street

Exit from the circle in front of Colchester High School and the high school service road

Exit from the Colchester Middle School and Blakely Road

Everbreeze Drive at Williams Road (north)

Everbreeze Drive at Williams Road (south)

Farnsworth Road and East Road

Fastnet Circle at North Harbor Road

Fern Court at Mercier Drive

Fern Court at Bean Road

Ford Lane at Bean Road

Forman Drive at Severance Road

Fox Run at Williams Road

Giffin Court at Severance Road

Granite Creek Road at Bay Road

Greenwood Drive and Porters Point Road

Gregg Lane at Al-Shir Road

Grey Birch Drive and River Road

Hawkes Way at Edgewood Drive

Hegeman Avenue at Barnes Avenue

Hegeman Avenue at Ethan Allen Avenue

Hegeman Avenue at VT National Guard Road

Hercules Drive and U.S. Route 7

Hercules Drive Eastbound at Hercules Drive

Hercules Drive Westbound at Hercules Drive

Hercules Drive Northbound at Hercules Drive

Hercules Drive Southbound at Hercules Drive

Heritage Lane and U.S. Route 2A

Hidden Oaks Drive at Severance Road

Holbrook Court and Heineberg Drive

Hollow Creek Road at Justin Morgan Drive

Hollow Creek Road at LeClair Road

Holy Cross Road and Porters Point Road

Hummingbird Drive at Malletts Bay Avenue

Indian Circle at Creek Glen

Ira Allen Court at Bean Road

Jason Drive and Williams Road

Jasper Mine Road at U.S. Route 2

Jeffrey Drive at Williams Road

Jen Barry Lane at Holy Cross Road

Jocelyn Court at U.S. Route 2A

Joey Drive at Williams Road

Johnson Avenue at U.S. Route 15

Johnson Avenue at Vt. National Guard Road

Julie Drive at Williams Road

Justin Morgan Drive at Creek Farm Road

Kathleen Lane at Severance Road

King Street at Dalton Drive

King Street at Ethan Allen Avenue

Kylies Way at Wall Street

Laker Lane at Blakely Road

Lakewood Court at Holy Cross Road

Lavigne Road and Blakely Road

Lavigne Road and Mallets Bay Avenue

Lawrence J. Drive at Porters Point Road

LeClair Drive at Creek Farm Road

Leoray Court at Heineburg Drive

Liberty Lane at Severance Road

Liberty Lane at Hidden Oaks Drive

Lily Lane at Main Street

Logan Drive at U.S. Route 2A (Main Street)

Lois Lane at Porters Point Road

Lone Pine Road at Bay Road

Mallard Drive and Porters Point Road

Malletts Bay Avenue and Blakely Road

Mallets Bay Club Road at Marble Island Road

Malletts Head Road at Marble Island Road

Mangum Avenue at Hegeman Avenue

Maple Ridge Drive at Princess Anne Drive

Marble Island Road at W. Lakeshore Drive

Marcou Lane at Jasper Mine Road

Mariner Heights at Marble Island Road

Mayo Road at Jasper Mine Road

Mazza Ct. and Malletts Bay Avenue

Meadow Drive and Prim Road

Meadow Drive and Prim Road

Mercier Drive at Macrae Road

Middle Road and U.S. Route 2A

Midnight Pass at Williams Road

Mill Pond Road and Severance Road

Morehouse Drive at Malletts Bay Avenue

Morellen Lane at Williams Road

Munson Road at Bay Road

Nice Way at Blakely Road

Nice Way at Lavigne Road

Niquette Bay Road at U.S. Route 2

North Harbor Road at Watkins Road (both locations)

Norway Drive and Porters Pt. Road

Nottingham Court at Church Road

Oak Circle and Rathe Road

Oak Circle and Sunderland Woods Road

Old Saw Mill Road and Blakely Road

Orchard Circle at Orchard Drive

Orchard Drive and U.S. Route 7

Orion Drive at Hercules Drive

Overlake Drive at Holy Cross Road

Parkwood Drive at Hidden Oaks Drive

Parkwood Drive at Liberty Lane

Parsons Road at Macrae Road

Pebble Beach Road at Marble Island Road

Pet Way at the west bound approach of Pet Way at the Pet Way and South Park Drive intersection

Pine Island Road and Malletts Bay Avenue

Pine Lane and Porters Point Road

Pine Meadow Drive and Airport Road

Pine Meadow Drive and Porters Point Road

Poor Farm Road and Blakely Road

Poor Farm Road and U.S. Route 7

Porters Point Road and Colchester Point Road

Porters Point Road and Holy Cross Road

Pretty Road at Porters Point Road

Prim Road at W. Lakeshore Drive

Princess Anne Drive and Porters Point Road

Queen Street at Dalton Drive

Queen Street at Ethan Allen Avenue (east side of VT ETV)

Rathe Road and U.S. Route 7

Raymond Road and U.S. Route 2

Raymond Road at Jasper Mine Road

Red Oak Drive and Colchester Point Road

Richfield Lane at Crossfield Drive (east)

Richfield Lane at Crossfield Drive (west)

River Road and Porters Pt. Road

Ryan Place at Crossfield Drive

Sand Road and Lost Nation Road

Shady Lane and Porters Point Road

Shetland Lane at Justin Morgan Drive

Shore Acres Drive at W. Lakeshore Drive

South Bay Circle at E. Lakeshore Drive

South Oak Circle at Sunderland Woods Road

South Oak Circle at Rathe Road

South Park Drive at the east bound approach of South Park Drive and Pet Way Intersection

Stone Drive at Granite Creek Road (north)

Sunderland Woods Road and U.S. Route 7

Tanglewood Drive and Colchester Point Road

Tanglewood Drive (north and south bound approaches), Waybury Road and Rudgate Road

Thayer Bay Road at Holy Cross Road

Thibault Drive at Porters Point Road

Thomas Drive and Blakely Road

Thomas Drive and Mallets Bay Avenue

Timberlake Drive at Church Road

Timberlake Drive at W. Lakeshore Drive

Troy Avenue at Barnes Street

Troy Avenue at Hegeman Avenue

Troy Avenue at Mangum Street (sign each side for Champlain in Sheltered Workshop)

Turquoise Drive at W. Lakeshore Drive

Valleyfield Drive at Malletts Bay Avenue

Village Drive and U.S. Route 2A (Main Street)

Vt. National Guard Road at Camp Johnson exit

Wall Street at Severance Road

Walnut Grove at Jasper Mine Road

Waterlefe Way and Blackberry Circle

Waterlefe Way and Fox Run

Water Tower Circle at Mountain View Drive

Watkins Road at Jasper Mine Road

West View Road at Mountain View Drive

Westward Drive and Village Drive

Wheatley Court at River Road

Wildflower Lane at Raymond Road

Wildlife Loop at Lomartire Drive (East end)

Wildlife Loop at Lormartire Drive (West end)

Williams Road and Blakely Road

Williams Road at E. Lakeshore Drive

Windermere Way and Airport Road

Windermere Way at Biscayne Heights (northbound)

Windermere Way at Biscayne Heights (southbound)

Windswept Drive at Orchard Drive

Wintergreen Drive at Creek Farm Road (east)

Wintergreen Drive at Creek Farm Road (west)

Woodrose Lane at Hidden Oaks Drive

Woodrose Lane at Severance Road

Woodside Drive and Bean Road

Young Street and Malletts Bay Avenue

(b)  Full stop required. Wherever a stop sign is erected at the location described above, it shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle, as defined by the laws of the State, to proceed into said intersection without first coming to a full stop.

(c)  Penalty. The penalty for not observing a stop sign as provided in Title 23, V.S.A., Section 1008.

(Ord. of 8-23-77; Ord. of 3-14-78; Ord. of 4-17-79; Ord. of 7-8-80; Ord. of 6-16-81; Ord. of 9-1-81; Ord. of 10-27-81; Ord. of 10-11-83; Ord. of 4-12-88; Ord. of 10-8-91; Ord. of 6-22-93; Ord. of 1-23-96; Ord. of 7-23-96; Ord. of 2-25-97; Ord. of 10-14-97; Ord. of 1-12-99; Ord. of 9-14-99; Ord. of 11-23-99; Ord. of 4-3-01; Ord. of 3-12-02; Ord. of 9-13-05(2); Ord. of 8-22-06(1); Ord. No. 4-24-07(2); Ord. of 4-14-08(3); Amd. of 8-25-09; Amd. of 9-8-09; Amd. of 1-12-10; Amd. of 1-12-10; Ord. of 1-25-11; Ord. of 2-22-11; Ord. of 6-14-11; Ord. of 1-10-12; Ord. of 1-8-13; Ord. of 2-12-13; Ord. of 8-13-13; Ord. of 11-11-14; Ord. of 12-8-15; Ord. of 8-6-16; Ord. of 1-10-17; Ord. of 3-28-17; Ord. of 12-12-17; Ords. of 10-23-18(2))

Editor's note— See editor's note following § 12-33.

Sec. 12-35.   Yield signs required.

(a)  Designations. Yield signs shall be erected at the following locations:

Fieldgreen Drive and Orchard Drive.

Kathleen Lane at Giffin Court

Rathe Road eastbound at Mountain View Drive.

(Ord. of 10-8-91; Ord. of 1-23-96; Ord. of 1-10-12; Ord. of 8-9-16)

Editor's note— See editor's note following § 12-33.

Sec. 12-36.   Fire hydrant and fire lane parking prohibited.

No vehicle shall be parked within six (6) feet of a fire hydrant or within a designated fire lane.

Penalty: Fifty dollars ($50.00) for first violation, one hundred dollars ($100.00) for second or subsequent within thirty (30) days.

(Ord. of 8-9-16)

Secs. 12-37—12-39.   Reserved.

ARTICLE IV.   PEDESTRIANS
Sec. 12-40. Obedience to directions and signals.

Sec. 12-41. Manner of crossing the street.

Sec. 12-42. Vehicles to yield to pedestrians crossing in crosswalk.

Sec. 12-43. Vehicles not to pass another stopped for pedestrians.

Sec. 12-44. Duty of drivers to exercise due care.

Secs. 12-45—12-49. Reserved.




Sec. 12-40.   Obedience to directions and signals.

All pedestrians shall be subject to and comply with any direction of any member of the police department and directions of all official traffic-control signs. Where such devices are not installed pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the regulations as set out in this article.

(Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-41.   Manner of crossing the street.

(a)  Wherever a crosswalk is provided, pedestrians are required to use the crosswalk when crossing a roadway.

(b)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any point other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a crosswalk.

(c)  Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of the crosswalk.

(d)  No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield safely.

(Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-42.   Vehicles to yield to pedestrians crossing in crosswalk.

When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation or do not provide an exclusive pedestrian walk phase, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger.

(Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-43.   Vehicles not to pass another stopped for pedestrians.

Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.

(Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-44.   Duty of drivers to exercise due care.

Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any pedestrian, child, bicyclist, or animal upon a roadway.

(Ord. of 8-9-16)

Secs. 12-45—12-49.   Reserved.

ARTICLE V.   BICYCLISTS
Sec. 12-50. General bicycle regulations.

Sec. 12-51. Riding on sidewalks, bicycle and pedestrian pathways.

Sec. 12-52. Riding on bicycles.

Sec. 12-53. Clinging to motor vehicles.

Sec. 12-54. Bicycles to be in good mechanical condition and properly equipped.

Sec. 12-55. Dissemination of information.




Sec. 12-50.   General bicycle regulations.

(a)  Bicycle defined. A bicycle shall be defined for the purposes of this section as any non- motorized wheeled vehicle that is propelled manually by pedals.

(b)  Obedience to traffic regulations. Every person riding a bicycle upon the streets, alleys and highways within the Town shall observe and comply with all signals, signs and ordinances regulating the operation of traffic not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.

(c)  Safe operation. Notwithstanding the following specific violations, every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway, sidewalk or recreational path within the Town shall operate in a safe and prudent manner.

(Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-51.   Riding on sidewalks, bicycle and pedestrian pathways.

(a)  Persons riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk or bicycle and pedestrian pathway shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian.

(b)  Persons riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk or bicycle and pedestrian pathway shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing a pedestrian or another bicycle.

(c)  Persons operating a bicycle on a sidewalk, in areas where such operation is not otherwise prohibited by this chapter, shall exercise due care, which includes operating the bicycle at a speed reasonable for the existing conditions.

(d)  Persons operating a bicycle on a sidewalk, in areas where such operation is not otherwise prohibited by this chapter, shall come to a complete stop prior to crossing all street crossings.

(Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-52.   Riding on bicycles.

(a)  No person propelling a bicycle may ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.

(b)  No person may use a bicycle to carry more persons at any one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.

(c)  Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway may not ride more than two (2) abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or except as otherwise permitted by the Commissioner of Public Safety in connection with a public sporting event in which case the Commissioner shall be authorized to adopt such rules as the public good requires. Persons riding two (2) abreast shall not impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic and, on a laned roadway, shall ride within a single lane.

(d)  Riders shall maintain one (1) hand on the handlebars of a bicycle at all times while operating on a roadway, sidewalk or recreational path.

(Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-53.   Clinging to motor vehicles.

No person, while riding or operating a bicycle on any roadway, sidewalk or recreational path in the Town, shall attach his/her bicycle or him/herself to any other moving vehicle; nor shall the operator of any other vehicle permit any person riding a bicycle to attach to his/her moving vehicle.

(Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-54.   Bicycles to be in good mechanical condition and properly equipped.

(a)  No bicycle shall be operated unless it is in good mechanical condition.

(b)  No bicycle shall be operated unless it is equipped with an adequate braking device.

(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle on any roadway, sidewalk or recreational path within the Town during the period from one-half (½) hour after sunset to one-half (½) hour before sunrise unless said bicycle or bicyclist shall be equipped with a lamp on the front exhibiting a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the front, with a lamp on the rear of the bicycle or bicyclist which emits a flashing or steady red light visible at least three hundred (300) feet to the rear, and with a red reflector on the rear.

(Ord. of 8-9-16)

Sec. 12-55.   Dissemination of information.

Every person or business engaged in the sale, rental or dissemination of bicycles shall inform each purchaser/renter/borrower of local ordinances and state law governing the operation of bicycles.

(Ord. of 8-9-16)

Chapter 13 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS [1]
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS AND OBSTRUCTIONS

ARTICLE III. - SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL

 

FOOTNOTE(S):

--- (1) ---

Cross reference— Street naming and street addressing, Ch. 17. (Back)

ARTICLE I.   IN GENERAL
Sec. 13-1. "Street" defined.

Sec. 13-2. Enclosing highway; erecting fence or encroachment; nuisance.

Sec. 13-3. Barbed wire fence or railing prohibited.

Sec. 13-4. Unnecessary interference with use of sidewalk.

Sec. 13-5. Authority to close streets.

Sec. 13-6. Disturbing monuments or markers prohibited.

Sec. 13-7. Injuring guidepost, guideboard, lamp, light, building, fence, or sign in street, highway or public place.

Sec. 13-8. Books containing surveys, maps or profiles adopted as public records.

Sec. 13-9. Sidewalks, curbs and gutters to conform to specifications.

Sec. 13-10. Cost of street improvements.

Sec. 13-11. Vehicles on sidewalks.




Sec. 13-1.   "Street" defined.

As used in this Chapter the word "street" shall include the entire width between property lines of every way used for vehicular traffic and pedestrian travel which has become public by authority of the law.

(Ord. of 11-24-92)

Sec. 13-2.   Enclosing highway; erecting fence or encroachment; nuisance.

No person shall enclose a part of the highway or street, or erect a fence, building or other encroachment, or make obstructions, or create a nuisance on a highway or street, or continue such enclosure, fence, building encroachment or nuisance on a highway or street.

(Ord. of 11-24-92)

Sec. 13-3.   Barbed wire fence or railing prohibited.

No person shall erect or maintain a barbed wire fence or railing upon the line of a sidewalk or street or in such proximity thereto as to be within reach of and dangerous to a passerby upon such street or sidewalk.

(Ord. of 11-24-92)

Sec. 13-4.   Unnecessary interference with use of sidewalk.

No person shall unnecessarily occupy, obstruct or encumber, or cause to be unnecessarily occupied, obstructed or encumbered, a sidewalk so as to interfere with the convenient use of the same by the public.

(Ord. of 11-24-92)

Sec. 13-5.   Authority to close streets.

In addition to the provisions set forth in Section 4-47 of the Colchester Town Code, the Chief of Police and/or Public Works Director shall have the authority to close streets or portions of streets to vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic when in their judgment the public safety is threatened by leaving the street opened.

The Chief of Police shall have the authority to close streets or portions of streets to vehicular traffic during and preparatory to any parade.

(Ord. of 11-24-92)

Sec. 13-6.   Disturbing monuments or markers prohibited.

No stone, post or other monument set by the Town to mark the location of any street line or grade shall be moved or in any other way disturbed, except by and under the direction of the Town.

(Ord. of 11-24-92)

Sec. 13-7.   Injuring guidepost, guideboard, lamp, light, building, fence, or sign in street, highway or public place.

No person shall injure, deface or destroy a guidepost, guideboard, lamp or electric light post or lamp or light thereon, or a building, fence, post or other thing, set, erected or made for the use or ornament of the Town. Nor shall any person move, mutilate or destroy, without the consent of the owners thereof, any sign, signpost, awning post, or other thing the private property of individuals, lawfully set, erected or placed in or upon a street, highway or public place.

(Ord. of 11-24-92)

Sec. 13-8.   Books containing surveys, maps or profiles adopted as public records.

The books wherein are recorded the surveys of the streets and the books containing the maps or profiles of street grades are hereby adopted and accepted as the public books of record for that purpose.

(Ord. of 11-24-92)

Sec. 13-9.   Sidewalks, curbs and gutters to conform to specifications.

All new sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall conform to current specifications of the Public Works Department, and shall be set on such grade as shall be adopted by the Selectboard.

(Ord. of 11-24-92)

Sec. 13-10.   Cost of street improvements.

Whenever any street, lane or alley, or portion thereof, shall hereafter be graded, paved or macadamized and curbed and guttered on the petition of the owners of a majority of the frontage of the same, or without such petition, and the cost or expenses thereof shall be assessed upon the frontage under the provisions of the Town Charter, no subsequent assessment shall be made by the Selectboard under the provisions of the Town Charter of any subsequent improvement of the same character on such street or any portion thereof.

(Ord. of 11-24-92)

Sec. 13-11.   Vehicles on sidewalks.

No motorized vehicle, with the exception of motorized wheelchairs shall be driven, backed, led or allowed to stand on any sidewalk, except that wares or merchandise in process of loading or unloading may be transferred from trucks or other vehicles over the sidewalk by use of skids or other means; provided that a passageway is kept open for the free passage of pedestrians. Nothing contained in this Section shall prevent the riding or driving of vehicles from private property directly across the sidewalk of any street to the roadway, or from the roadway back to such private property.

(Ord. of 11-24-92)

ARTICLE II.   EXCAVATIONS AND OBSTRUCTIONS
DIVISION 1. - PERMITS

DIVISION 2. - GENERALLY

DIVISION 1.   PERMITS
Sec. 13-12. Permit required.

Sec. 13-13. Contents of permit for excavation; fee.

Sec. 13-14. Excavations across public highways prohibited.

Sec. 13-15. Waiver of jack and bore requirement.

Sec. 13-16. Obstructing street or sidewalk prohibited.

Sec. 13-17. Time limit for permit to obstruct street or sidewalk; fee.

Sec. 13-18. Permits for curb cuts required.

Sec. 13-19. Cuts to conform with requirements.

Sec. 13-20. Replacement of curbing.

Sec. 13-21. Penalties; suspension; revocation.




Sec. 13-12.   Permit required.

(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall disturb the ground or pavement in any street, sidewalk, curb or tree belt within the Town without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the Director of Public Works or his/her designee, in accordance with Town ordinances and regulations and pursuant to Title 19 V.S.A. Chapter 11, Sections 1101 through 1111.

(b)  The applicant for a permit, his/her agent, and the contractor doing the work shall before the issuance of the permit submit the following to the Director of Public Works, or his/her designee.

(1)  A certificate of insurance affording the following coverage:

General liability:

Bodily injury, per person: ..... $100,000.00

Bodily injury, per occurrence ..... 300,000.00

Property damage, per occurrence ..... 100,000.00

This insurance shall include coverage for collapse and underground (CU) hazard, explosions (X) coverage, at the discretion of the Director of Public Works or his/her designee, and contractual liability.

Automobile liability:

Bodily injury, per person ..... $100,000.00

Bodily injury, per occurrence ..... 300,000.00

Property damage, per occurrence ..... 100,000.00

This insurance shall include coverage for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee, at his/her discretion, will accept satisfactory evidence of self insurance in lieu of the above coverage. The above-referenced insurance shall not be canceled without thirty (30) days' written notice to the Director of Public Works, or his/her designee.

(2)  An affirmation that he is not delinquent in payments due the Town on prior similar work;

(3)  Evidence that he is competent and equipped to do the proposed work;

(4)  A proper permit or license to do the work, if such license or permit is required under the laws of the State or ordinances of the Town;

(5)  A satisfactory plan for the subject property and adjacent properties showing existing surface and subsurface conditions including the placement of existing utilities, trees and vital structures such as fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, water gates, underground vaults, valve housing structures, and any other vital equipment as designated by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee;

(6)  A plan for the protection of shade and ornamental trees and the restoration of turf.

(c)  The Director of Public Works or his/her designee reserves the right to withhold issuance of permits when:

(1)  Paving materials are unavailable; or

(2)  A satisfactory traffic, pedestrian, or utility diversion plan cannot be implemented; or

(3)  Unsatisfactory compliance of subsection 13-12(b)(1) through (b)(6).

(d)  Emergencies. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prevent the making of excavations as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property provided that the person, firm or corporation, making such excavation shall apply to the Director of Public Works or his/her designee for a permit on the first working day after such excavation is commenced. Even in emergency situations, notice shall be given immediately by phone to the Public Works Department, Police Department, and Fire Department, and all provisions of this Article shall apply to such emergency.

(e)  In the event excavations occur within the so-called drip line of a public street tree, any permit issued by the Director of Public Works, or his/her designee must be countersigned by the Tree Warden or his/her designated representative. In addition nothing in this Article shall authorize the Director of Public Works to permit the conversion of any tree belt area from that use to any other use with the exception of driveways without the expressed permission of the Selectboard.

(f)  Where an excavation is for the limited purpose of planting a tree, or erecting a sign, within the public right-of-way including the so-called greenbelt, the Director of Public Works or his/her designee may waive any of the requirements contained in subsections 13-12(b) and 13-13(c), (d), (e), (f) and (g).

(Ord. of 11-24-92)

Sec. 13-13.   Contents of permit for excavation; fee.

(a)  Application for a street excavation permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Town.

(b)  Permits are classified as major or minor depending on the nature of the work.

(1)  Major: Work within the public right-of-way which will disturb the roadbed, pavement or sidewalk.

(2)  Minor: Other work within the right-of-way which will not disturb the roadbed, pavement or sidewalk.

(c)  The fee for an excavation permit, payable in advance, is five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus escrow to cover full restoration costs for a major permit, and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a minor permit. The escrow shall be based upon the square footage of pavement to be disturbed at a rate of five dollars ($5.00) per square foot. Escrows will be held until the expiration of the permit warranty period.

(d)  The fee for excavation permits shall be doubled if work is commenced prior to obtaining a permit. Paying double fees does not waive other penalties. This subsection shall not apply to emergency excavations as defined in subsection 13-12(d).

(e)  Generally, a permit shall cover only contiguous construction and work performed as one (1) continuous operation, except as otherwise determined by the Director of Public Works, or his/her designee. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, where a continuous and single operation involves separate excavation by a single excavator, no more than two (2) such excavations shall be covered by a single permit, provided such single permit shall be allowed only where the distance between the excavations shall not be greater than twenty (20) feet at their opposite extremities. Additionally, where an operation includes jacking or boring requiring excavation on each side of a public way, only one (1) permit shall be required for such excavations.

(f)  A permit shall expire for work not completed within fifteen (15) days after issuance of a permit, and a new permit shall be required before completing the work.

(g)  A permit shall contain a commencement date and estimated date of completion. Completion date as used in this Section means the date upon which the permanent pavement surfacing is finished and accepted by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee.

(h)  (1)  Whenever the Town has developed an annual work program for the reconstruction of Town streets, the Director of Public Works shall send written notice thereof to all abutting property owners and to all departments, utilities, or others which have pipes, wires, cables, conduits, or other such facilities beneath the surface of the streets to be reconstructed. Such notice of the annual street reconstruction program shall be sent no later than April 15.

(2)  For the purposes of this Section, "street construction" shall mean:

a.  The recycling and relaying of existing material;

b.  The complete removal of old surface material and the laying of new material; or,

c.  Resurfacing of existing surface material with new material in excess of one (1) inch thickness.

(3)  Upon receipt of the notice of the annual street reconstruction program such person, department, or utility shall have not more than sixty (60) days to complete any subsurface work contemplated, or, if an extension of time is needed, shall obtain a subsurface work schedule approved by the Director of Public Works. If an applicant objects to the subsurface work schedule required by the Director, the review and approval may be sought from the Selectboard.

(4)  If subsurface work is done in accordance with subsections (h)(1) through (h)(3) above, then the applicant shall pay a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a major excavation in lieu of the fee due in paragraph (c) above for that portion of the excavation area which will be reconstructed.

(Ord. of 11-24-92)

Sec. 13-14.   Excavations across public highways prohibited.

(a)  Excavations within or across public highways for purposes of installing or replacing utilities are generally prohibited.

(b)  In all possible instances, such work shall be achieved through jacking and boring beneath the roadway, without disturbance to the paved portion of the roadway. Requirements for jacking and boring will be determined by the Director of Public Works.

(c)  Jacking and boring procedures shall be subject to all requirements and conditions as established under this Article.

(Ord. of 11-24-92)

Sec. 13-15.   Waiver of jack and bore requirement.

(a)  The Director of Public Works may waive the requirements to jack and bore for utility work as described in this Section.

(b)  A waiver may be granted when in the opinion of the Director, that circumstances such as, but not limited to, existing utility location, ledge, soil conditions, ground water, road condition, traffic volumes and the scheduling for capital improvements make jacking and boring an unreasonable alternative.

(c)  Requests for such waivers shall be submitted in writing to the Director at least fifteen (15) days before the work is planned. Requests shall include all reasoning to justify and warrant the granting of such a waiver.

(Ord. of 11-24-92)

Sec. 13-16.   Obstructing street or sidewalk prohibited.

(a)  With the exception of the provisions set forth in Section 4-47 of the Colchester Town Code, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to temporarily obstruct a street or sidewalk without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the Director of Public Works, or his/her designee.

(b)  "Obstruction" as used in this Section includes, but is not limited to, temporary obstacles and/or barriers which hinder the free and safe passage of pedestrians and vehicles, or which may receive injury or damage, if run over or into by pedestrian or vehicle traffic. "Obstruction" as used in this Section, shall not include obstructions associated with excavations, nor shall it include obstacles or barriers placed during the normal and routine maintenance operations conducted by the Town departments or any public or private utility.

(c)  As a condition of the issuance of a permit, the Director of Public Works, or his/her designee may, in his/her discretion and depending on the nature and complexity of the obstruction, require safeguards in addition to those required in Section 13-22 for the protection of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.

(Ord. of 11-24-92)

Sec. 13-17.   Time limit for permit to obstruct street or sidewalk; fee.

(a)  No permit as required by Section 13-16 shall be for longer than thirty (30) days, except as authorized by the Selectboard. A permit may be extended from week to week by the Director of Public Works, or his/her designee, as appropriate, subject to the order of the Selectboard.

(b)  The permit fee shall be as listed in the Fee Ordinance, Chapter 6½.

(c)  Applicant for a permit or its agent shall before the issuance of the permit:

(1)  Furnish a certificate of insurance for personal and property damage liability in the amounts of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)/three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00)/one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), and agree to indemnify and hold the Town harmless and/or free of liability arising out of said obstruction;

(2)  Show, if required under the laws of the state or ordinances of the Town, that he has proper permits or licenses to maintain the obstruction.

(d)  The permittee shall restore or pay for any property damage occurring as a result of the placement of an obstruction.

(Ord. of 11-24-92; Ord. of 10-10-95)

Sec. 13-18.   Permits for curb cuts required.

(a)  No curb cut shall be changed, installed or removed and no driveway on or across the public right-of-way shall be installed without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the Director of Public Works, or his/her designee.

(b)  Application for curb cuts and driveway permits shall be made on forms furnished by the Town.

(c)  The permit fee shall be as listed in the Fee Ordinance, Chapter 6½.

(Ord. of 11-24-92; Ord. of 10-10-95)

Sec. 13-19.   Cuts to conform with requirements.

(a)  All work under a curb cut and/or driveway permit shall conform to the specifications established by the Selectmen.

(b)  All work under subsection (a) hereof shall be subject to inspection by the Director of Public Works, or his/her designee during construction and upon completion thereof.

(Ord. of 11-24-92)

Sec. 13-20.   Replacement of curbing.

(a)  Where private property use has been modified so that an existing curb cut is no longer needed or where Town Ordinances do not permit curb cuts at existing locations the Director of Public Works or his/her designee, may require the abutting property owner to replace the curb at their expense within ninety (90) days from the date of notice.

(b)  If, after notice, the abutting property owner fails to comply with the Director of Public Works, or his/her designee's order for curb replacement within ninety (90) days, the Town may do the work, or have the work done and bill the current property owner for the cost.

(Ord. of 11-24-92)

Sec. 13-21.   Penalties; suspension; revocation.

(a)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be fined pursuant to Chapter 1, Section 1-9. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.

(b)  Any permit issued under this Article may be suspended by the Town Manager or the Issuing Authority for violation of the permit or failure to observe Town Ordinances. Any permit issued pursuant to this Article may be revoked after a hearing before the Issuing Authority. Where necessary for the protection of public safety, the Police Department, by any of its officers, may order the suspension of work at an excavation, or the removal of an obstruction, and may order the work site secured. Such order or orders shall be effective only until the Director of Public Works or his/her designee has been notified of the activity and has had reasonable opportunity to visit the site to take action for the protection of the public, but in no event shall any order by the Police Department be effective for a period greater than twenty-four (24) hours.

(c)  Cost of restoration of work suspended or revoked under subsection 13-21(a) or (b) shall be paid by the permit holder.

(Ord. of 11-24-92; Ord. of 9-10-96)

DIVISION 2.   GENERALLY
Sec. 13-22. Protective measures.

Sec. 13-23. Method of excavation.

Sec. 13-24. Refilling excavation.

Sec. 13-25. Resurfacing; defects.

Sec. 13-26. Restoration of right-of-way.

Sec. 13-27. Cost reimbursement.

Sec. 13-28. Disclaimer.




Sec. 13-22.   Protective measures.

(a)  Every person, firm or corporation making an excavation or obstruction within the public way under a permit granted under this Article must at all times maintain a suitable number of lighted barricades so as to provide adequate warning to approaching motorists or pedestrians of the excavation or obstruction.

(b)  The permittee(s) shall take appropriate measures to assure while an excavation or obstruction remains and during the performance of excavation work and until said work is accepted by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee, that traffic conditions shall be maintained as near normal as possible at all times so as to minimize inconvenience to the occupants of the adjoining property and the general public.

(c)  The Director of Public Works or his/her designee, may require that the permittee(s) prepare a traffic-control plan in detail appropriate to the complexity of the work. Said traffic-control plan shall contain the following information:

(1)  Approval of the Chief of Police or designee;

(2)  Approval of the Chief of the Fire Department or his/her designee;

(3)  Approval of the Town Engineer;

(4)  Adequate warning, delineation and channelization by means of proper pavement markings, signing and use of other devices which are effective under varying conditions of light and weather to assure the motorist of positive guidance in advance of and through the work area;

(5)  Flagging procedures, if necessary, to control vehicular and pedestrian traffic;

(6)  Identification, and if necessary, the removal of inappropriate markings to eliminate any misleading cues to motorists under all conditions of light and weather;

(7)  Identification of what provisions, if any, will be made for the safe operation of work vehicles, particularly on high speed, high volume streets;

(8)  Estimated commencement date of excavation and/or obstruction and estimated date of completion of excavation and/or removal of obstruction.

(d)  Notwithstanding any requirements provided for under this Section, every permittee shall comply with the standards set forth in the Manual of Uniform Traffic-Control Devices as adopted by the State.

(Ord. of 11-24-92)

Sec. 13-23.   Method of excavation.

(a)  All excavations shall be performed in compliance with the standards adopted by the Vermont Occupational Safety and Health Administration, as such standards may be adopted, revised and amended hereafter. In addition, bracing and sheeting shall be utilized where necessary to preserve and protect adjacent structures and areas. All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in any street shall be piled and maintained in such a manner as not to endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the streets, and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets and adjoining property. Where the confines of the area being excavated are too narrow to permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, the Director of Public Works or his/her designee, shall have the authority to require that the permittee haul the excavated material to a storage site and then rehaul it to the trench site at the time of backfilling. It shall be the permittee's responsibility to secure the necessary permission and to make all necessary arrangements for all required storage and disposal sites.

(b)  The permittee(s) shall not interfere with any existing public and/or private utilities without the written consent of the Director of Public Works or his/her designee, and owner of the utility. In the event the utility is Town owned and operated the permittees shall secure the written consent of the Superintendent of the affected utility department. If it becomes necessary to relocate an existing utility this shall be done by the owner of the utility, and the permittee prior to the commencement of relocation, shall pay to the utility the estimated cost thereof.

(c)  The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and location of all underground utilities, trees and tree roots, and protect the same against damage. In the event any pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus should be damaged, and for this purpose pipe coating or other encasement or devices are to be considered as part of a substructure, the permittee(s) shall promptly notify the owner thereof. All damaged facilities shall be repaired by the owner or department operating them, and the permittee shall pay for the expense of such repairs. It is the intent of this Section that permittee(s) shall assume all liability for damage to facilities and any resulting damage or injury to anyone because of such facility damage. Such assumption of liability is a contractual obligation of the permittee, and the permittee shall save harmless the Town from any actions arising as a result of such damage.

(d)  In the event excavation takes place within the so-called drip line of any public or private tree, the permittee shall protect said tree(s) in accordance with the directions of the Town Tree Warden or his/her designated representative. The moving of any tree specifically to permit the construction of any driveway, curb-cut or utility installation shall not take place without the permission of the Town Tree Warden. The permanent removal of any tree shall not take place without the permission of the Town Tree Warden in accordance with its regulations and the laws of the State concerning public trees. In any event any public tree is damaged, moved or removed, the repair, moving or removal and replacement shall be done in accordance with the provisions of the Town Tree Warden and the cost thereof shall be borne by the permittee.

(Ord. of 11-24-92)

Sec. 13-24.   Refilling excavation.

(a)  Where a permit has been issued, the permittee(s) shall notify the Director of Public Works, or his/her designee of the time and date when it will commence the backfilling of the excavations pursuant to the permit. Where no permit has been issued pursuant to subsection 13-14(d) because of an emergency situation, the excavator shall nonetheless likewise notify the Director of Public Works or his/her designee of the time and date of backfilling. Unless otherwise waived, the Director of Public Works or his/her designee will be present to monitor the backfilling for the purposes of ascertaining whether the backfill material is proper and adequately compacted. In the event the Inspecting Official determines that the permittee is not using acceptable backfill materials or acceptable backfilling procedures, he/she may order the suspension of all work at the site. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee may require the permittee(s) to furnish a soil test by a recognized soil testing laboratory or registered professional engineer specializing in soil mechanics in order to determine whether the backfill for the excavation was adequately compacted. All expenses of such tests shall be borne by the permittee.

(b)  In order for resurfacing to commence, such test must demonstrate that the backfill material meets the requirements for composition and compaction as prescribed by the Selectboard.

(c)  After any excavation in the roadway, the trenches or openings shall be properly backfilled with suitable material. The backfill shall be thoroughly compacted in maximum lifts of six (6) inches. If the work is done in cold weather, no frozen material shall be used for backfill.

(d)  Whenever the base of a roadway is disturbed, it shall be replaced in as good condition as before it was disturbed. New materials meeting the appropriate Vermont Highway Department specifications for base courses shall be used for replacement of the disturbed base. The depth of the new base shall be equal to or exceed the depth of the existing road base, but be no less than twelve (12) inches deep.

(e)  The permittee(s) shall establish grass by sodding or seeding at the discretion of the Director of Public Works, or his/her designee. Where existing topsoil is deemed of insufficient quality the Director of Public Works or his/her designee may require that new topsoil be used to replace the top six (6) inches.

(Ord. of 11-24-92)

Sec. 13-25.   Resurfacing; defects.

(a)  Paved surfaces of roadways which have been disturbed shall be replaced with bituminous concrete pavement (hot mix). The thickness of the pavement shall exceed the thickness of the existing pavement but shall be at least three (3) inches thick. The new pavement shall be thoroughly compacted with a satisfactory tandem steel wheeled roller. Pavement will not be placed until the road base has been approved by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee.

(b)  Unless otherwise stipulated in the permit, all pavement resurfacing after excavation shall be done by the permittee.

(c)  The permittee shall remedy any defects due to faulty materials or workmanship and pay for any damage(s) resulting therefrom which shall appear within a period of one (1) year from the date of completion as defined in subsection (d), and in accordance with the terms of the permit.

(d)  For the purposes of this Section, date of completion is the date upon which permanent pavement resurfacing is finished and accepted by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee.

(Ord. of 11-24-92)

Sec. 13-26.   Restoration of right-of-way.

(a)  Restoration of the public right-of-way following any activity provided for under this Article shall be completed by the permittee within a time period established by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee and according to specifications adopted by the Selectboard.

(b)  On the completion of the work herein contemplated all rubbish and debris shall be removed and the roadway and roadsides shall be left neat and presentable and satisfactory to the Town Street Superintendent.

(c)  Work not completed to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, or his/her designee within the time period established will be completed by the Highway Department or the Highway Department's Contractor at the expense of the permittee.

(Ord. of 11-24-92)

Sec. 13-27.   Cost reimbursement.

The Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall send the permittee an itemized statement of all charges for all labor and materials furnished by the Highway Department or their contractor. Charges not paid in full within thirty (30) days of the date of such statement shall be collected from the bond or escrow where appropriate or turned over to the Town Attorney's Office for collection.

(Ord. of 11-24-92)

Sec. 13-28.   Disclaimer.

The granting of a permit or the monitoring of operations conducted under any permit shall not make the Town of Colchester or any of its representatives responsible for construction means, methods, techniques, sequences, procedures or permittee's failure to perform the work in accordance with the standards and specifications set forth in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, nor shall any approval granted by any Town Official under Section 13-22 make any such official responsible for any personal injury or property damage occurring as a result of the permittee's operations.

(Ord. of 11-24-92)

ARTICLE III.   SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL [2]
Sec. 13-29. Dumping ice and snow in public areas.

Sec. 13-30. Mailboxes.




Sec. 13-29.   Dumping ice and snow in public areas.

(a)  Placing prohibited without permission. No person, by his/her own act, or through his/her agents or employees, shall throw, put, place, push, or otherwise deposit snow, or ice, in the following public areas without the written permission of the Director of Public Works or his/her designated representatives:

(1)  On the paved or travelled portion of any public street;

(2)  On any Town sidewalk.

(b)  Restrictions may accompany permission. In granting written permission under the previous section, the Director or his/her representatives may impose such restrictions as are necessary to protect the safety and welfare of the public, and such permission may be revoked at any time.

(c)  Violations; penalty. Any person who shall violate this Section or the restrictions imposed by the written permission of the Director or his/her agent shall, upon conviction, be fined pursuant to Chapter 1, Section 1-9. Each offense, and each twenty-four (24) hours continuance of such violation shall be deemed a separate offense.

(Ord. of 11-24-92; Ord. of 9-10-96)

Sec. 13-30.   Mailboxes.

No person shall construct or place a mail receptacle which does not meet all requirements including the proper dimensions, heights and distance from the road, as described by the United States Postal Service.

(Ord. of 11-24-92)

 

FOOTNOTE(S):

--- (2) ---

Cross reference— Dumping ice and snow in public areas, § 9-2. (Back)

Chapter 14 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO LAND DEVELOPMENT [1]
Sec. 14-0. Purpose.

Sec. 14-1. Authority.

Sec. 14-2. Applicability.

Sec. 14-3. Administration.

Sec. 14-4. Waivers.

Sec. 14-5. Definitions.

Sec. 14-6. Adoption of public works specifications and standards.

Secs. 14-7—14-9. Reserved.

Sec. 14-10. Appeals.

Sec. 14-11. Penalties.

Sec. 14-12. Obligation.




Sec. 14-0.   Purpose.

The purpose of this Chapter is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, to achieve uniformity and consistency throughout the Town's infrastructure, to produce infrastructure that is long lasting and can be efficiently maintained, is sensitive to preserving and enhancing environmental resources, and to establish a uniform level of quality for all public improvements subject to the jurisdiction of this Chapter.

(Amd. of 1-12-10)

Sec. 14-1.   Authority.

This Chapter is adopted pursuant to V.S.A. Title 24, Chapter 59, Adoption and Enforcement of Ordinances and Rules, Sec. 1971, Authority to Adopt, and shall be a Civil Ordinance.

(Amd. of 1-12-10)

Sec. 14-2.   Applicability.

The requirements, specifications and standards contained in this Chapter are applicable only to public improvements associated with new development, or, the expansion or extension of existing public improvements. No public improvements, except municipal maintenance, shall occur or be constructed or altered, except in conformance with the requirements set forth and incorporated herein. The Colchester standards contained in this Chapter are considered the minimum acceptable standard specifications for the Town of Colchester. The acceptability of any deviations from these standards shall be determined by the Public Works Director.

(Amd. of 1-12-10)

Sec. 14-3.   Administration.

The Public Works Director or his/her designee shall administer this Chapter.

(Amd. of 1-12-10)

Sec. 14-4.   Waivers.

The Public Works Director may waive or vary the provisions of any requirements of this Chapter if in his/her judgment the requirements are not requisite to fulfill the overall purpose as defined in Section 14-0 of this Chapter, or are inappropriate because of inadequacy or lack of connecting facilities in proximity to the project.

(Amd. of 1-12-10)

Sec. 14-5.   Definitions.

For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless their context clearly requires otherwise:

Building Inspector shall mean the individual or firm appointed by the Town to perform the duties of this position.

Campus development means a series of buildings and grounds used for a singular purpose such as, but limited to, a school; college; university; hospital; nursing or convalescent home; corporate, governmental, or shopping complex on one (1) or more lots that are owned and controlled by one (1) entity, or as may otherwise be determined by the Director of Public Works. The definition of campus development shall generally exclude residential land uses.

Contractor shall mean the party actually responsible for performing the construction of public improvements.

Design/Project Engineer shall mean a Vermont registered professional engineer experienced in the design of streets and appurtenances, sewer and water systems and/or stormwater systems, hired by the developer to perform planning, design and construction related engineering services.

Developer shall mean the individual, partnership, corporation or authorized agent developing a parcel or parcels of land.

Municipal maintenance shall mean the repair, replacement, modification or rehabilitation of existing municipal infrastructure by the Town or its agents, including, but not limited to, resurfacing of roadways, repair and replacement of sidewalks, and repair and replacement of storm drain systems.

Public improvement shall mean any land disturbance that requires a permit or approval under any regulation or ordinance of the Town of Colchester, which disturbance is related to the construction of any streets, roads, bike paths, sidewalks, or any other transportation infrastructure, or to the construction or alteration of utilities including, but not limited to, water, municipal sewer, street lighting, or stormwater, and shall further mean and include any improvement over which the Town will eventually assume ownership and control, either pursuant to the requirement of an ordinance, a condition of approval, agreement with the Town, or otherwise.

Public street, highway or road shall mean a new improvement that is exclusively maintained by the Town and is intended to provide a way of vehicular public access to:

(1)  Five (5) or more residential dwellings; or

(2)  Other residential, retail, commercial and/or industrial development, whereby such access is deemed by the Public Works Director to benefit the public's health, safety and general welfare.

A public street, highway or road shall not include or be part of an area designated or used as a parking area or parking lot. A vehicular access way within a campus development shall not be considered to be a public street, highway or road.

Public Works Director shall mean the individual appointed by the Town to perform the duties of this position.

Town shall mean municipality.

Town Engineer or Engineer shall mean the individual or firm appointed by the Town to perform the duties of this position.

(Amd. of 1-12-10; Ord. of 8-13-13)

Sec. 14-6.   Adoption of public works specifications and standards.

To protect the general public, health, safety, and welfare, and to establish a uniform level of quality for all public improvements subject to the regulatory jurisdiction of the Town of Colchester, this Chapter incorporates by reference, Public Works Specifications and Standards, Town of Colchester, Vermont, effective February 2, 2010, as may be amended from time to time.

(Amd. of 1-12-10)

Secs. 14-7—14-9.   Reserved.

Sec. 14-10.   Appeals.

Any interested person, as provided in 24 V.S.A. Section 4465(b), i.e.:

(1)  A person owning title to property, or a municipality or solid waste management district empowered to condemn it or an interest in it, affected by a bylaw, who alleges that the bylaw imposes on the property unreasonably or inappropriate restrictions of present or potential use under the particular circumstances of the case;

(2)  The municipality that has a plan or a bylaw at issue in an appeal brought under this Chapter or any municipality that adjoins that municipality;

(3)  A person owning or occupying property in the immediate neighborhood of a property that is the subject of any decision or act taken under this Chapter, who can demonstrate a physical or environmental impact on the person's interest under the criteria reviewed, and who alleges that the decision or act, if confirmed, will not be in accord with the policies, purposes, or terms of the plan or bylaw of that municipality;

(4)  Any ten (10) persons who may be any combination of voters or real property owners within a municipality listed in subdivision (2) of this Section who, by signed petition to the appropriate municipal panel of a municipality, the plan or a bylaw of which is at issue in any appeal brought under this title, allege that any relief requested by a person under this title, if granted, will not be in accord with the policies, purposes, or terms of the plan or bylaw of that municipality. This petition to the appropriate municipal panel must designate one (1) person to serve as the representative of the petitioners regarding all matters related to the appeal; and

(5)  Any department or administrative subdivision of this State owning property or any interest in property within a municipality listed in subdivision (2) of this Section, and the Agency of Commerce and Community Development of this State; may appeal any decision or action of the Public Works Director under this Chapter as amended from time to time, may appeal any decision or action of the Public Works Director to the Selectboard by filing a petition with the Town Clerk and providing a copy to the Town Manager.

Such petition shall be filed within five (5) days after receipt of notice of such action or decision. Within forty-five (45) days following receipt of the petition, the Selectboard shall meet and hear the petitioner and the Director and determine whether it should affirm or reverse the Director's decision or action or modify the same; any modification shall conform to the expressed or implied provisions of this Chapter. The Selectboard's determination shall be made in writing and shall be sent by the Town Clerk to the Public Works Director and to the petitioner.

(Amd. of 1-12-10)

Sec. 14-11.   Penalties.

Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating this Chapter shall be fined pursuant to Chapter 1, Section 1-9 of this Code. Each day in which any such violation continues shall be considered a separate offence.

(Amd. of 1-12-10)

Sec. 14-12.   Obligation.

Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to obligate the Town to assume the maintenance for any street, road, or other improvement until the Selectboard has formally accepted such obligation.

(Amd. of 1-12-10)

 

FOOTNOTE(S):

--- (1) ---

Editor's note— An amendment adopted on Jan. 12, 2010, deleted the former Ch. 14, §§ 14-1—14-12, and enacted a new Ch. 14 as set out herein. The former Ch. 14 pertained to construction standards applicable to land development and derived from Ord. of 2-24-04; Ord. of 8-12-08. (Back)

Chapter 15 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DISTRICT
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS

ARTICLE II. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DISTRICTS

ARTICLE I.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 15-1. Definition of special assessment.

Sec. 15-2. Statement of purpose.

Sec. 15-3. Separation of districts.

Sec. 15-4. Annual assessment.

Sec. 15-5. Limitations on use of funds.

Sec. 15-6. Special assessment districts allowed.

Sec. 15-7. Expansion of a district.

Sec. 15-8. Method of payment and abatement.

Sec. 15-9. Powers supplemental—Construction.

Sec. 15-10. Creation of a district.

Secs. 15-11—15-20. Reserved.




Sec. 15-1.   Definition of special assessment.

Special assessment shall mean a tax assessed against one (1) or more properties receiving the benefit of a particular public improvement as distinguished from a tax on the entire grand list of a municipality.

(Ord. of 12-8-92)

Sec. 15-2.   Statement of purpose.

Special assessments may be made for the purchase, construction, repair, reconstruction, of a water system or sewer system, or any other public improvement which is of benefit to a limited area of a municipality to be served by the improvements.

(Ord. of 12-8-92)

Sec. 15-3.   Separation of districts.

The special assessment districts shall be identified into separate and distinct categories. Each category has its special attributes as well as special improvements which benefit the properties within a district.

(Ord. of 12-8-92)

Sec. 15-4.   Annual assessment.

(a)  Each property in a special assessment district shall be assessed annually by the Town of Colchester, on the date set by the Selectboard for the district until all district obligations have been met. The Selectboard shall determine the amount necessary to meet expenses for the coming year and establish by resolution using the assessment formula to establish the rate upon which the properties will be assessed.

(b)  The Town Manager shall prepare an annual budget showing the proposed debt service expenditures and anticipated revenues for each fiscal period.

(c)  The Town Manager shall propose assessment methods and standards to aid in the determination of the benefit described herein and shall recommend such standards and methods for establishment of the special benefit tax for the district as well as individual special assessment fees to the Selectboard. The Selectboard, after public hearing and after considering the recommendation of the Town Manager, shall establish standards and shall levy such special assessments upon such properties in the proportion that it judges such properties to be benefitted by the construction and/or operation of the special assessment district. The amount to be raised by such assessments shall be payable to the Town Treasurer and appropriated in accordance with the Selectboard's direction.

(d)  The Selectboard may set the special assessment fees at any time in an amount it deems adequate to meet the expenses for each fiscal year and to provide for the collection thereof according to a schedule it deems appropriate.

(e)  The Selectboard shall make a final determination of special assessment fees and shall cause such decision to be recorded in full with the Town Clerk. When such decision is so recorded, the amount so assessed shall be and remain a lien in the nature of a tax upon the properties so assessed, until the same shall be paid, or such lien is otherwise discharged by operation of law.

(Ord. of 12-8-92)

Sec. 15-5.   Limitations on use of funds.

All collected revenues shall be used and appropriated solely for projects which directly benefit those who are located within and contribute to the "special assessment district." The total assessment made on account of any special benefitting improvements shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total costs of such improvements as provided for by Section 104(1)(A) of the Colchester Charter.

(Ord. of 12-8-92)

Sec. 15-6.   Special assessment districts allowed.

Districts may be established for projects which include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following:

(1)  Land acquisition;

(2)  Pedestrian footpaths;

(3)  Aesthetic corridors;

(4)  Parking areas;

(5)  Lighting;

(6)  Landscaping;

(7)  Signage;

(8)  Sidewalks;

(9)  Public works;

(10)  Associated amenities—trash barrels, benches, fountains, bathrooms;

(11)  Debt retirement relating to the above improvements.

(Ord. of 12-8-92)

Sec. 15-7.   Expansion of a district.

Upon the recommendation of the Town Manager or upon petition of the landowners within the assigned special assessment district, the Selectboard may move to expand or decrease the area of the district provided the following conditions are met:

(1)  Notification of the consideration of the change in the area is given in writing to all persons owning property in the affected area.

(2)  A legally warned public hearing on the question is conducted by the Selectboard. This hearing requirement may be met by the public hearing conducted in amending this Chapter to incorporate the district's expansion.

(3)  The Selectboard amend this Chapter to incorporate the expansion of a district.

(4)  Any requirement for voter approval for any Town obligations is satisfied.

(Ord. of 12-8-92)

Sec. 15-8.   Method of payment and abatement.

(a)  Pursuant to Title 24 V.S.A. Section 3255—"Collection of Assessments; Liens," special assessments under this Chapter shall constitute a lien on the property against which the assessment is made in the same manner and to the same extent as taxes assessed on the grand list of a municipality, and all procedures and remedies for the collection of taxes shall apply to special assessments. If the owner or owners of any property so assessed shall neglect to pay the Town Treasurer any installment of such fee on the date such installment is due and payable, the amount of such installment shall be increased by eight (8) percent, and for any amount not paid by the dates so set at Town meeting for the collection of taxes, the Town Treasurer shall issue a lien upon the delinquent property and collect fees in a manner consistent with delinquent property taxes.

(b)  The Colchester Board of Tax Abatement (Board of Civil Authority) is the Constituted Board for the abatement of assessments whenever the same are illegal or in the judgment of the Board cannot be collected or are manifestly unjust.

(Ord. of 12-8-92)

Sec. 15-9.   Powers supplemental—Construction.

(a)  The powers conferred by Sections 15-1 through 15-10 hereof are supplemental and alternative to other powers conferred by law, and these sections are intended as an independent and comprehensive conferral of powers to accomplish the purpose set forth herein.

(b)  The provisions of these sections shall be liberally construed in order to effect their purpose.

(c)  If any provision of these sections shall be held invalid in any circumstance, such invalidity shall not affect any other provisions or circumstances.

(d)  These sections shall be construed in all respects so as to meet all constitutional requirements. In carrying out the purposes and provisions of these sections, all steps shall be taken which are necessary to meet constitutional requirements, whether or not such steps are required by statute.

(e)  Pursuant to Title 24 V.S.A. Section 3256—"Construction with Other Laws," nothing contained in this Chapter shall prohibit the financing of any of the improvements referred to in this Chapter by a tax on the grand list of a municipality, or by other means.

(Ord. of 12-8-92)

Sec. 15-10.   Creation of a district.

Pursuant to Title 24 V.S.A. Chapter 87, Section 3251-3256, and Town Charter, Section 104(1) the Town of Colchester is hereby enabled to create special assessment districts.

(Ord. of 12-8-92)

Secs. 15-11—15-20.   Reserved.

ARTICLE II.   SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DISTRICTS
Sec. 15-21. Exit 16 Special Assessment District.

Sec. 15-22. Creation of district.

Secs. 15-23—15-40. Reserved.




Sec. 15-21.   Exit 16 Special Assessment District.

There is hereby created in the Town of Colchester a special district to be known as the "Exit 16 Special Assessment District." This district shall include all lands which are located in and around the intersection of Route 7 with I-89 at Exit 16.

(Ord. of 12-8-92)

Sec. 15-22.   Creation of district.

(a)  The "Exit 16 Special Assessment District" shall include the parcels as designated on current tax maps of the Town of Colchester and any parcels subdivided from those listed:

On Tax Map 1, lots 20-1, 22, 23, 24, 24-1, 24-2, 24-3, 24-4, 24-5, 25, 26 and 27.

On Tax Map 1A, all parcels, including 1, 20, 20-2, 20-3, 20-4, 20-5, 20-6, 20-7, 20-8, 20-9, 20-10, 20-13, 20-14, 20-15, 20-16, 20-17, 20-18, 20-19, 20-20, 20-21, 20-22, 20-23, 20-24, 20-25, 20-26, 20-27, 20-28, 20-29, 20-30, 20-31, and 20-32.

On Tax Map 3, parcels 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 11-1, 12, 13, 16, 17, 17-1, 17-2, 17-3, 18, 19, 20, 20-9, 21, 22, 23, 24, 24-1, 24-2, 24-3, 25, 25-1, 26, 27, 28, 29-1, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, and 66.

On Tax Map 3B, all parcels.

(b)  The exit 16 special assessment district is to be broken down into four (4) separate and distinct categories, each category having its special attributes. They are:

(1)  Category 1. Exempt properties. Premises not subject to special assessment. Residential uses shall not be subject to the special assessment fee established herein. Totally vacant, unoccupied buildings are not subject to a special assessment if it can be reasonably determined by the Town Manager that the use of the building in no way benefits from or is affected by the special assessment district improvements or by the operation of a tenant or landowner of other properties within the special assessment district. Real estate owned by the Town of Colchester or by the Colchester School District shall not be subject to special assessment.

(2)  Category 2. Vacant land approved for development prior to December 31, 1985.

(3)  Category 3. Vacant land approved for development or granted a construction permit after December 31, 1985.

(4)  Category 4. Deferred assessment due to vacancy and lack of approvals prior to December 31, 1991.

(c)  At the effective date of this Chapter, the parcels within the Exit 16 Special Assessment District are assigned to assessment categories as follows:

(1)  Category 1. Exempt properties;

Tax Map 3: Lots 18, 64 and 66.

Tax Map 3B: Lot 195 (formerly lot 15 A on Tax Map 3).

(2)  Category 2. Vacant land approved for development prior to December 31, 1985;

Tax Map 1A: 20-2, 20-3, 20-5, 20-6, 20-7, 20-8, 20-13, 20-14, 20-23, and 20-24.

Tax Map 3: 24-1.

(3)  Category 3. Vacant land approved for development or granted a construction permit after December 31, 1985;

Tax Map 1: All properties in district except 22, 25, 26, and 27.

Tax Map 1A: Lots 20, 20-15, 20-16, 20-18, 20-19, 20-21, 20-22, 20-27, 20-28, 20-29, 20-30, 20-31, and 20-32.

Tax Map 3: Lots 6, 7, 10, 10-1, 11, 11-1, 12, 13, 16, 19, 22, 24, 24-2, 54, 56, 60, 61, 63, and 65.

Tax Map 3B: All parcels except Lot 195.

(4)  Category 4. Deferred assessment due to vacancy and lack of approvals prior to December 31, 1991.

Tax Map 1: Lots 20-1, 21, 22, 25, 26, and 27.

Tax Map 1A: Lots 1, 20-4, 20-17, 20-25, 20-26, and 20-10.

Tax Map 3: Lots 8, 8-1, 17, 17-1, 17-2, 17-3, 20, 20-9, 21, 23, 24-3, 25, 25-1, 26, 27, 28, 29-1, 55, 57, 58, and 62.

(Ord. of 12-8-92)

Secs. 15-23—15-40.   Reserved.

Chapter 16 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
ARTICLE I. - OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT

ARTICLE I.   OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Sec. 16-1. Short title.

Sec. 16-2. Intent and purpose.

Sec. 16-3. Definitions.

Sec. 16-4. Organization and appointments.

Sec. 16-5. Emergency powers and duties.

Sec. 16-6. Violation of regulations.

Sec. 16-7. Penalty.

Sec. 16-8. Severability.

Sec. 16-9. Conflicting ordinances, orders, rules and regulations suspended.

Secs. 16-10—16-30. Reserved.




Sec. 16-1.   Short title.

This Chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as "Emergency Management Ordinance of the Town of Colchester."

(Ord. of 10-25-93)

Sec. 16-2.   Intent and purpose.

(a)  It is the intent and purpose of this Chapter to establish an office that will ensure the complete and efficient utilization of all the Town's facilities to combat attacks or other disasters as defined herein.

(b)  The Town of Colchester Office of Emergency Management will be the coordinating agency for all activity in connection with emergency management; it will be the instrument through which the Town Manager will exercise the authority and discharge the responsibilities vested in him/her in Title 20, Section 6, V.S.A., as amended in Chapter 4, Section 404 of the Town Charter, as amended, and this Article.

(c)  This Article will not relieve any Town department or contracted service of the responsibilities or authority given to it in the Town Charter or by local ordinance or by State statute nor will it adversely affect the work of any volunteer agency organized for relief in disaster emergencies.

(Ord. of 10-25-93)

Sec. 16-3.   Definitions.

The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this Article:

Attack: A direct or indirect assault against the Town of Colchester, its government, its environs or of the nation by the forces of a hostile nation or the agents thereof, including assault by bombing, radiological, chemical or biological warfare or sabotage.

Coordinator: The Chairman of the Town of Colchester Office of Emergency Management, appointed as prescribed in this Article.

Director: The Town Manager or his/her designated alternate duly appointed in accordance with Chapter 4, Section 401 of the Town Charter.

Disaster: Includes, but is not limited to, actual or threatened enemy attack, sabotage, extraordinary fire, flood, storm, epidemic or other impeding or actual emergency or calamity endangering or threatening to endanger health, life or property or constituted government.

Emergency management: The preparation for and carrying out of all emergency functions, other than the functions for which military forces or other federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or from flood, fire, storm or other natural causes, or from radiological incidents or hazardous chemical or substance incidents, and the preparation and planning designed to ensure that this Town is prepared to deal with such disasters or emergencies and includes civil defense activities.

Emergency management forces: The employees, equipment and facilities of all Town departments, boards, institutions and commissions or other contracted service (including, but not limited to, fire services); and, in addition, it shall include all volunteer personnel, equipment and facilities contributed by, or obtained from, volunteer persons or agencies.

Emergency management volunteer: Any person duly registered, identified and appointed by the Chairman of the Office of Emergency Management and assigned to participate in the emergency management activity.

Regulations: Includes plans, programs and other emergency procedures deemed essential to emergency management.

Volunteer: Contributing a service, equipment or facilities to the emergency management organization without remuneration.

(Ord. of 10-25-93)

Sec. 16-4.   Organization and appointments.

(a)  The Town Manager is hereby authorized and directed to create an organization for emergency management utilizing to the fullest extent the existing agencies within this Town and a budget to establish funds to support the organization. The Town Manager, as executive head of the municipal government, shall be the Director of the Emergency Management forces of this Town and shall be responsible for its organization, administration and operations.

(b)  The organization shall consist of the following:

(1)  An Office of Emergency Management within the Executive Department of the Town government and under the Direction of the Town Manager. There shall be an executive head of the Office of Emergency Management, who shall be known as the Coordinator of Emergency Management, and such assistants and other employees as are deemed necessary for the proper functioning of the organization.

(2)  The employees, equipment and facilities of all Town departments, boards, institutions and commissions or other contracted service (including, but not limited to, fire services) shall participate in the emergency management activity. Duties assigned to a Town department shall be the same or similar to the normal duties of the Department.

(3)  Volunteer persons and agencies offering service to, and accepted by, the Town.

(c)  The Emergency Management Director (Town Manager) shall appoint the Coordinator of the Office of Emergency Management (with the consent of the Selectboard) who shall be a person well versed and trained in planning operations involving the activities of many different agencies which will operate to protect the public health, safety and welfare in the event of danger from enemy action or disaster as defined in this Article.

(d)  The Emergency Management Director shall designate and appoint Deputy Directors to assume the emergency duties of the Director in the event of his/her absence or inability to act. (This designation to be compatible with the provisions of Chapter 4, Section 404 of the Town Charter. The intent being that there will always and at all times be an Emergency Management Director in charge of the Town.)

(Ord. of 10-25-93)

Sec. 16-5.   Emergency powers and duties.

(a)  The Town Manager (Emergency Management Director):

(1)  The Emergency Management Director may exercise the emergency power and authority necessary to fulfill his/her general powers and duties as defined in Chapter 4, Section 404 of the Town Charter. The judgment of the Emergency Management Director shall be the sole criteria necessary to invoke emergency powers provided in the Town Charter, the Ordinance Code and other appropriate authorities. The Town Selectboard shall convene to perform its legislative and administrative powers as the situation demands and shall receive reports relative to emergency management activities.

Nothing in this Article shall be construed as abridging or curtailing the powers or restrictions of the Town Selectboard as defined in Chapter 2, Section 211 of the Town Charter.

(2)  During any period when disaster threatens or when the Town has been struck by disaster, within the definition of this Article, the Town Manager may promulgate such regulations as he/she deems necessary to protect life and property and preserve critical resources. Such regulations may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

a.  Implementation of the Town of Colchester Emergency Operations Plan.

b.  Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of vehicles in order to facilitate the work of emergency management forces or to facilitate the mass movement of persons from critical areas within or without the Town.

c.  Regulations pertaining to the movement of persons from areas deemed to be hazardous or vulnerable to disaster.

d.  Such other regulations necessary to preserve public peace, health and safety.

e.  Regulations promulgated in accordance with the authority above will be given widespread circulation by proclamations published and uttered by newspaper and radio. These regulations will have the force of ordinance when duly filed with the Town Clerk and violations will be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, Section 105 of the Town Charter.

(3)  The Emergency Management Director shall order emergency management forces to the aid of other communities when required in accordance with the Statutes of the State, and he/she may request the State, or a political subdivision of the State to send aid to the Town of Colchester in case of disaster when conditions in the Town are beyond the control of the local emergency management forces.

(4)  The Emergency Management Director may obtain vital supplies, equipment and other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of health, life and property of the people, and bind the Town for the fair value thereof.

(5)  The Emergency Management Director may require emergency services of any Town officer or employees. If regular Town forces are determined inadequate, the Director may require the services of such other personnel as he/she can obtain that are available, including citizen volunteers.

All duly authorized persons rendering emergency services shall be entitled to the privileges and immunities as are provided by State law, the Town Charter and Ordinances for regular Town employee and other registered and identified emergency and disaster workers.

(6)  The Emergency Management Director will exercise his/her ordinary powers as Town Manager and all of the special powers conferred upon him/her by the Town Charter and the Ordinance Code of the Town of Colchester, all powers conferred upon him/her by any Statue, or any other lawful authority.

(b)  Emergency Management Coordinator:

(1)  The Emergency Management Coordinator shall be responsible to the Director in regard to all phases of the emergency management activity. Under the supervision of the Director, he/she shall be responsible for the planning, coordination and operation of the emergency management activity in the Town. Under the supervision of the Director, he/she shall maintain liaison with the State and Federal authorities of other nearby political and subdivisions as to ensure the most effective operation of the emergency management plan. His/her duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

a.  Coordinating the recruitment of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the Town for emergency management purposes.

b.  Development and coordination of plans for the immediate use of all of the facilities, equipment, manpower and other resources of the Town for the purpose of minimizing or preventing damage to persons and property and protecting and restoring to usefulness governmental services and public utilities necessary for the public health, safety and welfare.

c.  Negotiating and concluding agreements with owners or persons in control of buildings or other property for the use of such buildings or other property for the emergency management purposes and designating suitable buildings as public shelters.

d.  Through public informational programs, educating the civilian populations as to actions necessary and required for the protection of their persons and property in case of enemy attack, or disaster, as defined herein, either impending or present.

e.  Conducting public practice alerts to ensure the efficient operation of the emergency management forces and to familiarize residents with emergency management regulations, procedures and operations.

f.  Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies engaged in any emergency management activity.

g.  Assuming such authority and conducting such activity as the Director may direct to promote and execute the emergency management plan.

(Ord. of 10-25-93)

Sec. 16-6.   Violation of regulations.

It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this Article or the regulations of plans issued pursuant to the authority contained herein or to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management organization as herein defined in the enforcement of the provisions of this Article or any regulation or plan issued thereunder.

(Ord. of 10-25-93)

Sec. 16-7.   Penalty.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this Article, or any rule or regulation formulated thereunder, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished pursuant to Chapter 1, Section 1-9. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.

(Ord. of 10-25-93; Ord. of 9-10-96)

Sec. 16-8.   Severability.

Should any provision of this Article be declared invalid for any reason, such declaration shall not affect the validity of other provisions, or of this Article, as a whole, it being the legislative intent of the provisions of this Article shall be severable and remain valid notwithstanding such declaration.

(Ord. of 10-25-93)

Sec. 16-9.   Conflicting ordinances, orders, rules and regulations suspended.

All times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this Article shall be in effect, they shall supersede all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith.

(Ord. of 10-25-93)

Secs. 16-10—16-30.   Reserved.

Chapter 17 STREET NAMING AND STREET ADDRESSING [1]
Sec. 17-1. Purpose.

Sec. 17-2. Definitions.

Sec. 17-3. Street naming.

Sec. 17-4. Administration.

Sec. 17-5. General numbering system guidelines.

Sec. 17-6. Street signs.

Sec. 17-7. Effective date.

Sec. 17-8. Penalty.

Sec. 17-9. Severability.




Sec. 17-1.   Purpose.

In accordance with 24 V.S.A. Section 2291(16) and 24 V.S.A. Section 4421 the Selectboard of the Town of Colchester hereby establish the following Chapter regarding street naming and street addressing. The purpose for this Chapter is to help establish a more uniform street naming and street addressing system throughout the Town of Colchester. We believe that easily locatable addresses will have a number of beneficial results:

(1)  It will enable emergency services to arrive at a scene faster.

(2)  Deliveries will be easier to find.

(3)  The U.S. Postal Service will soon stop rural route deliveries and require a street address.

(4)  Visitors to our Town will be able to find an address and know where they are in case of emergency.

(5)  When the State of Vermont begins Enhanced 9-1-1 the Town of Colchester will be ready for it.

(Ord. of 6-24-97)

Sec. 17-2.   Definitions.

Apartment house: A building under one (1) ownership in which the rooms are arranged and rented as apartments. Apartment houses shall be numbered as follows: The apartment house shall be given one (1) street number and each individual apartment shall be given an apartment number. For example, 21 Main Street Apt. 1; 21 Main Street, Apt. 2.

Combined commercial and apartment complex: A building or buildings used for commercial use in which there is also apartments shall be numbered as follows: Each building shall be given its own street number; each commercial unit shall be given a respective unit or suite number and each apartment a respective apartment number. At no time shall a unit or apartment be given the same numbers. For example: 111 Roosevelt Highway, Unit 1 (first floor business), 111 Roosevelt Highway, Apt. 3 (third floor apartment).

Commercial complex: A building or buildings under one (1) ownership used for commercial or industrial use shall be numbered as follows: Each building shall be given its own street number, and each unit shall be given its own unit or suite number. For example: 111 Roosevelt Highway, Suite 1. Where there are multiple roads in a complex, each road shall be named and each building given its own number. In the case of commercial condominiums each separately owned unit in the building should have a unit number and further leased/division should be given a letter. For example 111 Roosevelt Highway, Suite 1, Unit A.

Duplex apartment: An apartment with rooms on two (2) floors and a private inner stairway shall be numbered as follows: Each building shall be given its own street number and each apartment within that building shall be given its own apartment number.

Duplex house: A dwelling consisting of two (2) separate family units that is separated from the adjoining units by a wall that extends from ground to floor shall be numbered as follows: Each family unit shall be given its own street number.

Residential condominium complex: A property where living units are separately owned while the site, and some improvements, are held in common. Each unit shall be numbered using the methods herein described.

Single-family dwelling: A detached one-family house shall be given its own street number.

Single-family unit with an apartment: A detached one-family house with an apartment shall be numbered as follows: Each single-family dwelling unit shall be given a street number and each apartment shall use that street number along with a respective apartment number.

(Ord. of 6-24-97)

Sec. 17-3.   Street naming.

(a)  Every street and road, both public and private, shall be assigned a name. If necessary, this will be done at first by the Colchester 9-1-1 Committee and after public input with final approval by the Selectboard.

(b)  In the future any new development must meet the guidelines of this Chapter.

(c)  All road names must be a separate and distinct name. No two (2) roads can have the same or similar sounding names. No new road can have any currently used name in the Town of Colchester. Furthermore, the Selectboard may change the names of the streets, both public and private, (after duly warned public hearings) within the Town when necessary to promote public welfare and safety.

(Ord. of 6-24-97)

Sec. 17-4.   Administration.

(a)  A uniform system of numbering properties and principal buildings as shown on the property tax maps which are maintained by the Assessor's office is hereby adopted for use in the Town.

(b)  The Assessors shall number parcels as necessary and update the property tax maps annually according to the method of numbering set forth in Section 17-5. Existing numbering of parcels not in conformity with this Chapter shall be changed to conform to the system herein adopted to maintain the integrity of the overall system and to protect public safety.

(c)  Prior to the issuance of final plat approval, a developer shall furnish a plan for a street naming system, including proposed curb cuts, in accordance with this policy to the Town Planner/Zoning Officer, who, with the Assessors, will then assign an address so that satisfactory mail delivery and emergency systems will be maintained.

(Ord. of 6-24-97)

Sec. 17-5.   General numbering system guidelines.

(a)  All roads are to be given an official name by the Selectboard and shall be measured in increments of 5.28 feet from a designated starting point, usually the end of the road nearest the intersection of a larger road. Odd numbers shall be assigned to the left side of the road and even numbers to the right side of the road. Each 5.28-foot increment will represent a street address number with the first 5.28 increment representing number 1, the second representing number 2, and so on.

(b)  All numbers shall be established based on front entrance from the street, from the center of the driveway (or in some cases from the center of the structure). The closest appropriate even/odd number shall be assigned.

(c)  For most roads there is a logical start point at which addressing should begin (at zero), generally at the end of the road which connects a larger traffic artery. Road numbering should generally begin at the point where emergency responders are most likely to enter the road, so numbers will be ascending as responders search for a location. Where there is no obvious end with greater traffic flow, it is recommended that the start point be selected at the end that is closer to the Town Center, or at the end which is otherwise the logical "zero" point for addressing. If there is no way to select a start point, one may default to numbering east to west or south to north, or one can be selected by "best judgment."

(d)  All numbers shall be properly affixed on or near the front entrance or in some other manner visible from the street. The numbers must be easily legible figures not less than two (2) inches high and in a color contrasting to the building background (reflective numbers are recommended). The United States Post Office requires correct, easily legible numbers which are not obscured by anything. The homeowner is responsible for the numbers on the house or unit. If the house is not visible from the road it needs a number at the driveway visible from the road.

(e)  Numbers shall be reserved to provide for future growth in property in all areas.

(Ord. of 6-24-97)

Sec. 17-6.   Street signs.

(a)  The Selectboard, upon adoption of this Chapter, shall institute a program for the installation and maintenance of street name signs in accordance with the names established by this Chapter. All signs shall be installed and maintained to the highest degree possible allowed by budget considerations.

(b)  All signs shall conform to the Town's Zoning Regulations.

(Ord. of 6-24-97)

Sec. 17-7.   Effective date.

This Chapter shall become effective twenty-one (21) days after passage unless a petition is filed in accordance with Section 305 of the Town Charter.

(Ord. of 6-24-97)

Sec. 17-8.   Penalty.

There will be a fine pursuant to Section 1-9 for any vandalism (stealing, defacing, or destroying) of public signs within the Town.

(Ord. of 6-24-97)

Sec. 17-9.   Severability.

If any portion of this Chapter and amendments is held unconstitutional or invalid by a Court of Competent Jurisdiction, the remainder of this Chapter and amendments shall not be affected.

(Ord. of 6-24-97)

 

FOOTNOTE(S):

--- (1) ---

Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 13. (Back)

Chapter 18 STORMWATER [1]
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS

ARTICLE III. - INSPECTION, ENFORCEMENT AND APPEALS

ARTICLE IV. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND STORMWATER CONNECTION

ARTICLE V. - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL

ARTICLE VI. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT

ARTICLE VII. - STORMWATER SYSTEM USER FEES

 

FOOTNOTE(S):

--- (1) ---

Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Apr. 25, 2017, amended Ch. 18, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 18 pertained to the same subject matter, consisted of §§ 18-1—18-41, and derived from an ordinance adopted Mar. 28, 2006; and an amendment adopted Jan. 12, 2010. (Back)

ARTICLE I.   IN GENERAL
Sec. 18-1. Purpose.

Sec. 18-2. Applicability.

Sec. 18-3. Responsibility for administration.

Sec. 18-4. Severability.

Sec. 18-5. Relation to other ordinances of the Town of Colchester.

Sec. 18-6. Ultimate responsibility.

Sec. 18-7. Documents incorporated by reference as may be amended from time to time.




Sec. 18-1.   Purpose.

This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the Colchester Town Charter at sections 103(b), 104(1) and 104(2) and 24 V.S.A., Chapters 59 and 61. Under the authority set forth in Title 24 V.S.A. § 2291, 24 V.S.A. Chapter 101. These Stormwater Regulations define the rules and regulations for the control and operation of the Stormwater Services of the Colchester Public Works Department, allow the Town of Colchester to exercise general regulation over the planning, location, construction, and operation and maintenance of stormwater facilities in the Town, whether or not owned and operated by the Town, to adopt any regulations deemed necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter, including the adoption of a system of fees for services and permits, and to define what constitutes a public nuisance relating to illicit discharges, soil erosion and stormwater management related to land disturbance activities. These regulations also provide procedures for the abatement or removal of such public nuisance as the public health, safety or welfare may require. This Ordinance also establishes methods for controlling the discharge of sediment, stormwater and non-stormwater discharges into the MS4, and/or surface or ground water in order to comply with the requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process, and General Permit No. 3-9014 as issued by the State of Vermont.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-2.   Applicability.

This Ordinance shall apply to all property within the Town of Colchester, and shall apply specifically as indicated in articles within this Ordinance.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-3.   Responsibility for administration.

The Director of Public Works shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Director of Public Works may be delegated by the Director to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the Town of Colchester.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-4.   Severability.

The provisions of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, it shall not affect the validity or application of other provisions of this Ordinance.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-5.   Relation to other ordinances of the Town of Colchester.

If the provisions of these regulations conflict with the provisions of any other valid and enforceable Colchester Ordinance(s), the stricter shall prevail.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-6.   Ultimate responsibility.

The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this Ordinance are minimum standards; therefore this Ordinance does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge or discharge of pollutants.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-7.   Documents incorporated by reference as may be amended from time to time.

(a)  Town of Colchester Subdivision Regulations.

(b)  Town of Colchester Zoning Regulations.

(c)  Town of Colchester Specifications and Standards for Construction.

(d)  Vermont Stormwater Management Manual, Volumes I and II.

(e)  Vermont Handbook for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control on Construction Sites.

(f)  Town of Colchester Stormwater Utility Credit Manual.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

ARTICLE II.   DEFINITIONS
Sec. 18-8. Definitions.




Sec. 18-8.   Definitions.

For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following shall mean:

Agent shall mean a person authorized to act in the place of another person.

Applicant shall mean a property owner or duly designated representative who files an application for a land disturbance activity.

Best management practices or (BMPs) shall mean a schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce water pollution.

Building Inspector shall mean the Building Inspector for the Town of Colchester.

Building permit shall mean a permit approved by both the Zoning Administrator and Building Inspector which authorizes any land disturbance activities in the Town of Colchester.

Clearing shall mean any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.

Construction shall mean land-disturbing activity associated with development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading, and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements, footings, piers, or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings such as garages.

Construction activity shall mean activities subject to NPDES Construction Permits. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.

Construction season shall mean the period of time between May 1 and October 14 when land disturbance activities are permitted under this Ordinance.

Contiguous shall mean sharing a common property border.

Credits shall mean an ongoing reduction in a property's or parcel's normally calculated stormwater fee for certain qualifying activities that reduce the impact of increased stormwater runoff resulting from development, or provide an ongoing public benefit related to stormwater management.

Department of Public Works shall mean the employees or designees of the Director of Public Works.

Designated Enforcement Officer shall mean either the Town of Colchester's Building Inspector or Health Officer, or other Town officers as may be designated by the Colchester Select Board.

Developed property shall mean any property that is altered from a natural state by construction, or installation of improvements such as buildings, structures, or other impervious surfaces.

Development shall mean the construction of improvements on a tract of land for any purpose.

Development Review Board shall mean the Development Review Board for the Town of Colchester.

Director shall mean the Director of Public Works for the Town of Colchester.

Drainage way shall mean any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout the site.

Erosion control shall mean a measure that prevents erosion.

Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall mean a set of plans prepared by or under the direction of a licensed professional engineer or a certified erosion control technician indicating the specific measures and sequencing to be used to control sediment and erosion on a development site during and after construction.

ERU is an acronym for "Equivalent Residential Unit" and shall mean the square footage that represents the average of the area of impervious surface for all single-family properties in the Town. The Town Selectboard shall, by resolution, establish the square footage that constitutes one (1) ERU on a periodic basis.

Grading shall mean any excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof.

Hazardous materials shall mean any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.

Illegal discharge shall mean any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the MS4, except as exempted in Article IV of this Ordinance.

Illicit connections shall mean any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the MS4, including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the MS4, and any connections to the MS4, from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the Director.

Impervious surface shall mean those manmade surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall. Examples include, but shall not be limited to: Paved and unpaved roads, rooftops, parking lots, walkways and driveways, compacted gravel or soil surfaces, including those created through agricultural activities, storage areas, awnings and other fabric or plastic coverings. Any area shown to be impervious through the stormwater utility's aerial imagery analysis, as most recently amended, will be considered impervious for stormwater billing purposes, unless a property or parcel owner files a successful appeal under section 18-46.2 of this chapter.

Industrial activity shall mean activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14).

Infiltration basin shall mean any structure or device designed to infiltrate retained water to the subsurface.

Land disturbance activities shall mean any land disturbance that requires a building permit or approval under any regulation or ordinance of the Town of Colchester that disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement of earth on land.

Maintenance Agreement shall mean a legally recorded document that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices.

Manager shall mean the Town Manager for the Town of Colchester.

Municipal Authority shall mean the Colchester Select Board.

Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System or (MS4) shall mean a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains):

(i)  Owned or operated by the Town of Colchester or another designated MS4 entity that discharges to surface waters or ground water;

(ii)  Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;

(iii)  Which is not a combined sewer; and

(iv)  Which is not part of a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.2.

National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit shall mean a permit issued by EPA (or by the State of Vermont under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.

Non-point source pollution shall mean pollution from any source other than from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include, but not be limited to, pollutants from mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.

Non-single-family property shall mean any single parcel of developed land with impervious surfaces that is not a single-family property as defined herein. This includes, but is not limited to: Professional condominium developments. residential properties with more than three (3) units such as four-plexes and apartment buildings, not-for-profit properties, commercial and industrial properties, mobile home parks, educational institution sites, agricultural properties, public properties including roadways, parks and recreation sites, parking lots and storage sites, and hospitals and nursing homes.

Non-stormwater discharge shall mean any discharge to the MS4 that is not composed entirely of stormwater.

On-site Sewage Official shall mean the Town's On-site Sewage Official or their designee.

Outfall shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater.

Parcel is any lot, subdivided piece of land, unit of land, any subset of land, land owned in common, or a condominium unit or condominium association in the Town of Colchester that could legally be sold as a separate entity as of April 1 of the year the fee is based on, and has a separate parcel identification number, map identification number or is identified as a separate parcel on the Town of Colchester Parcel Maps. Included in this definition are all roadways owned by the Town, the State, and the Federal Government.

Permitted premises shall mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips, that require a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, or a state stormwater discharge permit, or a construction erosion control permit, or stormwater best management practices constructed and submitted for receiving stormwater credits.

Person shall mean any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner, the owner's agent, or the operator of a premises.

Private stormwater system shall mean all elements of a stormwater system located in the Town of Colchester that are controlled and operated by individuals, corporations, and other organizations and not by the Town of Colchester, County, State, or Federal Government Agency, or that carry water that drains from any private property or parcel.

Property owner shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation or other entity or combination of entities who alone, jointly, or severally with others hold(s) legal or equitable title to any real-estate. The term "property owner" shall also include heirs, successors, and assigns.

Pollutant shall mean anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: Paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.

Premises shall mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.

Public stormwater system shall mean all elements of the stormwater system located in the Town of Colchester that are controlled and operated by the Town of Colchester or that carry water that drains from any public property or parcel, including street right-of-way.

Sediment shall mean soil, sand, and minerals washed from land into surface waters or onto other lands.

Sediment control shall mean measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the site.

Septic Permit shall mean a State Wastewater System and Potable Water Supply Permit, or a Town Water and Wastewater Permit.

Single-family property shall mean any single parcel of developed land that contains a single-family home (including mobile homes on individually owned lots), or a duplex, or a triplex, or any combination of the previous uses that does not exceed three (3) dwelling units. Residential condominium developments with individually owned units are considered single-family properties for the purposes of this Ordinance. This definition includes single-family properties where a legal home business/occupation exists.

Site shall mean a parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation.

Site development shall mean construction or alteration of the ground, improvements and structure installation.

Soil erosion shall mean when land or soil is diminished or worn due to wind or water.

Stabilization shall mean the use of accepted practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding.

Start of construction shall mean the first land-disturbing activity associated with a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading, and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements, footings, piers, or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings such as garages.

Stormwater shall mean precipitation and snowmelt that does not infiltrate into the soil, including material dissolved or suspended in it, but does not include discharges from undisturbed natural terrain.

Stormwater fee shall mean the periodic fee imposed pursuant to this Ordinance for the purpose of funding costs related to stormwater programs, services, systems, and facilities.

Stormwater management shall mean the use of structural or non-structural practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, peak flow discharge and detrimental changes in stream temperature that affect water quality and habitat.

Stormwater runoff shall mean flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation.

Stormwater services shall mean the Department of Public Works, which is responsible for construction, operations and maintenance of the public stormwater system.

Stormwater treatment practices shall mean measures, either structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means of preventing or reducing point source or non-point source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and water bodies.

Structure shall mean a house, building or any other assembly of materials used for human occupancy, including, but not limited to, residence, place of employment meeting places and places used for recreation.

Surface waters shall mean any receiving waters existing on the surface of the ground, including, but not limited to, brooks, streams, rivers, wetlands, ponds, or lakes.

Undeveloped property shall mean any property that exists in a natural state.

Un-permitted premises shall mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips, that does not require a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, or a state stormwater discharge permit, or a construction erosion control permit, or stormwater best management practices constructed and submitted for receiving stormwater credits.

Wastewater shall mean any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from premises.

Watercourse shall mean any body of water, including, but not limited to, lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, and bodies of water delineated by the Town of Colchester.

Waterway shall mean a channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to the public storm drain.

Zoning Administrator shall mean the Zoning Administrator for the Town of Colchester.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

ARTICLE III.   INSPECTION, ENFORCEMENT AND APPEALS
Sec. 18-9. Monitoring of discharges.

Sec. 18-10. Enforcement remedies.

Sec. 18-11. Appeals.




Sec. 18-9.   Monitoring of discharges.

(a)  Applicability. This section applies to all premises that are subject to regulation under this Ordinance.

(b)  Access to unpermitted and permitted premises.

(1)  The Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, shall be permitted to enter and inspect any premise subject to regulation under this Ordinance as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this Ordinance. The Town shall give written notice to the person and any occupant of the date of any inspection. The notice shall advise the person and occupant of the inspection, the person's right to refuse inspection of the premises, and the Town's right to seek issuance of an administrative search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction in the event of any such refusal. If a person has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the person shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the Town. Any Town representative shall present proper credentials and identification at any such inspection to any person or occupant, upon request.

(c)  Access to permitted premises.

(1)  Upon request, a person shall provide the Department of Public Works all records that must be kept under the conditions of a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. to include records that impose additional duties as defined by State and Federal law, records that document stormwater best management practices constructed and submitted for receiving stormwater credits, and records pertaining to any and all other stormwater infrastructure or conditions that are subject to regulation under this Ordinance.

(2)  The Department of Public Works shall have the right to set up on any permitted premises such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the Director to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the premises stormwater discharge. In the event the Director determines it to be necessary to install any such monitoring or sampling devices, the Director or his or her designee shall give written notice to the person and any occupant of the date of any installation, as well as the technical specifications of any such monitoring equipment and the proposed location(s) for installation. The notice shall advise the person and occupant of the proposed installation, the person's right to refuse installation of any such monitoring equipment, and the Town's right to seek issuance of an administrative search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction in the event of any such refusal for the purpose of installing monitoring equipment.

(3)  The Director has the right to require a person to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the person at his or her own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. A person shall demonstrate calibration techniques and satisfactory operation of the devices to the Department of Public Works upon request.

(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the premises to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by a person at the written or oral request of the Department of Public Works and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the person associated with the premises.

(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the Department of Public Works access to permitted premises are a violation of this Ordinance. A person who is the operator of a premises with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity violates this Ordinance if the person denies the Department of Public Works reasonable access to the permitted premises for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this Ordinance.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-10.   Enforcement remedies.

The Town, by and through its authorized agents, shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance, and any orders, violation notices, or enforcement orders issued hereunder, and may pursue all civil remedies in connection with any violation hereunder.

(a)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies set forth herein are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable Federal, State or local law. Election of one (1) remedy shall not preclude pursuing other remedies and nothing herein shall prohibit the Town from seeking multiple remedies.

(b)  Judicial Bureau Municipal Civil Complaint Ticket. Pursuant to Title 24 V.S.A., Chapters 59 and 61 and Title 4 V.S.A., Chapter 29, a Designated Enforcement Officer may commence prosecution in the Judicial Bureau for any violation of this Ordinance by serving two (2) copies of a municipal civil complaint ticket either in person or by first class mail on the alleged offender, and thereafter promptly filing the original with the Judicial Bureau. The issuing officer shall follow the procedure set forth by the Judicial Bureau for municipal complaint tickets. The first offense ticketed for a violation shall be punishable by a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00), the waiver fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00); a second offense ticketed for the same violation shall be punishable by a fine of four hundred dollars ($400.00), the waiver fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00); a third offense ticketed for the same violation shall be punishable by a fine of eight hundred dollars ($800.00), the waiver fee shall be four hundred dollars dollars ($400.00). Upon the fourth offense, or in any circumstance where the Town seeks remedies in excess of the Judicial Bureau's jurisdiction, the Town may request that the case be transferred to the Civil Division of the Vermont Superior Court, or any other court of competent jurisdiction.

(c)  Other enforcement remedies generally; fines, injunctive relief.

(1)  Fines. In addition to the fines authorized by Section 18-10(b) of this Ordinance, any person, partnership, corporation, or other entity adjudged to have violated any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be required to bear the expense of such restoration.

(2)  Injunctive relief. In addition to the foregoing penalties, an action, injunction, or other enforcement proceeding may be instituted by the Town to prevent, restrain, connect, or abate any violation or activity causing a violation. The relief sought may include the right to enter onto private property to abate or correct the violation, to restrain any activity that would create further violations, or to compel a person or persons to perform abatement or remediation of the violation; and to seek damages for all costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the Town in pursuing and obtaining such relief. In addition to any other remedies authorized in law or equity, the Town may seek an order specifically requiring:

a.  The elimination of illicit connections and/or non-stormwater discharges to the MS4;

b.  The discontinuance of practices, activities, or operations that lead to violations of this Ordinance;

c.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property or parcel;

d.  The implementation of source control or treatment through the use of best management practices;

e.  The performance of monitoring, analysis, and reporting.

(d)  Stop work order; revocation of permit. In the event that any person holding a Building Permit approved by the Zoning Administrator, or a Septic Permit approved by the On-site Sewage Officer or their designee, for land disturbance activities, violates the terms of this Ordinance or alters a site in such a manner as to adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare, the Designated Enforcement Officer may issue a Stop Work Order and/or suspend or revoke the permit.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-11.   Appeals.

The following process shall be followed for appeals to Town decisions pertaining to this Ordinance:

(a)  Any aggrieved person or parcel owner shall have the right to appeal any decision of the Public Works Director under this Ordinance as amended from time to time, may appeal any decision or action of the Public Works Director to the Selectboard by filing a petition with the Town Clerk and providing a copy to the Town Manager.

(b)  Such petition shall be filed within five (5) days after receipt of notice of such action or decision. Within forty-five (45) days following receipt of the petition, the Selectboard shall meet and hear the petitioner and the Director and determine whether it should affirm or reverse the Director's decision or action or modify the same: any modification shall conform to the expressed or implied provisions of this Ordinance. The Selectboard's determination shall be made in writing and shall be sent by the Town Clerk to the Public Works Director and to the petitioner.

(c)  Any aggrieved person or parcel owner may appeal the decision of the Selectboard to the Vermont Superior Court Civil Division, Chittenden Unit, pursuant to V.R.C.P. 75.

(d)  The filing of an appeal shall not relieve a person or parcel owner of the obligations of this Ordinance.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

ARTICLE IV.   ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND STORMWATER CONNECTION
Sec. 18-12. Purpose/intent.

Sec. 18-13. Applicability.

Sec. 18-14. Prohibitions.

Sec. 18-15. Exemptions.

Sec. 18-16. Industrial or construction activity discharges.

Sec. 18-17. Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by the use of best management practices.

Sec. 18-18. Notification of spills.




Sec. 18-12.   Purpose/intent.

Under the authority set forth in the Colchester Town Charter subsections 103(b), 104(1), 104(2), and 24 V.S.A § 2291, specifically subsection (14), and to provide for the public health, safety, welfare and convenience, it is hereby declared that it shall be a public nuisance for anyone to contribute pollutants, illegally connect, or illegally discharge into the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, (MS4), or to otherwise discharge non-stormwater in violation of the requirements of this Ordinance. It is the purpose of this article to provide procedures for the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the MS4, and where required by public health, safety, or welfare, to provide for the abatement or removal of any public nuisance related thereto. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the MS4 in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process, and General Permit No. 3-9014 as issued by the State of Vermont. The objectives of this article are:

(a)  To regulate the introduction of pollutants to the MS4 from non-stormwater discharges by any user;

(b)  To prohibit illicit connections and illegal discharges to the MS4;

(c)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, monitoring, and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-13.   Applicability.

This article applies to all properties or parcels within the jurisdictional area of this Ordinance.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-14.   Prohibitions.

(a)  Solid waste disposal. No person or any individual shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, left, or maintained, in or upon any premises, public or private property, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, component of the MS4, or any surface water of Colchester, any object or material, including, but not limited to, refuse, rubbish, garbage, animal waste, litter, yard waste, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution, or interfere with the operation, maintenance and access to the MS4. Wastes deposited in streets in proper waste receptacles for the purposes of collection are exempted from this prohibition.

(b)  Illicit connections.

(1)  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the MS4 are prohibited.

(2)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.

(c)  Illegal discharges. No person or individual shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the MS4, any materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater, or any materials that may impede the natural flow of stormwater or the functionality of the MS4.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-15.   Exemptions.

The commencement or continuance of any illegal discharge to the MS4 is prohibited except as described as follows:

(a)  Water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, approved stream flow diversions, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pool draining (if dechlorinated - typically less than one (1) PPM chlorine), firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants.

(b)  Discharges specified in writing by the Director as being necessary to protect public health and safety.

(c)  Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the Department of Public Works prior to the time of the test.

(d)  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the MS4 by the Director.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-16.   Industrial or construction activity discharges.

Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge regulation, and/or permit shall comply with all provisions of such regulation and/or permit. Proof of compliance with said regulation and/or permit may be required in a form acceptable to the Director prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-17.   Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by the use of best management practices.

A person of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the MS4 through the use of structural and non-structural BMPs.

Further, any person responsible for a property, parcel or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-18.   Notification of spills.

Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a permitted premises or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a premises or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the Department of Public Works either in person, by phone, or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the Department of Public Works within three (3) business days of the phone notice.

If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the person of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge, including any steps taken to remediate the illicit discharge, and any actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained on-site by the person for at least three (3) years.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

ARTICLE V.   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
Sec. 18-19. Purpose/intent.

Sec. 18-20. Applicability of erosion and sediment control.

Sec. 18-21. Prohibitions.

Sec. 18-22. Permits.

Sec. 18-23. Exemptions.

Sec. 18-24. Erosion and sediment control requirements.

Sec. 18-25. Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.

Sec. 18-26. Design requirements.

Sec. 18-27. Access to land disturbance activities.

Sec. 18-28. Inspection requirements.

Sec. 18-29. Inspection certifications.




Sec. 18-19.   Purpose/intent.

Under the authority set forth in the Colchester Town Charter at subsections 103(b), 104(1), and 104(2), and 24 V.S.A. § 2291, specifically subsection (14), and to provide for the public health, safety, welfare and convenience, it is hereby declared that it shall be a public nuisance for anyone to discharge sediment into the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, (MS4), and/or surface waters, as a result of soil erosion caused by land disturbance activities, or to otherwise discharge sediment in violation of the requirements of this Ordinance. It is the purpose of this article to provide procedures for the regulation of sediment discharged to the MS4 and/or surface waters, and where required by public health, safety, or welfare, to provide for the abatement or removal of any public nuisance related thereto. This article establishes methods and procedures for controlling the introduction of sediment into the MS4 and/or surface waters in order to comply with the requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process, and General Permit No. 3-9014 as issued by the State of Vermont. The objectives of this article are:

(a)  To regulate the contribution of sediment to the MS4 and/or surface waters from soil erosion caused by land disturbance activities.

(b)  To control the design, construction, use, and maintenance of land disturbance activities.

(c)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance to this article.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-20.   Applicability of erosion and sediment control.

This article applies to any land disturbance activities within the jurisdictional area of this Ordinance that result in less than one (1) acre of clearing, grading, construction or land disturbance activity, unless otherwise exempted under Section 18-23 of this article.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-21.   Prohibitions.

No person required to obtain a building permit, septic permit or any other form of Town approval for land disturbance activities, shall cause, allow or permit the release of any sediment created by soil erosion resulting from these activities, to any other property or parcel, the MS4 and/or surface waters.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-22.   Permits.

No person shall be granted a building permit, septic permit or approval for any land disturbance activities regulated under this Ordinance without the approval of an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan by the Director of the Department of Public Works or his or her designee.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-23.   Exemptions.

The discharge of any sediment from land disturbance activities approved by the Town to any other property or parcel, the MS4 and/or surface waters is prohibited except as described as follows:

(a)  Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property or natural resources.

(b)  Any nursery and/or agricultural operations as a permitted main or accessory use.

The approval of an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan for an approved land-disturbing activity is not required for those projects disturbing equal to or less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet provided that a determination is made by the Director that such waiver is not inconsistent with Section 18-19 of this article.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-24.   Erosion and sediment control requirements.

(a)  Construction access route. Land-disturbing activities subject to the provisions of this article shall require the installation of a stabilized temporary construction access. Construction sites regulated under this article shall have no more than one (1) construction access route.

(b)  Winter shutdown. Earthwork shall be scheduled for completion and the site stabilized no later than October 15. By the end of the growing season, perennial cover shall be established and non-vegetated protection measures installed by October 15. There shall be no land disturbance activities allowed between the dates of October 15 and April 30. A waiver of this requirement may be granted by the Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, following the submittal and approval of a Winter Construction Erosion Control Plan consistent with the Vermont Handbook for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control on Construction Sites.

(c)  Stabilization of denuded areas. Soil may be exposed for a maximum of ten (10) business days between the dates of May 1 and October 14. Denuded areas must be stabilized in conformance with this section by implementing soil covering best management practices such as including, but not limited to, mulching, straw matting, plastic covering, sodding, etc. Construction shall be planned to limit the amount of exposed area, and to avoid grading activities during rainy periods. Clearing limits shall be clearly marked and kept as small as possible.

(d)  Protection of adjacent properties or parcels. All sediment from land-disturbing activities shall be kept on site through the use of cover practice BMPs, structural BMPs and construction management measures. Where possible, a vegetative buffer strip shall be preserved and maintained around the site boundary. All soil stock piles on site shall be placed as far as possible from any and all drainage ways including storm drains systems and roadside ditches and swales. All soil piles on site shall also be covered with plastic or some other suitable cover practice BMP until the soil is either used or removed from the site.

(e)  Maintenance. All construction access routes, cover practice BMPs and structural BMPs shall be inspected weekly, and immediately following each rain event causing runoff to ensure they are functioning properly. Any maintenance that is required to ensure the proper operation and performance of these BMPs shall be completed immediately.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-25.   Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.

(a)  Review and approval. The Department of Public Works, or its designee, will review each Erosion and Sediment Control Plan to determine its conformance with the provisions of this regulation, unless explicitly exempted within this article. Within thirty (30) days after receiving a plan, the Department of Public Works, or its designee, shall in writing:

(1)  Approve the plan;

(2)  Approve the plan subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this regulation, and require that the issuance of the building permit or septic permit be subject to these conditions; or

(3)  Disapprove the plan, indicating the reason(s) and procedure for submitting a revised plan.

(b)  Plan requirements. The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall be prepared by or under the direction of a licensed professional engineer or a certified erosion control technician, and demonstrate conformance to the erosion and sediment control requirements contained in Section 18-24 of this article. All erosion and sediment control devices must be installed and stabilized before the strut of construction. The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall contain both narrative and map(s) that clearly provide the following information:

(1)  Contact information. The name, address, and telephone number of all persons having a legal interest in the property or parcel and the tax reference number and parcel number of the property or properties or parcels affected.

(2)  General description. A general description of the project including a map identifying the location of the property and parcel boundaries.

(3)  Natural resources. A map of existing on site natural resources including soil type, types and location of vegetative covering, natural drainage ways, brooks, streams, ponds, wetlands and other surface waters, including any surface waters within three hundred (300) feet from the site.

(4)  Grading plan. A grading plan at a minimum scale of one (1) inch = forty (40) feet. The grading plan shall include existing and proposed contours at maximum intervals of five (5) feet. The grading plan shall also include the location of the temporary construction entrance and any soil stockpiles that will be maintained on the site.

(5)  Infrastructure. A map identifying existing infrastructure both on and adjacent to the site, including roads, driveways, culverts, drainage structures, roadside ditches, etc.

(6)  BMPs. A description of each of the best management practices to be used on the site, and a map identifying the locations where each of the best management practices will be installed and maintained.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-26.   Design requirements.

All erosion control practices, sediment control practices, waterway and watercourse protection practices and construction site access practices shall meet the design criteria set forth in the Vermont Handbook for Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control, latest version, the Department of Public Works Specifications and Standards, latest version, and the Colchester Zoning Regulations, latest version, and shall be adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to the satisfaction of Department of Public Works. In the event of conflicting design criteria within these standards, the stricter shall prevail.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-27.   Access to land disturbance activities.

The Director of the Department of Public Works, or his or her designee(s) shall be permitted to enter and inspect any land disturbance activities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article.

The Town shall give written notice to the person and any occupant of the date of any inspection. The notice shall advise the person and occupant of the inspection, the person's right to refuse inspection and the Town's right to seek issuance of an administrative search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction in the event of any such refusal. If a person has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry, the person shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the Town. Any Town representative shall present proper credentials and identification at any such inspection to a person or occupant, upon request.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-28.   Inspection requirements.

The Department of Public Works shall make inspections as hereinafter required and either shall approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to comply with the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan as approved. To obtain inspections, the applicant or their agent shall notify the Department of Public Works at least two (2) working days before the following:

(a)  Start of construction.

(b)  Installation of sediment and erosion control measures.

(c)  Completion of site clearing.

(d)  Completion of rough grading.

(e)  Completion of final grading.

(f)  Close of construction season.

(g)  Completion of final landscaping.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-29.   Inspection certifications.

In lieu of the requirements outlined in Section 18-28 of this article, the Department of Public Works may allow or require that the applicant or their agent provide a written certification from a professionally licensed engineer, or a state certified erosion control technician, certifying compliance to the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan as approved.

The applicant or their agent shall make regular inspections of all control measures in accordance with the inspection schedule outlined on the approved Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

ARTICLE VI.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Sec. 18-30. Purpose/intent.

Sec. 18-31. Applicability of stormwater management.

Sec. 18-32. Prohibitions.

Sec. 18-33. Permits.

Sec. 18-34. Exemptions.

Sec. 18-35. Stormwater Manual.

Sec. 18-36. Stormwater treatment standards.

Sec. 18-37. Stormwater treatment practice design criteria.

Sec. 18-38. Stormwater Management Plan.

Sec. 18-39. Access to permitted premises for review of stormwater treatment practices.

Sec. 18-40. Inspection requirements.

Sec. 18-41. Inspection certifications.

Sec. 18-42. Landscaping and stabilization requirements.




Sec. 18-30.   Purpose/intent.

Under the authority set forth in the Colchester Town Charter at subsections 103(b), 104(1), and 104(2), and 24 V.S.A. § 2291, specifically subsection (14), and to provide for the public health, safety, welfare and convenience, it is hereby declared that it shall be a public nuisance for anyone to improperly manage stormwater runoff created by land disturbance activities, or to otherwise manage stormwater runoff caused by land disturbance activities in violation of the requirements of this Ordinance. It is the purpose of this article to provide procedures for the regulation of stormwater runoff caused by land disturbance activities, and where required by public health, safety, or welfare, to provide for the abatement or removal of any public nuisance related thereto. This article establishes minimum stormwater management requirements and controls associated with land disturbance activities in order to comply with the requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process, and General Permit No. 3-9014 as issued by the State of Vermont. The objectives of this article are:

(a)  To minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land disturbance activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream temperature, and stream bank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream channels;

(b)  To minimize increases in non-point source pollution caused by stormwater runoff from land disturbance activities which would otherwise degrade local water quality;

(c)  To minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff which flows from any specific site during and following land disturbance activities to not exceed the pre-development hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable;

(d)  To reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and non-point source pollution, through stormwater treatment practices and to ensure that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety;

(e)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance to this article.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-31.   Applicability of stormwater management.

This article applies to any land disturbance activities within the jurisdictional area of this Ordinance that result in greater than or equal to one (1) acre of clearing, grading, construction or land disturbance activity, and creates less than one (1) acre of impervious surface, unless otherwise exempted under Section 18-34 of this article.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-32.   Prohibitions.

No person required to obtain a building permit or any other form of Town approval for land disturbance activities shall improperly manage stormwater runoff associated with these activities, and/or fail to conform to the requirements of this article.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-33.   Permits.

No person shall be granted a building permit or approval for any land disturbance activities regulated under this article without the approval of a Stormwater Management Plan by the Department of Public Works or designee.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-34.   Exemptions.

The following activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this article:

(a)  Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property or natural resources.

(b)  Any nursery and/or agricultural operations as a permitted main or accessory use.

(c)  Any land disturbance activity that creates less than one-half (½) acre of impervious surface that a determination is made by the Director that such waiver is not inconsistent with Section 18-30 of this article.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-35.   Stormwater Manual.

The Stormwater Manual as referenced in this article refers to the technical analysis and design standards specified in the Vermont Stormwater Management Manual (Volumes I and II), as may be amended from time to time.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-36.   Stormwater treatment standards.

The following stormwater treatment standards may apply to land disturbance activities regulated under this article, and where applicable, shall be applied as required and outlined in the Vermont Stormwater Management Manual, (Volumes I and II), latest revision.

(a)  Water Quality Treatment Standards.

(b)  Channel Protection Treatment Standards.

(c)  Groundwater Recharge Treatment Standards.

(d)  Over Bank Flood Protection Treatment Standards.

(e)  Extreme Flood Protection Treatment Standards.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-37.   Stormwater treatment practice design criteria.

All stormwater treatment practices shall meet the design criteria set forth in the Vermont Stormwater Management Manual, (Volumes I and II) latest version, the Department of Public Works Specifications and Standards, latest version, and the Colchester Zoning Regulations, latest version, and shall be adequate to achieve the required stormwater treatment standards contained within the Vermont Stormwater Management Manual, (Volumes I and II), latest version. In the event of conflicting design criteria within these standards, the stricter shall prevail.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-38.   Stormwater Management Plan.

(a)  Review and approval. The Director, or their designee, will review each stormwater management plan to determine its conformance with the provisions of this regulation, unless explicitly exempted within this article. Within thirty (30) days after receiving a plan, the Director, or their designee, shall in writing:

(1)  Approve the plan;

(2)  Approve the plan subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this regulation, and require that the issuance of the building permit be subject to these conditions; or

(3)  Disapprove the plan;

(4)  Disapprove the plan indicating the reason(s) and procedure for submitting a revised plan.

(b)  Plan requirements. The Stormwater Management Plan shall be prepared and signed by a licensed, professional engineer who shall verify and demonstrate conformance to the applicable water quality treatment standards and stormwater management design criteria contained in this article. The stormwater management plan shall contain both narrative and map(s) that clearly provide the following information:

(1)  Contact information. The name, address, and telephone number of all persons having a legal interest in the property or parcel and the tax reference number and parcel number of the properties or parcels affected.

(2)  Site plan. A map indicating the location of existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural stormwater management and sediment control facilities. The map will also clearly show proposed land use with tabulation of total lot size in acres, percentage of surface areas to be disturbed, percentage of both existing and proposed impervious surfaces, drainage patterns, locations of utilities, limits of clearing and grading, and all easements, including those easements necessary for required maintenance of all stormwater treatment practices.

(3)  Base map. A one (1) inch = two hundred (200) feet topographic base map of the site which extends a minimum of one hundred (100) feet beyond the limits of the proposed development and indicates existing surface water drainage including streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, and wetlands and current land use including all existing buildings, utilities, roads, and significant natural and manmade features not otherwise shown.

(4)  Calculations. Sufficient engineering analysis to show that the proposed stormwater treatment practices are capable of controlling runoff from the site in compliance with this Ordinance and the Stormwater Design Manual. The analysis shall also include hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the pre-development and post-development conditions for the design storms specified in the Public Works Specifications and Standards, herein incorporated by reference. Post-development stormwater runoff flows shall be limited to equal to or less than pre-development stormwater runoff flows for a minimum twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour storm event.

(5)  Soils report. If a stormwater treatment practice depends on the hydrologic properties of soils, such as infiltration basins, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles.

(6)  Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities shall include detailed maintenance and repair procedures to ensure their continued function. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility that needs to be maintained. The maintenance and repair plan shall also include:

a.  Landscape plan. The applicant must present a detailed plan for the management of vegetation at the site after construction is finished, including who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetation cover is preserved.

b.  Maintenance easements. The applicant must ensure access to all stormwater treatment practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all of the maintenance easements needed on a permanent basis. These easements shall be recorded in the land records before the issuance of a building permit and will remain in effect even with transfer of title to the property or parcel.

c.  Maintenance agreement. The applicant must execute a maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management measure. The maintenance agreement shall be recorded in the land records before the issuance of a building permit and shall specify the required maintenance for all stormwater treatment practices, along with a maintenance schedule specifying when and how often maintenance is performed on the stormwater treatment practices.

d.  Maintenance records. The applicant shall be required to maintain records that verify that all required maintenance was performed in conformance to the approved Stormwater Management Plan. The records shall be maintained for a period of three (3) years, and shall be made available to the Department of Public Works upon request.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-39.   Access to permitted premises for review of stormwater treatment practices.

The Director of the Department of Public Works, or his or her designee(s) shall be permitted to enter and inspect any land disturbance activities where stormwater treatment practices are being, or have been constructed subject to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. The Town shall give written notice to the person and any occupant of the date of any inspection. The notice shall advise the person and occupant of the inspection, their person's right to refuse inspection of the premises, and the Town's right to seek issuance of an administrative search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction in the event of any such refusal. If a person has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry onto its premises, the person shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the Town. Any Town representative shall present proper credentials and identification at any such inspection to person or occupant, upon request.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-40.   Inspection requirements.

The applicant must notify the Department of Public Works, or their designee, in advance before the start of construction. The Department of Public Works shall make regular inspections of the construction of stormwater treatment practices. If any violations are found, the property or parcel owner shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. No additional work shall proceed until any violations are corrected and all work previously completed has received approval from the Department of Public Works.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-41.   Inspection certifications.

In lieu of the requirements outlined in Section 18-40 of this article, the Department of Public Works may allow or require that the applicant or their agent provide a written certification from a professionally licensed engineer certifying compliance to the Stormwater Management Plan as approved.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-42.   Landscaping and stabilization requirements.

Any area of land for which the natural vegetative cover has been either partially or wholly cleared or removed by land disturbance activities shall be revegetated within ten (10) business days from the substantial completion of such clearing and construction. The following requirements apply:

(a)  Reseeding must be done with an annual or perennial cover crop accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until such time as the cover crop is established over ninety (90) percent of the seeded area.

(b)  Replanting with native woody and herbaceous vegetation must be accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until the plantings are established and are capable of controlling erosion.

(c)  Any area of revegetation must exhibit survival of a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the cover crop throughout the year immediately following revegetation. Revegetation must be repeated in successive years until the minimum seventy-five (75) percent survival for one (1) year is achieved.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

ARTICLE VII.   STORMWATER SYSTEM USER FEES
Sec. 18-43. Establishment of stormwater user fees.

Sec. 18-44. User fee credits.

Sec. 18-45. Establishment of ERUs.

Sec. 18-46. Billing and collection.

Sec. 18-47. Establishment of Stormwater Enterprise Fund.




Sec. 18-43.   Establishment of stormwater user fees.

(a)  A user fee based on an Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU) shall be imposed on all properties or parcels as otherwise defined in Section 18-43(d). An ERU shall equal that square footage that represents the average of the area of impervious surface for all single-family properties in the Town. The Town Selectboard shall, by resolution, establish the square footage that constitutes one (1) ERU on a periodic basis.

(b)  The Town Selectboard shall have the authority to set and modify the user fee rates so that the total revenue generated by said charges, and any secondary sources of revenue, shall be sufficient to fund the Town's stormwater program.

(c)  The Town Selectboard shall establish by resolution the annual rate for each ERU. The annual user fee for a specific property or parcel is determined by multiplying the rate per ERU times the number of ERUs allocated to the property or parcel.

(d)  All properties or parcels will be attributed at least one (1) ERU and receive a stormwater bill, including vacant or undeveloped parcels, tax-exempt parcels, and those properties having less impervious surface than one (1) ERU. The only properties that will not receive a bill are commonly owned parcels within residential developments whereby the impervious surfaces have been accounted for in the overall calculation of an ERU, mobile home owners with an established mobile home park as impervious surfaces within mobile home parks are to be directly assessed to the park owner, and those properties whereby the owner cannot be easily determined and that the efforts to do so create an unreasonable and disproportionate burden to the utility and its rate payers in relationship to the overall public benefit.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-44.   User fee credits.

(a)  The Stormwater Utility Credit Manual shall specify the design and performance standards of on-site stormwater systems, activities and services which qualify for application of a user fee credit and the method of calculating credits. Under no circumstances shall a credit be applied to the stormwater bill for a single-family property as defined in this Ordinance, vacant or undeveloped properties, or for properties or parcels having only one (1) ERU. The Town Selectboard, by resolution, shall have the authority to approve, modify or disapprove the Credit Manual. Credits are only available to non-single-family properties or parcels, (NSF).

(b)  Any property or parcel owner may appeal the determination regarding an award of a credit. The appeal process is outlined under Section 18-11 of this Ordinance.

(c)  Credits may be awarded retroactively for one (1) year from the date of initiation of the stormwater user fee. Thereafter, credits shall be applied to user fees on the next billing period after the completed credit application is approved.

(d)  Any award of credit shall be conditioned on continuing compliance with the Town's design and performance standards as stated in the Stormwater Utility Credit Manual and/or upon continuing provision of the systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the property or parcel owner or owners upon which the credit is based. The Director of Public Works may revoke a credit at any time for noncompliance by providing thirty (30) days' written notice of a noncomplying condition and intent to revoke the credit to the property or parcel owner. If the noncompliance is not cured within the thirty-day period, the Director of Public Works shall eliminate the credit for user fee bills issued to the property or parcel owner after such period.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-45.   Establishment of ERUs.

(a)  Single-family, (SF) properties or parcels shall be billed one (1.0) ERU, as defined in Section 18-43, excepting single-family properties having more than one (1.0) acre of impervious surface as they shall be billed ten (10.0) ERUs. Property or parcel owners that own contiguous parcels that are combined for property tax billing purposes will receive one stormwater bill representing the aggregate stormwater charges for all contiguous parcels under the same ownership.

(b)  Non-single-family, (NSF) properties or parcels shall be billed the ERUs that are determined by dividing the total impervious surface on the property or parcel by one (1.0) ERU as defined in Section 18-43. The resulting value shall be rounded to the nearest whole number. In those instances when the calculations produces a value exactly half-way between two (2) numbers (.5) the number is rounded up to the next whole number.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-46.   Billing and collection.

(a)  Stormwater user fees shall be billed annually and shall be reflected on the stormwater bill for each property or parcel owner. The bill shall also state the ERUs allocated to each property or parcel, except when a property or parcel owner owns more than multiple contiguous parcels as described in section 18-45. The property or parcel owner is responsible for payment of stormwater user fees regardless of whether a property is rented or leased to a tenant.

(b)  The property or parcel owner may appeal an allocation of ERUs to the Director of Public Works pursuant to Section 18-11 in the event that there have been physical changes made to the property or parcel that would affect the property or parcel's ERU calculation from the time aerial imagery was most recently analyzed. The property or parcel owner shall bear the burden of proof in providing evidence to support their claim in a manner that is satisfactory to the Director of Public Works. The filing of an appeal shall not relieve a property or parcel owner of the obligation to pay the user fee when due.

(c)  In the event that any stormwater user fee is not paid within thirty (30) days from the billing date, interest charges will be added to the fee. The amount of the interest rate on the overdue accounts shall be the same as those applied to delinquent sewer use fees. If such payment is not paid, such stormwater user fee shall be a lien upon such real-estate in the same manner and as to the same effect as taxes are a lien upon real estate pursuant to 32, V.S.A. § 5061 and 24 V.S.A. § 3612.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

Sec. 18-47.   Establishment of Stormwater Enterprise Fund.

(a)  The user fees, as well as any secondary sources of revenue, shall be used to fund the Town's efforts to manage stormwater.

(b)  Revenues will be placed into the Stormwater Enterprise Fund, and may be retained and expended in the manner set forth herein.

(c)  The Selectboard of the Town of Colchester shall establish a dedicated stormwater enterprise fund in the Town budget and an accounting system for the purpose of managing all funds collected for the purposes and obligations of the stormwater program. All revenues and receipts of the stormwater program shall be placed in the enterprise fund, which shall be separate from all other funds. Fees will be set at a rate that covers the costs associated with stormwater management, planning, staffing, engineering, maintenance and repair, public education, capital improvements, technical support, and other services approved by the municipality to implement the purposes of the stormwater program as set forth herein. The Selectboard may consider both stormwater quality and quantity management needs in determining whether to expend any funds in the Stormwater Enterprise Fund, and the use of the fund is limited to operating expenses, non-operating expenses such as equipment, payment of principal and interest on debt obligations, capital improvement pro jects, reserve expenses and other costs as deemed necessary by the Colchester Selectboard.

(Ord. of 4-25-17)

SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted."

In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution.

Date
Adopted

Included/
Omitted

Supplement
Number

11- 4-14

Included

1

 3- 3-15

Included

1

11-11-14

Included

2

 5-26-15

Included

2

 9-22-15
Total 2

Included

2

12- 8-15
Total 3

Included

2

 2- 9-16

Omitted

2

 8- 8-16
Total 3

Included-2
Omitted-1

2

10-25-16

Included

2

 1-10-17

Included

2

 3-28-17
Total 3

Included

2

 4-25-17

Included

2

 8- 8-17

Included

2

12-12-17

Included

2

 1-23-18

Included

2

 3- 6-18

Included

2

10-23-18
Total 2

Included

2

11-13-18
Total 2

Included

2

ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
 

Effective Date

Title of Ordinance

4/14/20

Chapters 1, 4, 7, and 9 – Seth Lasker, Emergency Management Coordinator

1/28/20

Chapter 13 Streets and Sidewalks -

4/14/20

Chapter 18 Stormwater –Bryan Osborne, Director of Public Works

11/12/19

Chapter 14 amended 11.12.19

CERTIFICATE OF ADOPTION
We, the Colchester Selectboard, hereby certify that pursuant to 24 V.S.A. § 4415, held a public
hearing, and adopted the following Interim Zoning Regulation per the attached pages.
Notwithstanding any provision otherwise contained in these Development Regulations,
the Administrative Officer may review, approve, approve with conditions or deny
administrative amendment to an existing site plan for the purposes of temporarily
creating or expanding, until May 31, 2022, outdoor seating to any restaurant described
in Table A-1, Sections 8.111. 8.112. 8.122.
Although being submitted to the Administrative Officer, the application for site
plan amendment shall be presented in the same form and with the same contents as a
site plan application otherwise submitted to the Development Review Board. When
reviewing the application, the Administrative Officer shall take into consideration the
requirements described in Article 8, Section 8.07.
Any request for either permanent, new outdoor seating or permanent, expanded
outdoor seating beyond May 31, 2022 must be presented by application to the
Development Review Board.
The purpose of this provision is to assist restaurants in promoting the physical
distancing of customers while dining and to allow diners not to be in confined, indoor
spaces with others while dining, thereby reducing the risks of Covid-19 infection.
This Bylaw shall be effective from June 1, 2020 until May 31, 2022 unless otherwise
amended or repealed by Select Board.
_________________________________________________________________
DATED this 26th day of May, 2020. EFFECTIVE IMMEDIATELY.
TOWN OF COLCHESTER SELECTBOARD
781 Blakely Road
Colchester, VT 05446
__________________________________
COLCHESTER SELECTBOARD

DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS

 



 

First Adopted 1955

Last Amended March 4, 2020

ARTICLE I: PURPOSE AND TITLE

 

 

APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS………..………………..……………….2

 

 

ARTICLE 2: GENERAL PROVISIONS

 

 

ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND DESCRIPTION OF

                             CERTAIN DISTRICTS……………...……………………...1

OFFICIAL MAPS AND OTHER MAPS…………………………………………2

DISTRICT BOUNDARIES……..………………..……………………………….3

LOTS…………………………………………………………………………...…5

SETBACKS AND BUFFERS..………..………………………………………….6

HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES…………………………………………………......9

TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES…………………………………....10

MULTIPLE STRUCTURES………………………………………………...…..12

ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES…………………………………….12

FENCES……………………………………………………………………….…15

SWIMMING POOLS…………………………………………………………....16

NON-CONFORMING USES AND NON-COMPLYING STRUCTURES AND LOTS…………………….………………………………….………………16

ALTERATION OF EXISTING GRADE OR IMPERVIOUS AREA….….......19

POTABLE WATER…………………………………………………………..…20

SEPTIC…………………………………………………………………………..20

FIRE PREVENTION CODE………………………...………………….……….21

BUILDING CODE……………………………………………………….…..….21

SIGNS……………………………………………………………………………21

COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER 14 OF THE COLCHESTER CODE OF ORDINANCES…………………….……………………………………….....…30

GENERAL PERFORMANCE AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS…....….31

 

 

ARTICLE 3: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS

 

 

RESIDENTIAL THREE DISTRICT………………………………………………1

RESIDENTIAL TWO DISTRICT……….……………………………………......1

RESIDENTIAL ONE DISTRICT…………………..…...………………………...2

RESIDENTIAL FIVE DISTRICT……..……...…………………………..……….3

RESIDENTIAL TEN DISTRICT…...……...………………………...………..…..3

 

 

ARTICLE 4: GENERAL DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS

 

 

GENERAL DEVELOPMENT ONE (GD1)……….………………………...…….1

GENERAL DEVELOPMENT TWO (GD2)……….…………………………..….2

GENERAL DEVELOPMENT THREE (GD3)…….……………………..……….3

GENERAL DEVELOPMENT FOUR (GD4)………..…………………….………7

INTENTIONALLY RESERVED…………………….…………………………..14

 

 

ARTICLE 5: COMMERCIAL & INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS

 

 

COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (COM)………………………………….……..........1

INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (IND)………………….…………………….……..….2

BUSINESS DISTRICT (BD)……………………………………………………..4

 

 

ARTICLE 6: OTHER DISTRICTS

 

 

 

AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT (AGR)……………………………………..….....1

MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT (MHP)………………………………..…....1

FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT (FP)……………………………………………..…..2

AGRICULTURAL MIXED USE DISTRICT (AMU)………...……………….…4

 

 

ARTICLE 7: OVERLAY DISTRICTS

 

 

GENERAL DEVELOPMENT FOUR COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (GD4C)…...1

GENERAL DEVELOPMENT FOUR OPEN SPACE DISTRICT (GDOS)….....2

SHORELAND DISTRICT (SD)…………………………….………………….....3

WATER PROTECTION DISTRICT (WPD)……...………….…………………..7

HISTORIC PRESERVATION DISTRICT (HPD)……….…………………...…14

TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS DISTRICT (TDRD)…….…….…17

 

 

ARTICLE 8: SITE PLAN AND CONDITIONAL USE REVIEW

 

 

 

ARTICLE 9: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT

 

 

 

ARTICLE 10: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

 

 

OFF STREET PARKING, LOADING, & CIRCULATION…….……….…….1

OUTDOOR ILLUMINATION………………………..…………………………15

OUTSIDE STORAGE AND DISPLAY…………………………………….…. 23

LANDSCAPING, SCREENING, AND STREET TREES……………….……..24

UTILITY CABINETS AND SIMILAR STRUCTURES………………….…….26

TRASH CONTAINERS……………………………………………………....….27

NUMBERING SYSTEMS…………………………………………………..…. 27

SOLAR COLLECTORS…….………………………………………………..….27

WIND TURBINES…….…………………………………………………………28

TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS & COMMERCIAL SATELLITE

    DISHES…….………………………...………………………………………..28

SATELLITE DISHES OTHER THAN COMMERCIAL SATELLITE

DISHES…………….…………………………………………………………….35

BUS SHELTERS………………………………………………………………...36

HOME OCCUPATIONS & BUSINESS……………………………………..….36

SEASONAL DWELLING UNIT CONVERSION……….…………………..….37

 

 

ARTICLE 11: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

 

 

 

ARTICLE 12: DEFINITIONS

 

 


APPENDICES

 

TABLE A-1 TABLE OF USES

 

TABLE A-2 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS

 

APPENDIX B GENERAL PROVISIONS DIAGRAMS

 

APPENDIX C PERFORMANCE STANDARDS

 

APPENDIX D TRAFFIC GENERATION DATA

 

APPENDIX E ZONING REGULATION AMENDMENTS

 

APPENDIX F ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS

 

APPENDIX G DIGITAL FORMAT REQUIREMENTS

 

MAPS

COLCHESTER DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS

SUPPLEMENT 42

 

ARTICLE 1: PURPOSE AND TITLE

 

 

1.01 Purpose and Compliance

1.02 Title

1.03 Severability

1.04 Repealer

1.05 Relation to Other Ordinances of the Town of Colchester

1.06 Effective Date and Implementation

1.07 Applicability of Regulations

 

 

1.01 Purpose and Compliance

A. The purpose of these Development Regulations is to implement the Municipal Plan of the Town of Colchester; to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the community; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, utilities, schools, parks, and other public requirements; and to preserve the value of property, to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the Town of Colchester, with reasonable consideration for the character of each locality and its peculiar suitability for particular use, under and pursuant to the Vermont Planning and Development Act (Title 24 V.S.A., Chapter 117), as amended.

 

B. Accordingly the following are hereby restricted and regulated as hereinafter provided:

(1) dimensions, location, erection, construction, repair, maintenance, alteration, razing, removal, and use of buildings and other structures;

(2) density of population;

(3) intensity of use;

(4) areas and dimensions of land and bodies of water to be occupied by uses and structures, as well as areas, courts, yards, and other open spaces and distances to be left unoccupied by uses and structures;

(5) percentage of lot area that may be occupied and the size of yards and setbacks;

(6) use of land for trade, industry, residence, or other purposes, and of watercourses and other bodies of water;

(7) subdivision of land.

 

C. No provision in any such ordinance, law, restriction, covenant, or undertaking shall be deemed to justify noncompliance with any provision in this chapter.

 

 

1.02 Title

These provisions shall be known and may be cited as the Colchester Development Regulations.

 

 

1.03 Severability

Should any section, sub-section, paragraph, sentence, clause, provision, or phrase of these development regulations be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other portion of these land development regulations, except the section in question.

 

 

1.04 Repealer

This Article shall not be deemed to amend, repeal, or impair any requirement in any ordinance or law or in any deed restriction or covenant or in any other undertaking among private persons.

 

 

1.05 Relation to Other Ordinances of the Town of Colchester

If the provisions of these regulations conflict with the provisions of any other valid and

enforceable ordinance(s), such as the Colchester Code of Ordinances Chapters Four, Seven, Eight, Ten or Fourteen, the more strict shall prevail.

 

 

1.06 Effective Date and Implementation

These regulations shall become effective twenty-one (21) days after the date of adoption by the Colchester Selectboard. On the date these regulations become effective, they will combine the Colchester Zoning Regulations and the Colchester Subdivision Regulations.

 

 

1.07 Applicability of Regulations

 

A. Area, Density, and Dimensional Requirements. Except where the text of these Regulations provides otherwise, the size and dimension of lots and yards, lot coverage, and density for all districts, except overlay districts, shall be as shown in Table A-2, Dimensional Standards.

 

B. Minimum Requirements. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare.

 

C. Primacy of Development Regulations. Where these regulations impose a greater restriction than imposed or required by other provisions of law or by other laws, rules, regulations, resolutions or ordinances, the provisions of these regulations shall control.

 

D. Conflict with other Regulations or Private Restrictions. The provisions of these regulations shall not be construed to abrogate or annul the provisions of other ordinances or regulations or to impair private restrictions placed upon property.

Where these regulations impose a greater restriction upon land, buildings, or structures than is imposed by any such provision, the restrictions of these regulations shall control.

 

E. Most Recent Amendment in Effect. Any citation of a statute, law, rule, regulation or ordinance contained in these regulations shall be deemed to refer to such statute, law, rule, regulation or ordinance as amended, whether or not such designation is included in the citation.

 

F. Measuring. Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally.  Required frontage shall be contiguous.

COLCHESTER DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS

SUPPLEMENT 42

 

ARTICLE 2: GENERAL PROVISIONS

 

2.01 Establishment of District and Description of Certain Districts

2.02 Official Maps and Other Maps

2.03 District Boundaries

2.04 Lots 

            2.05 Setbacks and Buffer

2.06 Height of Structures

2.07 Temporary Structures and Uses

2.08 Multiple Structures

2.09 Accessory Structures and Uses

2.10 Fences

2.11 Swimming Pools

2.12 Non-conforming Uses, Structures and Lots

2.13 Alteration of Existing Grade or Impervious Area

2.14 Potable Water

2.15 Septic

2.16 Fire Prevention Code

2.17 Building Code

2.18 Signs

2.19 Compliance with Chapter 14 of the Colchester Code of Ordinances

2.20 General Performance and Maintenance Standards

 

 

2.01 Establishment of District and Description of Certain Districts

A. For the purpose of these regulations, the Town of Colchester is hereby divided into the districts shown on the Official Zoning Map. This Development Regulation also contains provisions for overlay districts.

1. Residential Districts

      R-3 Residential Three District

R-2 Residential Two District

R-1 Residential One District

R-5 Residential Five District

R-10 Residential Ten District

2. General Development Districts

      GD1 General Development One

      GD2 General Development Two

      GD3 General Development Three

      GD4 General Development Four

3. Commercial & Industrial Districts

      COM Commercial District

      IND Industrial District

      BD Business District

4. Other Districts

      AGR Agricultural District

MHP Mobile Home Park District

      FP Flood Plain District   

      AMU Agricultural Mixed Use District

Lakeshore One District

Lakeshore Two District

5. Overlay Districts

      GD4C General Development Four Commercial District

      SD Shoreland District

WPD Water Protection District

HPD Historic Preservation District

TDRD Transferable Development Rights District

 

B. Description of Certain Districts.

1. Flood Plain District.  The boundaries of the Floodplain District shall include those areas that are identified and defined as areas of special flood hazard in and on the most current flood insurance studies and maps published by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), as provided by the Secretary of the Agency of Natural Resources pursuant to 10 V.S.A. § 753, which are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of these regulations. This regulation does not imply that the land outside of the Floodplain District is free from flood or erosion damages.  This regulation shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Colchester, or any municipal official or employee thereof, for any flood or erosion damages that result from reliance on this regulation or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 

 

2. Water Protection District. The boundaries of the Water Protection District shall include: 1) those areas that are identified and defined as Class I and II wetlands as designated by the National Wetlands Inventory (NWI) maps published by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service as well as all lands within 50 feet horizontal distance of these wetlands, and 2) surface waters and associated buffers as described in Section 7.04 herein and as depicted on the Overlays Districts Map.  Final determination of wetland and surface water location and associated boundaries shall be made by a professional wetland/aquatic biologist in case of conflict.

 

 

2.02 Official Maps and Other Maps

 

A. Official Zoning Map. The Official Zoning Map describes the different

and separate districts of the Town of Colchester set forth in Section

2.01. The Official Zoning Map is filed in the office of the Town Clerk and is incorporated herein by reference.

 

B. Overlay Districts Map. The Overlay Districts Map describes the different and separate overlay districts of the Town of Colchester set forth in Section 2.01. The Overlay Districts Map is filed in the office of the Town Clerk and is incorporated herein by reference.

 

C. Official Map. The Official Map of the Town of Colchester is adopted pursuant to Section 4421, Title 24 VSA Chapter 117, as amended, filed in the office of the Town Clerk, and incorporated herein by reference.  No zoning permit or subdivision approval may be issued for any land development within the lines of any street, drainageway, park, school, or other public facility shown on the official map, except as specifically provided in 24 V.S.A Section 4421.

 

 

2.03 District Boundaries

 

A. Interpretation of District Boundaries

1. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the Planning Commission shall determine the location, aided by the rules set forth in this section.

2. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets or highways shall be construed to follow such center lines.

3. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed to follow such lot lines.

4. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to follow the center line of the railroad right-of-way.

5. Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline such boundaries shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline.

6. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines.

7. Boundaries indicated as approximately following Town limits shall be construed to follow such Town limits.

8. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections 1 through 6 above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map or described under each zone shall be determined by the scale of the map.

9. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the Floodplain District, the most recent effective FEMA base flood elevation data, floodway data and Flood Insurance Study shall be reviewed and utilized to determine the base flood elevation.

 

B. Interpretation by Planning Commission. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are inconsistent with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections 1 through 8 above, the Planning Commission shall interpret the district boundaries.

 

C. Split Lots. Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in a single ownership at the time of passage of these regulations, the Development Review Board may permit, as a conditional use, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot but not to exceed fifty (50) feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot.  This provision shall not apply to the boundary lines of any overlay district.

 

D. Zone Change Requests.  The Planning Commission may consider applications for zone change requests and requests to amend the Official Zoning Map within one year of adoption of the Town’s Municipal Plan.  The process for such consideration shall be as follows:

1.  The applicant shall be the owner of the land and a written request shall be submitted to the Colchester Planning Commission care of the Director of Planning & Zoning.

2. The Planning Commission may consider the request informally as part of a regular business meeting and set a time to officially hear the request in light of current business. The Planning Commission may defer the request to the Commission’s regular review of the Development Regulations that typically follows the adoption of the Municipal Plan.

3. If the Commission sets a time to officially hear the request, public notice shall be given.  After public notice, the Commission will hold a public hearing at which time the applicant will be asked to present information to indicate the impacts that the requested rezoning of land would have on the community and Municipal Plan.  The Commission shall first review the proposed request for conformance with the duly adopted Municipal Plan.  Only if the Commission issues positive findings on conformance with the Municipal Plan shall the Commission further consider the request.  In further considering the request, the Commission shall consider the following criteria in its review:

(a)  Impact of growth – The proposed request shall not significantly affect the financial ability of the Town to provide services.

(b)  Public investment –The proposed change shall not significantly diminish the value of public utility investments and present or future government investments.

(c)   Use impact – The proposed change shall be compatible or complement adjacent land use patterns.

(d)  Natural Resources–The proposed change shall not result in a decline in water quality from increased urban runoff, or shoreline development or loss of wetlands.  The proposed change shall not adversely impact natural resources or create fragmentation of open space or wildlife habitat.

(e) Agricultural Resources–Wherever feasible, the proposed change shall not adversely affect the continuation of farming or forestry on the property or adjacent properties.  Wherever feasible, the Commission shall do nothing to adversely affect the viability of farming in Colchester.

 

 

 

2.04 Lots

 

A. Frontage Calculation.  All lots shall require frontage on a public street or way of a minimum specified in Table A-2.  The Interstate and Circumferential Highway rights-of-way and public waters shall not be considered frontage. Required frontage shall be contiguous.

 

B. Reduction of Frontage. No lot frontage shall be so reduced in frontage such that the coverage, setbacks, or other requirements of these regulations shall be smaller than herein prescribed for each district except as provided in Article Nine herein.

 

C. Reduction of Lot Size. No lot shall be so reduced in area that the lot size, coverage, setbacks, or other requirements of these regulations shall be smaller than herein prescribed for each district except as provided in Article Nine herein.

 

D. Corner Lots. In cases where a lot has frontage on two streets, the lot shall be deemed a corner lot and shall have two frontages. In cases where a lot has frontage on a public street and on a private right-of-way, the lot shall be deemed a corner lot and shall have two frontages.

 

E. Pre-Existing Small Lots.

1. Any lot that is legally subdivided, is in individual and separate and non-affiliated ownership from the surrounding properties, and is in existence on the date of enactment of any bylaw, including an interim bylaw, the enactment of which rendered the lot non-conforming because of the minimum lot size requirements of said bylaw, may be developed for the purposes permitted in the district in which the lot is located, provided:

(a)   such lot is not less than one-eighth acre in area and not less than forty feet in width and depth; and

(b)  such development complies with Chapter Eight of the Colchester Code of Ordinances; and

(c)   such development meets all the dimensional requirements for the district in which it is located.

The Development Review Board or Administrative Officer may require a survey for the lot in question.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event that an existing small lot has been at any time in common ownership with any contiguous lot, said existing small lot shall be deemed merged with said contiguous lot and may not be separately conveyed; provided, however such lot may be conveyed if:

(a)   lots are conveyed in their preexisting, non-conforming configuration, and

(b)  on the effective date of the bylaw causing the nonconformity, each lot was developed with a potable water supply and wastewater disposal system, and

(c)   at the time of transfer, each water supply and wastewater system is functioning properly, and

(d)  the deeds of conveyance create appropriate easements on both lots for replacement of one or more wastewater systems, potable water supply, or both if applicable, in the event of a failed system or failed supply as defined in 10 V.S.A. Chapter 64.

2. For any lot shown on a plat approved by the Planning Commission and recorded in Colchester Land Records, the requirements of individual and separate and non-affiliated ownership shall not apply and the lots shall not be deemed merged.

F. Footprint Lots.  A Footprint Lot as defined herein is not considered a lot for the above lot standard purposes.

 

 

2.05 Setbacks and Buffer

 

A. General Provisions. The size and dimensions of setbacks shall be as indicated in Table A-2, Dimensional Standards, unless otherwise provided in these Regulations.

 

B. Arterial and Collector Streets.

1. For the arterial and collector streets listed below, minimum front setbacks shall be forty-five (45) feet from the edge of the right- of-way or greater if so provided elsewhere in this Section 2.05.

ROAD / STREET

Route 2A (a.k.a. Main Street)

Route 2

Route 7 (a.k.a. Ethan Allen Highway; South of Chimney Corners is Roosevelt Highway) (outside of the GD3 District)

Route 15 (a.k.a. College Parkway)

East Road

Malletts Bay Avenue

Holy Cross Road

Severance Road (outside of the GD3 District)

Blakely Road (outside of the General Development Districts & Lakeshore Districts)

2. For the arterial streets listed below, the minimum front setbacks shall be seventy-five (75) feet from the edge of the right-of-way or greater if so provided elsewhere in this Section 2.05.

ROAD / STREET

I-89

3. Planned Arterial and Collector Streets. Planned public arterial and collector streets, as designated by the Official Map, shall be subject to the provisions of this Section 2.05 and any lot frontage requirements.

 

C. Yards Abutting a Planned Right-of-Way, Sidewalk or Bikepath. The dedication of public road rights-of-way, excluding Interstate 89, shall not reduce the area and property lines used to determine conformance of any pre-existing lot and/or structure’s area and coverage, and setback requirements as stated in Section 2.05 and Table A-2 of this Regulation. Evidence of the pre-existing area and property line conditions must be recorded in the Town Land Records prior to the dedication of the public rights-of-way affecting the pre-existing lot and/or structure. All new lots or substantial redevelopment of a pre-existing lot shall have a minimum setback from a right-of-way designated for a planned public right-of-way, sidewalk or bikepath equal to the front setback requirement for the district in which the lot exists, unless the yards abut any of those streets listed above in Section 2.05B, in which case the minimum setback of Section 2.05B shall apply from the edge of the planned right-of-way. 

 

D. Setback Calculation. The horizontal distance between a lot line, including lease lot lines, and the nearest line or point of a structure.  The nearest line or point of a structure shall include but not be limited to: roof eaves, window bays, stairs, attached structures such as decks, foundations, slabs, and pillars.  In the Mobile Home Park District where lease lot lines are not delineated, side yard setbacks shall be measured between structures by multiplying the setbacks of Table A-2 by two.

 

E. Traffic Visibility Across Yards. No shrubbery, fences, walls, or other visual obstructions shall be erected, maintained, or planted on any lot that obstructs or interferes with traffic visibility or access for emergency vehicles as required in Chapter Seven of the Colchester Code of Ordinances. In the case of corner lots, such restricted area shall be the triangular area formed by the lot lines along the streets and a line connecting them at points thirty (30) feet from the intersection of the lot lines except in the GD3 District.

 

F. Setback from Slopes. The minimum setback from a slope exceeding 45 degrees (See Appendix B) shall be fifty (50) feet. 

 

G. Structures Requiring Setbacks. Except as specifically provided elsewhere in these Regulations, the front, side, and rear setback provisions in Section 2.05 shall apply to all structures, except for fences under six (6) feet in height, sidewalks and other pedestrian ways, driveways, single family and residential parking lots.

 

H. Front Setbacks. In the case of nonresidential uses, not more than thirty percent (30%) of the area of the required front setback shall be used for driveways and parking and the balance shall be suitably landscaped and maintained in good appearance except in the GD3 District. No portion of the required front setback shall be used for storage or for any other purpose except as provided in this section. Front setbacks may be used for green infrastructure and outdoor seating. In addition, a continuous strip fifteen (15) feet in width traversed only by driveways and sidewalks shall be maintained between the street right-of-way line and the balance of the lot, which strip should be landscaped and maintained in good appearance. This provision shall apply also to yards that abut a right-of-way designated for a future street.  Along Prim Road, Heineberg Drive, and Porter’s Point Road between Heineberg Drive and Church Road, the width of the continuous strip shall be increased to twenty (20) feet for all new development.  In the case of residential uses, not more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of the required front setback shall be used for driveways and parking and the balance shall be suitably landscaped and maintained in good appearance. No portion of the required front setback shall be used for storage or for any other purpose except as provided in this section.

 

I. Buffer Strip for Non-Residential Uses Adjacent to Residential

District Boundaries outside the General Development Districts.

1. Where a new non-residential use is adjacent to or within fifty (50) feet of the boundary of a residential district, or where an existing non-residential use, structure or parking area that is adjacent to or within fifty (50) feet of the boundary of a residential district is proposed to be expanded, altered or enlarged, the required side or rear setback shall be increased to fifty (50) feet. A strip not less than fifteen (15) feet wide within the fifty (50) foot setback shall be landscaped with dense evergreens, fencing, and/or other plantings as a screen. New external light fixtures shall not ordinarily be permitted within the fifteen (15) foot wide buffer area.

2. The Development Review Board may permit new or expanded nonresidential uses, structures and/or parking areas, and new external light fixtures, within the setback and/or buffer as set forth in (1) above, and may approve a modification of the width of the required setback and/or landscaped buffer as set forth in (1) above. In doing so the DRB shall find that the proposed lighting, landscaping and/or fencing to be provided adjacent to the boundary of the residential district will provide equivalent screening of the noise, light and visual impacts of the new non-residential use to that which would be provided by the standard setback and buffer requirements in (1) above. However, in no case may the required side or rear setback be reduced below the standard requirement for the zoning district in which the non-residential use is located.

 

J. Exceptions to Setback Requirements for Lots Existing Prior to January 1, 1990. This provision is intended per 24 V.S.A. Section 4414(8) to provide relief to lots unduly burdened by zoning requirements adopted after the creation of said lots.  The following exceptions to setbacks shall be permitted for lots that meet the following criteria: the lot was in existence prior to January 1, 1990, and the existing principal use on the lot is a single family dwelling or a two-family dwelling.

1. Side and Rear Setbacks. A structure may encroach into the required side or rear setback up to a distance equal to 50% of the side or rear setback requirement of the district, but in no event shall a structure have a side setback of less than ten (10) feet unless a lawful existing encroachment exists.  If there is a lawful existing encroachment a structure may be enlarged within the setback up to the existing point of encroachment.  In no event shall the encroachment conflict with the required setbacks of Colchester Code of Ordinances Chapter Eight.  The applicant shall prove that the proposed structure can not be reasonably constructed elsewhere on the lot so as not to encroach.  The proposed structure shall be designed to minimize encroachment.

2. Front Setbacks. A structure may encroach into a required front setback, but in no event shall a structure have a front setback of less than twenty (20) feet unless a lawful existing encroachment exists.  If there is a lawful existing encroachment a structure may be enlarged within the setback up to the existing point of encroachment.  In no event shall the encroachment conflict with the required setbacks of Colchester Code of Ordinances Chapter Eight.  The applicant shall prove that the proposed structure can not be reasonably constructed elsewhere on the lot so as not to encroach.  The proposed structure shall be designed to minimize encroachment.

3. Processing of a Request. Any request under sections (1) - (3) above to expand an existing structure, or place a new structure may require the submission of survey data prepared by a licensed surveyor showing the location of affected property lines, existing and/or proposed structures, and any other information deemed necessary by the Administrative Officer.

 

K. Compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act or Building & Fire Codes.  An application to construct an access that complies with the Americans with Disabilities Act shall be exempt from required setbacks provided the applicant can demonstrate to the Administrative Officer that such access can not reasonably be constructed elsewhere on the lot to comply with setbacks.  Access shall include, but not be limited to, ramps, elevators, lifts, grading and filling, impervious area, and other amenities required under the American with Disabilities Act.  An application to construct a fire escape or other mean of emergency egress required by Chapters Four and Seven of the Colchester Code of Ordinances shall be exempt from required setbacks provided the applicant can demonstrate to the Administrative Officer that such access can not reasonably be constructed elsewhere on the lot to comply with setbacks.

 

L. Footprint Lots.  A Footprint Lot as defined herein is not considered a lot for the above setback standard purposes.

 

 

2.06 Height of Structures

 

A. General Provisions. Except as specifically provided elsewhere in these Regulations, the height provisions in Section 2.06 and Appendix A-2 shall apply to all structures except Telecommunication Facilities and Wind Turbines as defined herein.  Maximum allowable building heights are illustrated in Appendix B, Height of Structures.

 

B. Pre-Construction Grade. For the purpose of regulating height under this section, pre-construction grade shall be defined as the grade existing on property on the date of an application under the Colchester Development Regulations for any development approval (variance, conditional use approval, building permit, site plan approval), unless another grade has been established as the pre-construction grade pursuant to Section 2.13 Alteration of Existing Grade or Impervious Area below.

 

C. Height Waiver for Structures in All Zoning Districts Except R3, R2, R1, R5, and R10 Districts.

1. The Development Review Board may approve a structure with a

height in excess of the limitations set forth in Table A-2 up to forty-five (45) feet in the General Development Districts. For each foot of additional height above the maximum height specified in the district in Table A-2, all front and rear setbacks shall be increased by one (1) foot and all side yard setbacks shall be increased by one half (1/2) foot.

2. For structures proposed to exceed the maximum height for structures specified in Table A-2 as part of a planned unit development or planned residential development, the Development Review Board may waive the requirements of this section as long as the general objectives of the applicable zoning district are met. A request for approval of a taller structure shall include the submittal of a plan(s) showing the elevations and architectural design of the structure, pre-construction grade, post-construction grade, and height of the structure. The massing of the structure should be broken up by transitions in building height with steps up and down to achieve a sense of balance.  Bulky buildings with little variation in shape or design shall be avoided.

 

D. Rooftop Apparatus, Chimneys, Communications Towers, Silos, etc.

Rooftop apparatus, such as solar collectors, television antennas, satellite

dishes, chimneys, and air conditioning equipment shall be included in the height measurement. Chimneys for residential structures shall be exempt from the height limitations.  Farm silos, light poles, and steeples for places of worship that are taller than normal height limitations established in Table A-2 may be approved by the Development Review Board as a conditional use subject to the provisions of Article 8, Conditional Uses. Such structures do not need to comply with the provisions of Section 2.06(C) above.

 

E. Height Waiver for Accessory Structures.  The Administrative Officer may approve an accessory structure with a height in excess of the limitations set forth in Table A-2 up to twenty (20) feet in height or the height of the primary structure whichever is less if the accessory structure includes an accessory dwelling unit as defined in Section 2.09 herein.

 

 

2.07 Temporary Structures and Uses

 

A. General Provisions. Any temporary use of a lot, not approved in connection with the primary use of that property, shall be restricted according to the provisions of this section.

 

B. Location of Temporary Uses and Structures. Temporary uses and structures exceeding ten (10) days in duration shall be considered permanent except as provided in subsection E below.  Temporary uses or structures on a lot shall not be placed or conducted in such manner as to obstruct or interfere with vehicle circulation and parking, pedestrian movement, block sidewalks, obstruct crosswalks or damage landscaped areas.

 

C. Temporary Construction Structures. Temporary structures used in conjunction with duly permitted construction work shall be permitted only during the period that the construction is in progress.

 

D. Temporary Outside Storage. Temporary outside storage used in conjunction with the principal use or uses on that property shall be subject to approval by the Development Review Board unless specifically excluded from the use by definition or district.  

 

E. Temporary Uses Exempt from Review. The following uses are permitted without requiring review under this section provided such uses do not exceed the stated limits. Uses which exceed the stated limits shall be considered to be permanent uses and, as such, are restricted by other portions of these regulations.

1. Auctions lasting no longer than two (2) days per calendar year.

2. Garage sales totaling no more than two (2), seven (7) consecutive day sales or two (2) three (3) consecutive weekend sales shall be conducted at one (1) residence per year.  All sales shall be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. only.

3. Commercial use tents erected on a property for less than ten (10) days in one calendar year.

4. Outdoor sales events held by a business on the same lot for no more than four (4) consecutive days, two (2) times per calendar year.

5. Other mobile home dwelling unit type trailers such as office trailers, office/storage trailers and semi-van trailers may be allowed as temporary facilities for construction projects when approved with a building permit from the Administrative Officer.  No other non-dwelling uses of trailers shall be allowed except as a temporary emergency facility when approved by the Development Review Board as a conditional use.

6. Portable Toilets erected on a property for less than fifteen (15) days in one calendar year.  Portable toilets located in public parks, in association with agricultural operations, or in association with construction projects when approved with a building permit from the Administrative Officer or a wastewater permit from the Wastewater Official shall not be subject to this time limitation.

7. Play structures under 50 gross square feet such as but not limited to swings, slides, tree-houses, and sand boxes, and outside the Floodplain, Shoreland, & Watercourse Protection Districts.

8. Piers, docks, and other structures attached to the shore and extending beyond the mean water mark provided that such piers, docks, and other structures comply with all state and federal regulations pertaining to such encroachments and are not integrated with other structures herein regulated.

9. Fishing houses as defined in 10 VSA part 4 and appendix.

 

 

2.08 Multiple Structures

 

A.  General Provisions. Except as otherwise provided specifically within these Development Regulations, there shall be only one principal building or structure on a lot. Multiple structures on a lot shall be subject to the requirements of Planned Unit Development in Article Nine.

 

 

2.09 Accessory Structures and Uses

 

A. Accessory Structures. Accessory buildings, except as otherwise permitted in the Regulation, shall be subject to the following regulations:

1.  Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a principal building, it shall be subject to and must conform to all requirements of this Regulation applicable to principal buildings.

2. The square footage of the first (ground) floor of the accessory structure(s) shall be included in the computation of lot coverage.

3. No detached accessory building shall be located closer than ten (10) ft. to any principal building.

4. No detached accessory building in any District shall exceed the heights specified in Table A-2.

5. Any accessory structure designed as a poolhouse shall be located no farther than fifteen (15) feet from the swimming pool to which it shall be accessory.

6. If an accessory building exceeds 50% of the ground floor of the principal structure on a greater than five acre parcel or if  an accessory structure is to be located in the front yard the following criteria shall be met: 

a.   Where the building is accessory to a residence, the appearance of the accessory building shall be residential in nature.  Exterior building details – including scale, fenestration, roof and siding materials, color and design – shall be compatible with the principal structure.  The Administrative Officer may further require appropriate screening and landscaping around the accessory building to ensure compatibility with abutting residential properties.

b.   The placement of more than one accessory structure within a front yard shall require approval by the DRB through the conditional use process herein defined in Article 8.

7.     Portable Toilets are not permissible except as stated in Section 2.07E6 herein.

 

B. Accessory Uses.

1.  Accessory Residential Units.  An accessory apartment may be approved that is accessory to a conforming residential use in accordance with Title 24 VSA Section 4412 (1) (E) as amended from time to time.  The following criteria shall be used when reviewing an application for a zoning permit:

a.  The owner shall occupy either the principal dwelling or the accessory apartment.

b. Only one accessory apartment may be permitted per parcel.

c.  The accessory unit, whether located in the principal or an accessory structure, shall have the external appearance of a single-family residence.  Exterior building details – including scale, fenestration, roof and siding materials, color and design – shall be compatible with the principal dwelling.

d. The unit shall contain no more than 2 bedrooms.

e.  The apartment square footage shall not exceed 900 square feet in gross floor area or 30% of the gross floor area of the principal dwelling whichever is greater.  Included in the calculation of gross floor area for an accessory apartment shall be any structure, attached or detached, principally used by the accessory apartment.  Such structures shall include, but not be limited to, decks, porches, garages, lofts.

f.  All applicable regulations for the provision of sewage disposal and water supply shall be met.

g. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided to include two parking spaces for the principal dwelling unit and one space per bedroom for the accessory apartment.

2.  The outdoor storage or parking, storage or use of a travel trailer, tent trailer, pickup camper or coach, motorized dwelling, boat and boat trailer, snow vehicle, cycle trailer, utility trailer, horse trailer, or similar recreational vehicle per residential lot by the owner provided the following conditions are met:

a.  Such vehicular equipment is stored or parked on private property no closer than eighteen inches to any proposed or existing public sidewalk and so as not to project into the public right-of-way;

b. Minimum 5’ side yard setback except with neighbor’s written concurrence.

c.  On corner lots, any such vehicular equipment that exceeds thirty-six inches in height is not parked in the triangular area formed by the three points established by the intersection of property lines at the corner and the points thirty feet back from this intersection along each property line;

d. No travel trailer, tent trailer, pickup camper or coach, motorized dwelling, or van is used for the conduct of business or for living or housekeeping purposes except when located in an approved mobile home park or in a campground providing adequate sanitary facilities.

e.  Any travel trailer, tent trailer, detached pickup, camper or coach, boat and boat trailer, cycle trailer, utility trailer and van, horse trailer and van parked or stored out-of-doors is adequately blocked or tied down or otherwise secured so that such vehicle does not roll off the lot and is not moved about by high winds; and

f.  No vehicular equipment regulated by this section is stored out-of-doors on a residential lot unless it is in condition for safe and effective performance of the functions for which it is intended.

g. No more than two of any combination of travel trailer, tent trailer, pickup camper or coach, motorized dwelling, boat and boat trailer, snow vehicle, cycle trailer, utility trailer, horse trailer, or similar recreational vehicle may be stored per lot at any given time.

h. No more than one unregistered vehicle may be kept on a lot.  Exempted from this requirement are non-motorized boats that are not required to be registered.

i.   Farm equipment normally on farm land and equipment involved in construction and which is kept on an active construction site shall be excluded from this section.

3. The storage of scrap, salvage/junk material, refuse, automotive dismantling, salvage or recycling facilities on a lot is hereby prohibited. Exempted from this requirement are: 1) approved salvage operations, 2) construction projects when approved with a building permit from the Administrative Officer, and 3) nominal storage of materials in the rear yard or otherwise screened from view when associated with a residential use. Refuse for commercial, industrial, and multi-family dwelling units shall be in trash containers in accordance with Section 10.06 herein. Refuse for single-family residential shall be limited to up to three trash containers outside a structure.

 

 

 

 

2.10 Fences

 

A. General Requirements. In this section, fence and wall shall be interchangeable terms.  Fence height shall be the vertical distance as measured from the average preconstruction grade to the highest point of the fence. 

 

B. Specific Requirements. All fences are subject to the following provisions:

1.  A fence shall be erected within the boundaries of the applicant’s property and shall be placed wholly within but not on the property boundaries.  A fence shall be erected outside road right of ways as well as all bike/ped permanent easement areas.

2. A fence shall be erected so that its smooth or finished side faces an abutting property or roadway. All fence posts shall be placed on the inside of the fence, except for a fence to contain livestock.

3. No part of any fence shall be placed in such manner as to visually obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic.

4. Any fence shall require a permit.  A fence under six (6) feet in height shall require a building permit.

5. A fence over six (6) feet in height shall require approval by the DRB as a conditional use subject to the provisions of Article 8, Conditional Use Review.  In no case shall a fence height exceed 14 feet in height.

6. A fence over six (6) feet in height shall meet the accessory structure setback requirements for the zoning district, unless otherwise approved by the DRB as a conditional use subject to the provisions of Article 8, Conditional Use Review.

7. No fence shall be erected in such a manner as to inhibit or divert the natural drainage flow or cause the blockage or damming of surface water.

8. No fence shall be erected that may create a fire hazard or other dangerous condition or that may result in obstruction to fire fighting.

9. Fences shall be maintained in a safe and substantial condition.

10. No fence shall be located or constructed on a terrace or wall that will have an overall height of more than that permitted, unless otherwise approved by the DRB as a conditional use subject to the provisions of Article 8, Conditional Use Review.

 

C. Prohibited Fences and Materials. The following fences and fencing materials are specifically prohibited:

1. Barbed, razor or ribbon wire or broken glass as part of any fence except fences erected by a municipal, state, or federal entity.

2. Pointed metal fences except fences erected by a municipal, state, or federal entity.

3. Canvas and/or cloth fences, except when used to protect shrubs and vegetation.

4. Poultry and/or turkey wire fences within minimum front, side and rear yards.

5. Temporary fences, unless for snow control. Snow control fences shall be allowed from November 1 through to the following May 1.

6. Expandable fences and collapsible fences, except during construction of a building or for municipal, state, or federal projects.

7. Chain link fences erected with the open loop at the top of the fence.

 

D. Exemption. All existing fences that do not conform to the provisions of these regulations may be continued as they presently exist, except that these fences shall not be altered, extended, replaced or modified except in accordance with these regulations.

 

 

2.11 Swimming Pools.  All swimming pools shall be constructed in compliance with Chapter Four, Article Four of the Town of Colchester Code of Ordinances as amended from time to time.

 

 

2.12 Non-conforming Uses, Structures and Lots.  This section shall apply to non-conformities as defined in Title 24 V.S.A. Section 4303(16).  These uses and structures shall be subject to the restrictions and conditions set forth herein. 

 

A. Non-conforming Uses.

1. A non-conforming use shall not be changed to another non-conforming use.

2. A non-conforming use that is changed to a conforming use shall not be resumed.

3. A non-conforming use that is discontinued for six (6) months shall not be resumed.

4. A non-conforming use that is abandoned shall not be resumed.

5. No extension of a non-conforming use shall be permitted.

 

B. Alterations to Non-conforming Structures.  Except as otherwise provided in Article Six Section 6.03, Article Seven Section 7.03, Article Seven Section 7.04, Article Two Section 2.05J, Section 4.05,  and Article Ten Section 10.14 alterations or additions to a non-conforming structure shall not encroach within any required setbacks unless the Development Review Board has approved a variance for said encroachment per Title 24 V.S.A. Section 4469.All variance applications shall

be submitted in digital format in accordance with Appendix G herein.

1. In reviewing variance requests for encroachment within required setbacks, the Development Review Board shall use the criteria set forth in the Title 24 V.S.A., Section 4469 as amended from time to time.  In granting a variance request, the Development Review Board may attach conditions to such variances, as it may consider necessary and appropriate under the circumstances to implement the purposes of Title 24 V.S.A. Section 4469, this Article, and the municipal plan in effect. In approving a variance, the DRB shall make and so specify in its decision all of the following findings:

a.  That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions, and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of the Development Regulation in the neighborhood or district in which the property is located;

b. That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of the Development Regulation and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property;

c.  That the unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant;

d. That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property, reduce access to renewable energy resources, nor be detrimental to the public welfare; and

e.  That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that will afford relief and will represent the least deviation possible from the Development Regulation and from the plan.

2. Any non-conforming structure damaged, destroyed or removed may be reconstructed, repaired, or restored if such is completed within one (1) year of the damage, destruction or removal. Such construction shall not exceed the footprint of the structure damaged, destroyed, or removed. A time extension may be granted by the Development Review Board of up to, but not more than, one (1) year upon verification of documented evidence of a continuous good faith effort to reconstruct. A request for a time extension must be submitted in writing by the applicant prior to the expiration of the one (1) year time limit.  Any extension approved by the Development Review Board shall be made in writing and shall specify the date after which no reconstruction or restoration will be permitted upon the subject property.

3. Signs

a. Except as provided below no sign shall be altered, including any character or color alteration, or moved unless such conforms to and has been permitted under the provision of the regulations herein.  Provided, however, that this clause shall not be construed to restrict a person from maintaining or repairing a sign otherwise in compliance with the provisions thereof.  Provided further however, that this section shall not be construed to prohibit character alterations of signs designed to change a message on a regular basis, such as reader boards and pricing signs.

b. A non-conforming sign shall be removed or brought into conformance with the regulations herein if:

(1) It is damaged or destroyed and the cost of reconstruction or repair is 50% or more of its value at the time it was damaged or destroyed; or

(2) It no longer identifies a bona fide project, or business on the lot on which it is located.

c. A non-conforming sign may be relocated on a lot if the relocation is caused by street widening or other Town, State, or Federal activity beyond the control of the sign owner.

d. Any non-conforming sign where nonconformity is with respect to only size and/or height may be altered, provided: (1) the size and/or height of the sign is reduced by at least 25%; and (2) the sign is made to comply with all other provisions herein.

e. Any freestanding sign which is non-conforming as to location and/or as to the number of signs allowed on a lot may be altered provided the sign is made to comply with all other provisions contained herein.

4. Any development involving a non-conforming structure in the Flood Plain District shall be in accordance with Section 6.03 herein

5. Any variance issued in the Flood Plain District will additionally meet the requirements of 44 CFR 60.6, not increase flood heights, and will inform the applicant in writing over the signature of the Administrative Officer that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation increases risk to life and property and will result in increased flood insurance premiums up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of coverage. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions.

 

H. Construction Approved Prior to Regulations. Nothing contained in these regulations shall require any change in plans, construction or designated use of a structure provided the construction of the structure shall be completed according to such approved plans and permit within one year from December 21, 2004.

 

I. Unlawful Use Not Approved or Authorized. Nothing in these regulations shall be interpreted as authorization for or approval of the continuance of the use of a structure or land in violation of zoning prior to December 21, 2004.

 

J. Unsafe Structures. Nothing in these regulations shall permit the use of any portion of a structure declared unsafe by a proper authority nor the continuation of a condition declared to be a health hazard by an appropriate authority.

 

K. Non-conforming Lots. See Section 2.04 for pre-existing small lots.

 

 

2.13 Alteration of Existing Grade or Impervious Area

 

A. General Provisions.  In any district the removal or filling except when incidental to or in connection with the construction of a duly permitted structure on the same lot, shall require a building permit.  In any district the increase of impervious area or paving of a previously unpaved area except when incidental to or in connection with the construction of a duly permitted structure on the same lot, shall require a building permit. 

 

B. Earth Products.  For all applications for the removal or filling on a property the applicant shall submit the following information:

1. Depth of excavation in proximity to roads or adjacent properties.

2. Slope created by removal.

3. A plan for the rehabilitation of the site at the conclusion of the operations including grading, seeding, and planting, fencing, drainage, and other appropriate measures.

4. A building permit application.

Applications for the removal or filling on a property exceeding 100 cubic yards of materials shall require site plan approval by the Development Review Board subject to the provisions of Article 8, Site Plan Review prior to consideration of a building permit.  All applications for the removal or filling on a property located in the Flood Plain District or Shoreland District shall require approval by the Development Review Board subject to the provisions of Article 8, Site Plan Review prior to consideration of a building permit. 

 

C. Earth Products Review Standards.  In addition to the requirements and provisions of Article 8, Site Plan Review the applications shall meet the following standards:

1. Filling shall only be conducted with clean material such as sod, loam, sand, gravel, or quarried stone.  Biodegradable material shall not be considered clean fill.

2. No adverse effect upon public health or safety shall be created.

3. The proposed project shall not create a nuisance.

4. The effect upon the use of adjacent property by reason of noise, dust or vibrations shall be evaluated and no undue adverse effect shall be created.

5. The effect upon traffic hazards in residential areas or excessive congestion or physical damage on public ways shall be evaluated and no undue adverse effect shall be created.

6. The project may be limited in the duration of its permit to any length of time that the Administrative Officer or Board deems appropriate.

7. The project may be limited in the hours of operation, routes of transportation or material removed.

8. The Administrative Officer or Board may require suitable bond or other security adequate to assure compliance with the provision of this Section for the proper rehabilitation of the site.

9. Within the Flood Plain District, excavation of earth products shall be prohibited in such cases, except in relation to agricultural operations and commercial greenhouse operations, where it is anticipated that such excavation will lower the level of the water table or will interfere with the natural flow patterns or reduce the flood stage capacity.

10.  No adverse effect shall be created to receiving waters.

 

 
2.14 Potable Water Supply
 

A. All new potable water supplies and associated well shield areas shall be located entirely on the subject parcel if at all possible.  If any portion of the proposed well shield crosses property boundaries the owner shall obtain a permanent easement for that portion of the well shield not on his or her property prior to obtaining a Water & Wastewater Permit.

 

B. Water consumption design flows, including for existing water supplies, shall not be increased without first obtaining a Water & Wastewater Permit.  The applicant shall provide the proposed increase and shall delineate the associated well shield. If any portion of the proposed well shield crosses property boundaries the owner shall obtain a permanent easement for that portion of the well shield not on his or her property prior to obtaining a Water & Wastewater Permit.

 

C. Existing water supplies that have been replaced by an approved potable water source, including municipal water main connection, shall be considered abandoned water supplies except where the water supply serves an approved agricultural or horticultural use.  Abandoned water supplies shall be sealed and the associated well shield removed.  Abandoned water supplies shall not be recognized as protected water sources. 

 

 

2.15 Septic

 

A. General Requirements. No septic systems shall be constructed or altered except in conformance with the Colchester On-Site Sewage Disposal Regulations and Sewer Regulations as incorporated in Chapter Eight of the Colchester Code of Ordinances and amended from time to time.

 

B. Cross-District Sewage shall be subject to Conditional Use approval as specified in Article Eight and the following standards:

1. No uses shall exist on the site that interferes with the operation, maintenance, or replacement of said cross-district sewage disposal system.

2. The applicant shall possess all easements, rights-of-way, and or conveyances relative to or necessary for the establishment and maintenance of said cross-district sewage disposal system.

 

2.16 Fire Prevention Code

 

A. General Requirements. No structure or building shall be constructed or altered except in conformance with the Fire Prevention, Fire Protection, and Life Safety Regulations as incorporated in Chapter Seven of the Colchester Code of Ordinances and amended from time to time.

 

 

2.17 Building Code

 

A. General Requirements. No structure or building shall be constructed or altered except in conformance with the Colchester Building Code and Building Construction Ordinance as incorporated in Chapter Four of the Colchester Code of Ordinances and amended from time to time.

 

 

2.18 Signs

 

A. General Requirements. No signs shall be erected or maintained except in conformance with the regulations herein.

 

B.   Exempt Signs. No sign permit shall be required for the following signs:

1. Directional signs and sign plazas as defined in and erected pursuant to Chapter 21 of Title 10, Vermont Statutes Annotated. 

2. Entry signs, which contain the words "enter" or "exit" and/or related/similar wording, which are ground-mounted or post-mounted signs that do not exceed four (4) feet in height, and which do not exceed four (4) square feet in area.  Included on these signs may be a reference to a business, office or building only where that business is not directly served by a curb-cut at the property itself and shares a curb-cut with another or multiple businesses or entities.  These signs shall coordinate lettering and design with the overall signage for the property served.

3. Historical markers, memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut into any stone or masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials and not exceeding six (6) square feet in total area.

4. One (1) residential name plate sign as defined herein.

5. Traffic signs and legal notices.

6. Signs for the Town of Colchester including but not excluding community directories and signs that advise the public of the location of facilities operated by the town.

7. Directional signs.

8. "Warning", "Danger", "No Trespassing", or similar signs, in size and quantity as reasonably required to accomplish their intended purpose;

9. No more than two (2) signs advising the public that the property on which the sign is displayed is available for sale, rent, or lease. Such signs shall not exceed a combined total of six (6) square feet in area in Residential and Mobile Home Park Districts or a combined total of 32 square feet in all other districts.

10.  Bona fide holiday decorations displayed during the holiday period. Logos, business names, and commercial messages shall be prohibited on holiday decorations.

11.  One (1) A-frame sign per lot permitted for open-air markets, horticultural sales or agricultural operations as defined in these regulations. Signs shall be restricted to a maximum of 16 square feet in size and six (6) feet in height.  Signs shall be secured to the ground, shall be non-illuminated, and shall meet all the general sign requirements, design standards, and freestanding sign setbacks of this ordinance. Seasonal businesses shall remove their signs at the time of closure for the season and may restore their signs to the site at the reopening of seasonal businesses.  Signs shall not restrict sight distance in any direction.

12.  Scoreboard signs shall not be restricted in size, height, or methods of illumination. Signs attached to scoreboards are also exempted provided the following are met:

a.  The sign advertises only businesses or organizations that made a monetary contribution towards the scoreboard in question.

b. The sign includes the words “This scoreboard donated by” or similar words to that affect.

c.  The maximum size of the sign shall not exceed 21 square feet.

d. The area of the sign shall not exceed 24% of the area of the scoreboard and sign combined.

e.  The maximum height of the sign shall be 10 feet, measured from the grade line at the base of the scoreboard to the highest portion of any part of the sign.

f.  The sign shall not be illuminated.

13.  Signs for charitable or political purposes shall be exempted provided the following are met:

a. The sign shall not exceed five (5) square feet in area;

b.The sign shall not exceed three (3) feet in height;

c. Signs shall be removed within five (5) days after the election or event publicized.

d.All signs shall comply with 13 V.S.A. § 301 3 and 10 V.S.A. §§481-506 and §494(9) as amended from time to time.

14. Signs on a duly permitted construction site advertising the contractor, designers, new use or business provided that the signs are erected after the issuance of a building permit and removed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.

 

C. Prohibited Signs. The following types of signs shall be expressly prohibited in the Town of Colchester:

1.        Roof signs, except for signs erected on a parapet wall if such parapet is architecturally consistent with, the entire building and is not erected solely to receive the sign.  Any such sign shall not extend above the parapet wall.

2.       Wall signs that cover, wholly or partially, any window, door, or other wall opening or that projects beyond the ends or top of the wall to which they are attached. 

3.       Signs located on a tree, upon a rock or other natural feature.

4.        Exempt from this prohibition are up to three of the following properly displayed flags per business: town, state or country, Prisoners of War flag, open flag, corporate or seasonal flag.  No lettering shall be permitted on a seasonal or corporate flag.

5.        Billboards.

6.        Animated or action signs as defined in these regulations.

7.       Signs illuminated by or containing flashing, intermittent, rotating or moving lights. Electronic or changeable message signs, not to exceed 10 square feet in area, may be allowed to the extent that their display is static and the duration of each message is not less than five (5) minutes. Scrolling text, animation, video or other forms of continuously changing messages shall be prohibited. Not more than one (1) electronic or changeable message sign shall be located on a lot.

8.        Signs consisting of or employing string lighting.

9.        Signs intended to be primarily readable from a limited access roadway such as Interstate 89 or the Circumferential Highway.

10.    Signs constructed of paper, cardboard or similar material or signs that are temporary or non-permanent. 

11.    Signs that contain obscene, indecent or lewd content as defined within 13 V.S.A. §2801.

12.    Pennants and balloons (excludes feather signs).

 

D. Signs in Residential Districts. Signs within Residential Districts and the Mobile Home Park District shall be limited to the following:

1.   One (1) sign, not in excess of eight (8) square feet in area, located on a lot on which a lawful non-residential use exists.

2.   One (1) sign, not in excess of four (4) square feet in area, located on a lot on which a valid home occupation or business exists.

3.   One (1) free-standing or monument sign at each entrance of an approved subdivision or multi-family dwelling provided that the sign is non-illuminated, less than 20 square feet in area, and less than six (6) feet in height above the ground.

 

E. Hazards. No sign shall be designed or located to impair public safety, traffic flow or road visibility, specifically:

1.   Any sign or advertising structure as defined in these regulations shall be designed and constructed to withstand wind pressures and receive dead loads as required by recognized engineering and construction practices in the Town of Colchester.

2. All signs, and any structure such as standards and posts supporting them, shall be of substantial and sturdy construction. Break-away standards and posts are permitted if of substantial and sturdy construction.

3. No sign shall prevent free ingress to or egress from, any door, window or fire escape.  No sign shall be attached to a stand pipe or fire escape.

4.   No sign may be erected that imitates or resembles any official traffic control sign, signal, or device or as to direct the movement of traffic.

5.   No sign shall be located in a way that prevents drivers from having a clear and unobstructed view of traffic control signs, and approaching or merging traffic.  No sign shall obstruct free and clear vision, or distract the attention of the driver of any vehicle by reason of its position, shape or color. No sign shall restrict clear vision between the sidewalk and road.

6. No sign shall be designed so that it could be confused with any traffic sign or signal. Accordingly, no sign or other advertising structure shall make use of the words "Stop", "Go", "Look", "Slow", "Danger", or any other similar phrase, symbol, or character, or apply any color in a manner to wholly distract, mislead, or confuse traffic.

7.   No sign shall in its construction employ any mirror or mirror-like surface, nor any reflective, day-glowing or other fluorescent paint or pigment.

8.   No luminous sign, indirectly illuminated sign or lighting device shall be placed or aimed so as to direct beams of light or cause glare upon any road, sidewalk or adjacent premises in a manner that may constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance.



 

F. Setbacks. Zoning district setbacks shall not apply to signs, except that no freestanding or monument sign shall be placed closer than five (5) feet or the total height of the sign, whichever is greater, from any lot line or road right-of-way.

 

G. Lighting. No sign shall be illuminated during hours when the premise is not occupied or open for business. A constant light source may be used for sign lighting in accordance with the following:

1.   All bulbs shall be shielded or covered so that they are not visible to persons viewing the sign. Indirect or interior lighting may be used to illuminate any sign provided that the source of light shall concentrate the illumination upon the area of the sign so as to prevent glare upon the street or adjacent property.  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter, maintain or relocate any sign employing the use of luminescent lights, except where such luminescent elements are shielded from direct view by a separate translucent material. 

2.   External lights shall be directed on the sign or wall surface, preferably from fixtures mounted above or as a halo with lighting behind the sign. Illuminance of the sign face by external light fixtures shall not exceed 50 foot-candles as measured on the sign face or wall behind the sign. An external light source shall be shielded and shall not be visible from adjacent properties or roads. Light fixtures used for signs, if visible, should be of a style compatible with the overall building façade. Externally illuminated signs are preferred over internally illuminated or electronic message signs.

3. Internally illuminated signs shall be designed so that only the sign copy is illuminated. Internally illuminated plastic signs with white or clear or other light colored backgrounds are discouraged.  Internally illuminated signs with dark backgrounds and contrasting lettering are encouraged, so as to ensure that the lettering is illuminated rather than the signboard. The light emitted from the non-opaque portions of such signs shall not exceed a maximum brightness of 500 nits.

4. Electronic message signs shall not exceed a maximum brightness of 5,000 nits during the day and 500 nits at night. The brightness of such signs shall automatically adjust in response to changes in ambient light levels. Electronic message signs shall default to a black screen in the case of a malfunction.

 

H. General Design Standards. Signs shall be designed and constructed in such manner and of such materials as to be consistent with the following design standards:

1.   Signs shall not dominate the lot on which they stand or the building to which they are attached, but shall be visually compatible and harmonious with the associated development. The design of a sign shall be compatible in design and color to the structures on the site on which the sign will be placed.

2.   The design of all signs on a property shall promote a consistency in terms of color, graphic style, lighting, location, material and proportions.

3.   Signs shall contain a minimum amount of lettering, colors and other design features necessary to clearly communicate their message without being distracting to motorists. Use of more than three (3) predominant colors on a sign is discouraged.

4.   Signs shall be designed and constructed of durable materials.

5.   Signs indicating membership in national or regional organizations (including credit card signs) or informing the public that gifts, trading stamps, or similar promotional items are available shall be incorporated in the principal sign.  Such signs shall be included in the overall square footage calculation.

6.   The area of a sign shall be calculated as follows:

a.   for cut-out letters, that area shall be computed by taking one-half the area enclosed within the smallest geometric figure needed to completely encompass all letters, including vertical and horizontal spacing between letters.

b.   for signs other than cut-out letters, that area shall be computed by taking the total area of the facing or the total area within the outer edge of any existing border of the sign.

c.   the base of a freestanding sign shall be included in the maximum allowable square footage if the base is a solid pylon.  Rock walls and posts less than 18 inches in diameter shall not be deemed to be pylons.

I.  Freestanding and Monument Signs. The following shall apply to freestanding and monument signs:

 

Commercial District located on West View Rd., Water Tower Circle, and Upper Mountain View Dr.
Other Non-Residential Districts
GD-3 & GD-4 Districts
Lot <40,000 sf
Lot 40,000+ sf
Lot <40,000 sf
Lot 40,000+ sf
Numeric and Dimensional Standards
a. Number of Signs

1 per lot with 1 additional sign permitted for those properties located on West View Road

1 per road access provided that the entry qualifying for a sign is not located closer than 300 feet to any other entry qualifying for a sign.

b. Total Sign Area

32 sf + additional 25 sf per story above 2 stories not to exceed 110 sf

32 sf

32 sf + additional area as per Table *

32 sf

c. Ratio

No sign dimension shall exceed the other by more than 5 times.

No sign dimension shall exceed the other by more than 5 times.

No sign dimension shall exceed the other by more than 4 times.

d. Height

20 ft.

10 ft for signs up to 32 sf in area.
12 ft for signs greater than 32 sf in area.

 
Placement and Design Standards
 

e. Freestanding and monument signs shall be self-supporting without the need for guy wires, cables, chains, lines, or other similar ancillary supports.

 

f. Freestanding and monument signs and the premises surrounding same shall be landscaped in an aesthetically pleasing or appropriate manner with hardy plant materials, groundcover, lawn or hard surfaces that will remain attractive throughout the year and be maintained by the owner thereof clear of rubbish and weed.

 

g. Freestanding or monument signs shall be located in close proximity to road entrances. The signs shall be visible to vehicles passing road entrances.    For properties located on West View Road, offsite signage shall be allowed along Upper Mountain View Drive with permanent easements.    

 

Table *: Additional Sign Area

 
Multiple Businesses on the Lot OR
Road Frontage OR
Building Size =
Additional Sign Area
 

6

200 - <300 ft

25,000 sf - <50,000 sf

+2 sf

 

7

300 - <400 ft

50,000 sf - <75,000 sf

+4 sf

 

8 or more

400 ft or more

75,000 sf or more

+8 sf

Approval of additional sign area shall be subject to the requirement that the lot on which the sign is located together with the building(s) thereon shall continue to meet the standards on which approval was granted. In the event of reduction of the size of the lot or the amount of frontage or the size of the building the owner shall apply the reduced size from that point forward in calculating signage under regulations then in effect, and, if such regulations require a sign with reduced sign area, the property owner shall install a sign meeting such reduced sign area requirement within three (3) months.



J. Wall Signs. The following shall apply to wall signs:

 

Single-Use Lots
Multiple-Use Lots
Freestanding Sign
No Freestanding Sign
Freestanding Sign
No Freestanding Sign
Numeric and Dimensional Standards
a. Number of Signs

2

2 +
1 per additional principal business*

b. Total Sign Area

Lesser of 100 sf or

Lesser of 100 sf or

5% of signable wall area

10% of signable wall area

5% of signable wall area

10% of signable wall area

Placement and Design Standards
c. Wall signs shall be placed in a manner that complements the architecture of buildings. A wall sign shall not extend above the eaves, nor block access to any window or door.

d. Wall signs shall not be placed in locations where architectural details (e.g., window frames, cornices or other trim) will be obscured. Signs should be logically located on the building facades, such as within or just above storefront windows.

e. No wall sign shall project more than two (2) feet from the wall of any building.        

f. * For multiple use lots in which a principal business occupies multiple facades, the business is allowed to have a wall sign of up to 5% of the signable wall area on each façade.

 



K. Hanging or Projecting Signs. Hanging or projecting signs shall only be allowed in the GD-3 and GD-4 districts in accordance with the following:

Numeric and Dimensional Standards
a. Number of Signs

One (1) per customer entrance

b. Total Sign Area

Eight (8) sf or
32 sf, if property dimensions create circumstances that do not allow for a freestanding or wall sign

Placement and Design Standards
c. The lowest portion of a hanging or projecting sign, or its support structure, shall be at least eight (8) feet above the sidewalk or   six (6) above grade directly beneath it if no pedestrian access is feasible.

d. No hanging sign or its support structure shall project more than six (6) feet from the wall of any building or beyond one (1) foot from the edge of the sidewalk, whichever is less.

e. No portion of a hanging or projecting sign shall exceed the top of the building wall or parapet in height.

f. Hanging and projecting signs shall be securely mounted on the supporting building in a safe and appropriate fashion relative to the architecture of the building.



 

L. Window Signs. Window signs, temporary or permanent, are permitted provided the total sign area does not exceed 25% of the total window area to which the signs are attached.

 

M. Directory Signs. When it is necessary to orient the public by listing multiple stores or offices within one complex, an additional directory sign may be installed at the building entrances or in a suitable location to allow visitors, once within the property, to receive direction for a particular location.  These directory signs are not to compete with any advertising or informational signs designed to be visible from the traveled way. There shall be no more than two (2) directory signs per building.

 

N. Signs for Specific Uses.

1.   Drive-Through Restaurants. Restaurants with drive-through facilities may have one (1) sign displaying menu items in addition to any freestanding signs permitted herein.  A menu board sign shall not exceed 32 square feet and shall be screened from view except from the drive-through lane itself.

2.   Gasoline Sales. For establishments selling gasoline, wall signs may be attached only to the principal building. There shall be no more than two (2) wall signs on the principal building.  No signs shall be permitted on the canopy. In addition to signs permitted by other provisions of this section, gasoline stations may have signs attached to functioning gasoline pumps. No individual sign shall exceed two (2) square feet and the total square footage of all such signs shall not exceed 25 square feet.  Such signs include but are not limited to: “restrooms”, “self-service”, “turn off engine”, or “unleaded”. Notwithstanding, any sign including the name and/or logo of the business to which it is attached shall count as wall signage and shall be subject to the applicable provisions of these regulations.

O. Temporary Signs. Temporary signs may be permitted in accordance with the following:

1.   One (1) unlit, portable, A-frame, banner, or sandwich board sign not to exceed ten (10) square feet in area or four (4) feet in height, which advertises daily specials, menu items or the like. The sign shall only be placed outside when the business is open. If the business is housed in building that abuts the sidewalk, such a sign shall be placed five (5) feet from the sidewalk. Such signs shall be weighted or secured as appropriate to prevent them from being blown or knocked over and creating a hazard.

2.   One (1) unlit temporary sign or temporary feather sign not to exceed 32 square feet in area or 12 feet in height, which advertises a short-term sale, special event, seasonal product or the like. Such signs shall not be actionable or animated, or include any moving parts. Such a sign shall not be located within any public rights-of-way. Such signs shall be weighted or secured as appropriate to prevent them from being blown or knocked over and creating a hazard.

3.   No permanent footings, posts or similar structures shall be installed to support a temporary sign. Temporary signs that are not readily moveable shall be considered a permanent sign subject to all provisions of this section.

4.   Temporary signs may be displayed for the period(s) specified by the temporary sign permit issued by the town. A license holders found to be in violation shall have their permit suspended for the remainder of the year and shall not be eligible to apply for a permit for the following calendar year.

5.   Temporary sign permits shall be as follows:

Duration of Display
A-Frame, Banner, or Sandwich Board 10 sf max
Other Temporary Sign up to 32 sf max
Not to exceed 5 days in any
month period

permitted

permitted

Annual permit for daily use

permitted

not permitted

 

 

2.19 Compliance with Chapter 14 and 18 of the Colchester Code of Ordinances

 

A. General Standards. All projects shall comply with Chapters 14 and 18 of the Colchester Code of Ordinances as amended from time to time.

 

B. Additional Land Disturbance Standards.  All projects shall receive all applicable State and Federal permits prior to the issuance of a building permit.

 

 

2.20 General Provisions and Maintenance Standards

 

A. Purpose of Performance Standards. Consistent with the general purposes of these regulations, performance standards (see Appendix C) shall set specific controls on potentially objectionable external aspects of such non-residential uses so as to:

1.   Reduce to a reasonable minimum the dissemination of smoke, gas, dust, odor, or other atmospheric pollutant outside the structure or beyond the property boundaries in which the use is conducted.

2.   Control noise and light trespass beyond the boundaries of the site of the use.

3.   Prevent the discharge of untreated wastes into any watercourse or waterbody.

4.   Prevent the dissemination of vibration, heat, or electromagnetic interference beyond the immediate site on which the site is located.

5.   Prevent physical hazard by reason of biohazard, fire, explosion, radiation, or any similar cause.

6.   Regulate and control the generation and flow of vehicular traffic so as to prevent hazardous conditions, traffic congestion, and excessive noise in the streets.

 

B. Hazardous Conditions Prohibited. No land or structure in any district shall be used or occupied in any manner so as to cause hazardous or objectionable conditions to exist or to in any way endanger users of the site or the surrounding area. Such hazardous or objectionable conditions include but are not limited to dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable biohazard, fire, explosive, acidic, corrosive, caustic, pathogenic, or other hazard; or to create any noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, air pollution, heat, cold, dampness, electromagnetic or radioactive radiation, glare, toxicity or other hazardous or objectionable condition on the site or in the surrounding area.

 

C. Site Conditions.  No later than six (6) months after a permanent or temporary structure has been damaged, made uninhabitable, or has been abandoned, all scrap, debris, damaged or unsafe materials shall be removed from the site and any remaining excavation, foundation or cellar hole shall be covered over or filled to the existing grade by the property owner.

 

D. Performance Standards. The use of any substance or process so as to create any hazardous or objectionable condition on the site or in the surrounding area shall be prohibited except at levels in conformance with the requirements of this section and the performance standards listed in Appendix C, Performance Standards.

 

E. Review of Performance Standards.

1.   The Administrative Officer shall withhold a building or zoning permit or Certificate of Occupancy until satisfied that the proposed construction or use will comply with the performance standards in Appendix C, Performance Standards.

2.   Continued performance with such standards, once applicable, shall be a requirement for the continuance of any Certificate of Occupancy.

3.   Furthermore, the Administrative Officer, upon determination at any time that a use is exceeding or may exceed performance standards or will in any way create potentially hazardous conditions shall require an application for conditional use review under the requirements of Article 8, Conditional Use Review and this section.

4.   Any proposed construction, use, or change of use that, by its design or nature, is intended for the manufacture, processing, reprocessing, packaging, storage, transportation or disposal of hazardous materials shall require an application for conditional use review under the requirements of Article 8, Conditional Use Review and this section.

5.   The Development Review Board or Administrative Officer may deny applications based on excessive hazard potential. 

 

F. Required Information. Evidence of application for state and/or federal permits for the handling of potentially hazardous conditions, and/or the following information, at minimum, may be required for determination of compliance with performance standards or for conditional use review of potentially hazardous conditions:

1.   Description of proposed machinery, operations, and products.

2.   Amount and nature of materials to be used.

3.   Mechanisms and techniques to be used in restricting the emission of any hazardous and objectionable elements, as well as projected or actual emission levels.

4.   Method of delivery and disposal or recycling of any hazardous elements.

5.   Types of hazardous materials to be present, quantities of those materials, and the combination of materials in determining the degree of exposure as pertaining to the site, to adjoining sites and the surrounding area within and without the Town of Colchester.

6.   Expert testimony and documentation by a third party may be required at the expense of the applicant.

7.   Other information as may be necessary.

 

G. Conditions of Approval. The Development Review Board, in granting conditional use approval, may condition an approval to require evidence of the issuance of applicable state and/or federal permits for the handling of hazardous conditions prior to the issuance of a building permit, and may also impose conditions on the following:

1.   Size and construction of structures, quantities and types of materials, storage locations, handling of materials, routes of travel, and hours of operation.

2.   Warning systems, fire controls and other safeguards.

3.   Provision for continuous monitoring and reporting.

4.   Other restrictions as may be necessary to protect public health and safety.

COLCHESTER DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS

SUPPLEMENT 42

 

ARTICLE 3: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS

 

            3.01 Residential Three District R3

3.02 Residential Two District R2

3.03 Residential One District R1

            3.04 Residential Five District R5

            3.05 Residential Ten District R10

 

 

3.01 Residential Three District R3

 

A. Purpose. A Residential Three District is hereby formed in order to encourage high density residential uses. This district is primarily located in developed areas with existing suburban residential. Any use not expressly permitted is prohibited, except those that are allowed as conditional uses.

 

B. Municipal Plan. These regulations hereby implement the relevant provisions of the Town of Colchester adopted municipal plan and are in accord with the policies set forth therein.

 

C. Permitted Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and accessory uses to those uses.  Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

D. Conditional Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and approved pursuant to Article 8, and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

E. Area, Density, and Dimensional Requirements. In the Residential Three District, all requirements of this Section 3.01 and Table A-2 shall apply.

 

F. Additional Standards.

1. Multi-family dwellings shall be subject to Planned Residential Development Review, as per Article 9.

 

 

3.02 Residential Two District R2

 

A. Purpose. A Residential Two District is hereby formed in order to encourage medium density residential uses. This district is primarily located in developed areas with existing suburban residential. Any use not expressly permitted is prohibited, except those that are allowed as conditional uses.

 

B. Municipal Plan. These regulations hereby implement the relevant provisions of the Town of Colchester adopted municipal plan and are in accord with the policies set forth therein.

 

C. Permitted Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

D. Conditional Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and approved pursuant to Article 8, and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

E. Area, Density, and Dimensional Requirements. In the Residential Two District, all requirements of this Section 3.02 and Table A-2 shall apply.

 

F. Additional Standards.

1. Multi-family dwellings shall be subject to Planned Residential Development Review, as per Article 9.

 

 

3.03 Residential One District R1

 

A. Purpose. A Residential One District is hereby formed in order to encourage low density single-family residential uses. This district is located in areas that are transitioning from rural residential to suburban residential. Any use not expressly permitted is prohibited, except those that are allowed as conditional uses.

 

B. Municipal Plan. These regulations hereby implement the relevant provisions of the Town of Colchester adopted municipal plan and are in accord with the policies set forth therein.

 

C. Permitted Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

D. Conditional Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and approved pursuant to Article 8, and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

E. Area, Density, and Dimensional Requirements. In the Residential One District, all requirements of this Section 3.03 and Table A-2 shall apply.

 

F. Additional Standards.

1. Multi-family dwellings shall be subject to Planned Residential Development Review, as per Article 9.

 

 

3.04 Residential Five District R5

 

A. Purpose. A Residential Five District is hereby formed in order to encourage preservation of rural and agricultural character and uses while allowing for low density single-family residential uses. This district is located in rural and agricultural areas that are transitioning to rural residential. Any use not expressly permitted is prohibited, except those that are allowed as conditional uses.

 

B. Municipal Plan. These regulations hereby implement the relevant provisions of the Town of Colchester adopted municipal plan and are in accord with the policies set forth therein.

 

C. Permitted Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

D. Conditional Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and approved pursuant to Article 8, and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

F. Additional Standards.

1.  Multi-family dwellings shall be subject to Planned Residential Development Review, as per Article 9.

2. Privately owned recreational facilities in which activity is conducted primarily outside enclosed buildings or structures, such as golf and country clubs, shall be subject to the following standards:

            (a) Lighting of playing areas for night use shall be prohibited.

            (b) Golf courses and country clubs shall locate all accessory uses within one clubhouse structure.

3. Agricultural operations shall be subject to the following standards:

            (a) Structures in which farm animals are kept shall be a minimum of 100 feet from all property lines.

            (b) Feed lots, fenced runs, pens, and similar intensively used facilities for animal housing shall be a minimum of 100 feet from all property lines.

4. Contractors Yard, Landscape use shall be subject to the following standards:

            (a) All equipment shall be stored within fully enclosed building;

            (b) Only earth moving equipment shall be kept on site;

            (c) No more than six pieces of equipment shall be kept on-site;

            (d) The equipment shall be stored in a structure that is sufficiently removed or buffered from adjacent properties;

            (e) All structures associated with the use shall be either residential or agricultural in appearance and sited so as to minimize visual dominance of the site especially from the road and adjacent properties.

 

 

3.05 Residential Ten District R10

 

A. Purpose. A Residential Ten District is hereby formed in order to encourage preservation of rural and agricultural character and uses while allowing for low density single-family residential uses. This district is located in rural and agricultural areas. Any use not expressly permitted is prohibited, except those that are allowed as conditional uses.

 

B. Municipal Plan. These regulations hereby implement the relevant provisions of the Town of Colchester adopted municipal plan and are in accord with the policies set forth therein.

 

C. Permitted Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

D. Conditional Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and approved pursuant to Article 8, and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

E. Area, Density, and Dimensional Requirements. In the Residential Ten District, all requirements of this Section 3.05 and Table A-2 shall apply.

 

F. Additional Standards.

1. Multi-family dwellings shall be subject to Planned Residential Development Review, as per Article 9.

2. Privately owned recreational facilities in which activity is conducted primarily outside enclosed buildings or structures, such as golf and country clubs, shall be subject to the following standards:

            (a) Lighting of playing areas for night use shall be prohibited.

            (b) Golf courses and country clubs shall locate all accessory uses within one clubhouse structure.

3. Agricultural operations shall be subject to the following standards:

            (a) Structures in which farm animals are kept shall be a minimum of 100 feet from all property lines.

            (b) Feed lots, fenced runs, pens, and similar intensively used facilities for animal housing shall be a minimum of 100 feet from all property lines.

4. Contractors Yard, Landscape use shall be subject to the following standards:

            (a) All equipment shall be stored within fully enclosed building;

            (b) Only earth moving equipment shall be kept on site;

            (c) No more than six pieces of equipment shall be kept on-site;

            (d) The equipment shall be stored in a structure that is sufficiently removed or buffered from adjacent properties;

            (e) All structures associated with the use shall be either residential or agricultural in appearance and sited so as to minimize visual dominance of the site especially from the road and adjacent properties.

COLCHESTER DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS

SUPPLEMENT 42

 

ARTICLE 4: GENERAL DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS

           

            4.01General Development One GD1

            4.02 General Development Two GD2

            4.03 General Development Three GD3

            4.04 General Development Four GD4

            4.05 Lakeshore One LS1

            4.06 Lakeshore Two LS2

 

 

4.01 General Development One GD1

 

A. Purpose. To provide for residential and compatible commercial featuring convenience of required facilities and essential services in the Colchester Village and Warner’s Corners neighborhoods.

 

B. Municipal Plan. These regulations hereby implement the relevant provisions of the Town of Colchester adopted municipal plan and are in accord with the policies set forth therein.

 

C. Permitted Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

D. Conditional Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and approved pursuant to Article 8, and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

E. Area, Density, and Dimensional Requirements. In the GD1 District, all requirements of this Section 4.01 and Table A-2 shall apply.

 

F. Additional Standards.

1. Multi-family dwellings shall be subject to Planned Residential Development Review, as per Article 9.

2. Residential units and commercial uses may be permitted to occupy the same building subject to the Conditional Use and Site Plan criteria and the following standards:

            (a) Qualifying commercial uses shall be limited to: convenience stores without gas sales, general merchandise less than 10,000 sq. ft. no drive-up, retail food establishment with store area less than 5,000 sq. ft., automotive accessory sales without installation, general office, medical office less than 10,000 sq. ft., financial institution, personal or business service, artist production studio, cultural facilities less than 500 sq. ft., nursing care home, day-care facilities, or standard restaurants.

            (b)  The residential units shall have an entrance separate from the proposed commercial use.

            (c) Multiple commercial uses within the building may be considered however the commercial uses shall not adversely affect the proposed residential units.  Hours of operation of the commercial uses may be restricted to ensure no adverse affect to the residences.

             (d) Residential units converted from non-residential square footage in existence prior to January 1, 2004 under this section shall not be subject to Planned Residential Development review.

 

 

 4.02 General Development Two GD2

 

A. Purpose. To provide a range of commercial, light industry and compatible multi-family dwellings and related uses for the Fort Ethan Allen neighborhood and vicinity.

 

B. Municipal Plan. These regulations hereby implement the relevant provisions of the Town of Colchester adopted municipal plan and are in accord with the policies set forth therein.

 

C. Permitted Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

D. Conditional Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and approved pursuant to Article 8, and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

E. Area, Density, and Dimensional Requirements. In the GD2 District, all requirements of this Section 4.02 and Table A-2 shall apply.

 

F. Additional Standards.

1. Multi-family dwellings, in addition to the Planned Residential Development criteria contained in Article 9, shall be subject to the following standards:

(a) Class one properties, or properties with municipal water and municipal sewer, shall have a maximum residential density of ten (10) dwelling units per acre unless otherwise provided through the use of transfer of development rights under Section 7.06 herein.

(b) Class two properties, or properties with municipal water and on-site septic, shall have a maximum residential density of four (4) dwelling units per acre.

2. Outside storage for any use shall be confined to the rear yard and shall be screened from view from any side by a sufficiently high wall or fence or by appropriate landscaping such as berms, hedges and /or shrubbery.

3. All equipment maintenance, repair or manufacturing operations shall be within enclosed structures.

 

 

4.03 Severance Corners Form-Based District

A. Purpose. To facilitate a development pattern and interconnected street network within the Severance Corners Form-Based District that is modeled on traditional New England downtowns. The district shall be characterized by higher-density, mixed-use, multi-story buildings that can accommodate retail, office, commercial, light industrial, civic and residential uses. It shall have buildings set close to the sidewalk with entrances, storefronts and windows facing the street. Streets with curbs, street trees and sidewalks shall define small- to medium-sized blocks.

 

B. Municipal Plan. These regulations implement the relevant portions of the Town of Colchester adopted municipal plan and are in accord with the policies set forth in the municipal plan.

 

C. Allowed Uses. Those uses indicated in Table 1 (below) and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table 1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table 1 are prohibited. Table 1 (below) includes classes of uses (i.e. office); refer to Table A-1: Table of Uses for a detailed list of uses within each class (i.e. general office, research facility or laboratory, medical office).  

 

D. Establishment of Street Types. Development under the form-based code for this district shall be regulated by street type. Three street types are established, in order from highest to lowest: A Streets, B Streets, and C Streets. When the streets intersect, the primary street frontage is the highest order street type. The front of a principal building and its main entrance shall face the primary street frontage.

 

E. Classification of Streets. U.S. Route 7 & 2, Blakely Road and Severance Road shall be A Streets. The classification of any new public or private streets serving development within this district shall be approved by the Town of Colchester at the time of subdivision or site plan approval. Not more than 50% of the total length of new streets within any development shall be classified as a C Street.

 

F. Block Standards. No block, which includes an A or B Street, shall exceed a total perimeter length of 1,600 feet. Any block side on an A or B Street longer than 400 feet shall be broken up by a right-of-way allowing, at a minimum, through pedestrian connections.

 

G. Development Standards. All development in the Severance Corners Form-Based District shall be subject to the standards set forth in Tables 2-6 below.

 

H. Definitions. Terms specific to this section are defined as follows:



Frontage Buildout. Frontage buildout shall be calculated based on the widest point of a building between the minimum and maximum front setback lines and the width of the lot at the front lot line.
Table 1. Allowed Uses

USE (SEE SUPPLEMENT 30 (TABLE A-1: TABLE OF USES)  FOR A DETAILED LIST OF USES WITHIN EACH CLASS)

A STREET

B STREET

C STREET

GROUND FLOOR

UPPER FLOOR

GROUND FLOOR

UPPER FLOOR

GROUND FLOOR

UPPER FLOOR

1.100

Single-Family Dwelling

 

P

P

1.200

Two-Family Dwelling

 

P

P

1.300

Multi-Family Dwelling

 

P

C

P

P

P

1.400

Dwellings (w/ services, care or treatment)

P

P

P

P

P

P

1.530

Hotel & Motel

P

P

P

P

1.540

Extended Stay Hotel

P

P

P

P

P

P

1.550

Inn

P

P

P

P

P

P

1.600

Temporary Residences

 

P

P

P

P

1.700

Home Businesses

 

P

P

P

P

2.110

Convenience Store

P

P

2.120

Shopping Center

P

P

P

P

2.130

Retail Sales

P

P

P

P

2.140

Retail Food Establishment

P

P

P

P

2.150

Wholesale Establishment

 

P

P

2.610

General Merchandise Rental

P

P

3.100

Office

P

P

P

P

P

3.200

General Services

P

P

P

P

P

4.100

Manufacturing (fully enclosed)

 

 

P

P

5.000

Edu., Cultural, Religious & Social Uses

P

P

P

P

P

P

6.100

Recreation & Entertainment (indoor)

P

P

P

P

6.210

Private Recreational Facilities

P

P

P

P

P

P

6.220

Public Outdoor Recreation

P

P

P

6.300

Coliseums and Stadiums

P

P

P

P

7.000

Institutional Residence & Care Facilities

 

P

P

P

8.000

Restaurants, Bars & Nightclubs

P

P

P

P

9.100

Automobile Parking

P

P

P

P

9.230

Archival Facility

 

P

P

P

9.240

Distribution Facility

 

C

C

11.030

Public & Semi-Public Facilities

P

P

P

P

P

P

11.300

Transit Center

 

C

C

11.400

Public Garage

P

P

P

P

11.500

Municipal Services

P

P

P

P

11.800

Post Office

P

P

P

P

11.900

Essential Service Facility

P

P

P

P

P

P

12.000

Towers and Related Structures

 

P

P

13.000

Temporary Structures

P

P

P

P

14.000

PUDs

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

Table 2. A Street Dimensional Standards



A Streets are lined with mixed-use, multi-story storefront buildings that are positioned at the front of each lot. The following standards shall apply to all lots and buildings fronting on an A Street:

2.A Lot Configuration

 

A

Lot width

20 ft min, 180 ft max

 

B

Lot depth

80 ft min



C

Lot coverage

90% max

D

Frontage buildout

60% min

2.B Building Placement

Principal Building

E

Front setback

0 ft min, 18 ft max

F

Side setback

0 ft min

G

Rear setback

12 ft min

Accessory Building

H

Front setback

20 ft + principal bldg setback min

 

I

Side setback

3 ft min



J

Rear setback

3 ft min

2.C Building Form

Principal Building

K

Stories 2 min, 5 max (no more than 60% of the total frontage of the A streets in a development may be the min height.)

L

Ground floor ceiling height

Ground floor façade height

9 ft min, 24 ft max

12 ft min, 24 ft max

M

Upper floor ceiling height

8 ft min, 16 ft max

N

Portions of a building not meeting the minimum height shall not be used to calculate frontage buildout.

Accessory Building

O

Stories

2 max

P

Ground floor ceiling height

16 ft max

Q

Upper floor ceiling height

12 ft max

 

Table 3. B Street Dimensional Standards

B Streets feature mixed-use, multi-story buildings that are positioned near the front of each lot. The following standards shall apply to all lots and buildings fronting on a B Street:



3.A Lot Configuration

 

A

Lot width

20 ft min, 150 ft max



B

Lot depth

80 ft min

C

Lot coverage

85% max

D

Frontage buildout

50% min

 

 

 

3.B Building Placement

Principal Building

E

Front setback

0 ft min, 18 ft max

F

Side setback

0 ft min

G

Rear setback

12 ft min

Accessory Building

 

H

Front setback

20 ft + principal bldg setback min



I

Side setback

3 ft min

J

Rear setback

3 ft min

 

 

 

3.C Building Form

Principal Building

K

Stories

2 min, 4 max

L

Ground floor ceiling height

9 ft min, 24 ft max

M

Upper floor ceiling height

8 ft min, 16 ft max

N

Portions of a building not meeting the minimum height shall not be used to calculate frontage buildout.

Accessory Building

O

Stories

2 max

P

Ground floor ceiling height

16 ft max

Q

Upper floor ceiling height

12 ft max

 

 

Table 4. C Street Dimensional Standards

C Streets feature multi-story residential and compatible mixed-use buildings that are set back from the street behind a shallow green strip. The following standards shall apply to all lots and buildings fronting on a C Street:



4.A Lot Configuration

 

A

Lot width

30 ft min, 120 ft max



B

Lot depth

80 ft min

C

Lot coverage

85% max

D

Frontage buildout

40% min

4.B Building Placement

Principal Building

E

Front setback

6 ft min, 24 ft max

F

Side setback

0 ft min

G

Rear setback

12 ft min

Accessory Building

 

H

Front setback

10 ft + principal bldg setback min



I

Side setback

3 ft min

J

Rear setback

3 ft min

4.C Building Form

Principal Building

K

Stories

1.5 min, 3 max

L

Ceiling height

8 ft min, 12 ft max

Accessory Building

M

Stories

2 max

N

Ceiling height

12 ft max

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 5. Architectural Standards

The following standards shall apply to all buildings within the Severance Corners Form-Based District:

5.A Projecting Façade Elements

Projecting facade elements may encroach within setbacks as specified below, but shall not extend beyond lot lines.

Projecting facade elements shall not be used to meet frontage buildout requirements, with the exception of a colonnade or arcade with enclosed upper floor space above.

Awnings and Marquees



A

Depth

4 ft min, 12 ft max

B

Vertical Clearance

10 ft min

C

Length

25% of façade min

Porches and Balconies

A

Depth

6 ft min, 16 ft max

B

Vertical Clearance

8 ft min

C

Length

8 ft min

Porches and balconies shall be open and unenclosed. Ground-floor, front porches shall not be screened.

Colonnades and Arcades

A

Depth

8 ft min, 20 ft max

B

Vertical Clearance

10 ft min

C

Length

75% of façade min

Colonnades and arcades shall only be permitted on street-facing facades along an A or B Street.

Stoops and Patios



A

Depth

6 ft min

D

Height Above Sidewalk

2 ft max

C

Length

6 ft min

Stoops and patios shall not restrict sidewalk width to less than 4 feet on a C Street or 6 feet on an A or B Street.

Bay Windows

A

Depth

6 ft max



C

Length

8 ft max

Bay windows shall have fenestration on both front and side surfaces.

Eaves and Cornices

A

Depth

18 in min, 36 in max

Overhang depth for secondary roofs over building elements such as porches or dormers, or for primary roofs on small accessory buildings may be reduced to 9 inches.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5.B Walls & Facades

Composition

Street-facing building facades shall have a defined base, middle and top formed by an articulated cornice and roof.

An expression line shall delineate the division between the first and second story on facades facing an A or B Street.

The second story on an A or B Street must have an articulated vertical façade of 50% or greater in order to be considered for a second story.

Cornices and expression lines shall either be moldings or jogs in the surface plane of the building wall with a minimum depth of 2 inches.

All building facades facing an A or B Street shall incorporate at least one of the following elements at ground level: awnings, porches, colonnades, arcades, or storefronts.

All building facades facing a C Street shall incorporate at least one of the following elements: porches, balconies, stoops, or bay windows.

The total frontage of B Streets within a development shall not be more than 50% multifamily in use on the ground floor.

Bays

Street-facing building facades greater than 60 feet in width shall be divided into bays.

A

Bay Width

20 ft min, 60 ft max

B

Depth Between Bays

4 ft min



 

5.C Roofs

Type

Buildings fronting on C Streets shall have pitched roofs. Buildings fronting on an A or B Street may have pitched or flat roofs.

Pitched Roofs

Pitched roofs shall be a symmetrical gable, hip, gabled hip, hipped gable or cross gable with a pitch no less than 5:12.

Secondary shed roofs with a pitch no less than 2:12 may be used over building elements such as porches or dormers.

Flat Roofs

Flat roofs shall incorporate a cornice and parapet designed to screen views of the roof surface and any roof-mounted equipment from street level.

 

 

 

 

 

5.D Windows & Doors

Openings in Street-Facing Facades

 

 

Ground Floor (A Street)

40% min

 

 

Ground Floor (B Street)

30% min

 

 

Ground Floor (C Street)

30% min

 

 

Upper Floor (all streets)

10% min

 

A

Blank Walls (all streets)

20 ft max



Windows

 

All windows facing streets, except for storefront display windows, shall be rectangular or arched & shall be oriented vertically. Vertical windows may be grouped in a horizontal opening.

 

Windows facing streets shall use transparent glazing materials and shall provide view of interior spaces.

B

Except as part of a storefront, windows shall not be closer than 2 feet to building corners.

 

Shutters shall be sized so as to equal the width required to cover the window opening and shall be installed with the hardware necessary to make them functional.

 

Drive-through service windows may not be permitted on the front facade of buildings.

Doors

C

Pedestrian-entry doors shall be provided at intervals no greater than 50 feet along all street-facing facades.

 

Sliding, patio-style doors shall not be located on ground-floor, street-facing facades.



 

Service, security or garage doors shall not be located on street-facing facades, except for residential garages on C Streets (see 6.A below).

Storefronts

D

Storefronts shall have transparent display windows covering no less than 70% of the portion of the wall between 1 and 7 feet above the adjoining sidewalk or ground.

E

Display windows shall sit on a 1- to 2-foot high bulkhead and shall be a minimum of 5 feet high. Display windows may be oriented horizontally. Residential style windows shall not be used on a storefront.

 

 


Table 6. Parking Standards

It is the intent of these standards to ensure a balance between compact pedestrian-oriented development and necessary vehicle storage. The following standards shall apply to all surface and structured parking within the Severance Corners Form-Based District in addition to all other applicable provisions of these regulations (in the case of a conflict, the standards below shall govern):

6.A Placement

Surface Parking

A

Surface parking located on a lot with a principal building shall be located behind the principal plane of the building and a minimum of 9 feet from the front lot line.

B

Surface parking located on a lot without a principal building shall be set back from streets with landscaped green spaces as follows:

 

Setback (A Street)

30 ft min

 

Setback (B Street)

20 ft min

 

Setback (C Street)

10 ft min

Parking Structures

 

Liner buildings shall be provided between above ground parking structures (with more than 3 stories of parking above grade) and streets. Liner buildings may be attached to or detached from parking structures.

C

Liner Building Depth

24 ft min

Residential Garages

 

Residential garages may front on C Streets, but wherever possible they should face the side or rear.

D

Residential garage doors facing a C Street shall be set back a minimum of 8 feet behind the principal plane of the building and shall not exceed 10 feet in width when the door faces the street.

6.B Design

E

Consecutive Surface Parking Spaces Per Row

10 max

F

Landscape strips at least 6 feet in width shall be provided between aisles of surface parking and islands at least 9 feet in width shall be provided at the end of and within aisles (to divide consecutive rows of parking).

 

Use of LID approaches to stormwater management within surface parking lots is encouraged and landscape strips may be used to collect and infiltrate runoff.

6.C Amount

 

There are no minimum number of parking spaces required for any use within this district.

 

Parking spaces do not have to be contiguous with the building or use they serve.

G



No surface parking lot shall include more than 150 spaces. This calculation shall include all contiguous parking areas not separated by buildings, streets, or green spaces at least 50 feet in width.

 

 

 

           


4.04 General Development Four GD4

 

A.    Purpose. To encourage a mix of uses (both residential and nonresidential) in an area proximate to Interstate Exit 17 that has relatively easy access to Interstate 89.  Industrial and warehouse uses may be appropriate as long as they do not adversely affect the visual and rural qualities of the area and are adequately separated from residential uses.    Commercial uses at Exit 17 should be limited.

 

B. Municipal Plan. These regulations hereby implement the relevant provisions of the Town of Colchester adopted municipal plan and are in accord with the policies set forth therein.

 

C. Permitted Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and accessory uses to those uses.  Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.  The following additional standards shall apply to the uses indicated in Table A-1:

1. Retail and wholesale sales shall be limited as follows:

(a) No retail or wholesale building shall be greater than 20,000 square feet.

(b) Only one retail or wholesale building may be permitted on a lot, except where approved as part of a Planned Unit Development.

(c) Except where the lot in question existed prior to January 1, 2001, every subdivided lot developed for retail or wholesale sales shall have a minimum of 300 feet of frontage on an Arterial or Collector Roadway.

(d) With respect to any lot that existed on January 1, 2001, the footprint area of all buildings containing retail or wholesale sales shall not exceed 10% of the area of the lot on any existing parcel of 5 acres or greater.  This limitation shall apply to the overall acreage of the lot, whether said lot remains as one lot or is subdivided into more than one lot.  This limitation shall be noted on the site plan or subdivision plat.

2.     Gas sales shall be limited as follows:

(a) Existing gas sales operations shall be allowed to continue and/or expand.

(b) New gas sale operations must be located within 3,000 feet of the Interstate 89 right-of-way.

(c) No new gas sale use shall be permitted or allowed within 3,000 feet of an existing gas sales use, except that this limitation shall not apply to the distance between gas sale uses located on opposite sides of the Interstate 89 right of way.

3. Commercial Uses in a PUD.  Commercial uses within a PUD should be of a scale and design to primarily serve the residential uses in the PUD and in the surrounding neighborhood first and foremost.  In a PUD with dwelling units, commercial uses shall be compatible with the residential use.

 

D. Conditional Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and approved pursuant to Article 8, and accessory uses to those uses.  Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

E. Area, Density, and Dimensional Requirements. In the GD4 District, all requirements of this Section 4.04 and Table A-2 shall apply. Notwithstanding Section 7.06, transfer of development rights,  residential density bonuses may be considered by the Development Review Board in accordance with the following standards:

1. The project shall meet the definition of a Planned Unit Development as defined in these regulations and in accordance with Article Nine.  With the sketch plan application, the applicant shall submit a density plan in accordance with the general and specific standards of Article Nine additionally and an overview plan noting the ratio of commercial square footage to residential square footage.  If the project is at least 50% commercial, the applicant may apply for a 50% residential density bonus (.5 additional units for each unit permissible under the base density).  If the project is at least 50% commercial and the majority of the commercial square footage is provided within the same structure as residential units, the applicant may apply for a 100% residential density bonus (one additional unit for each unit permissible under the base density); and

2. The project shall provide significant central features and community spaces.  The project shall provide at least two design features and two structured spaces.  Qualifying design features include towers, arcades, public atrium plazas, completely enclosed walkway connections between buildings, porticos, clock towers, kiosks or and other similar public architectural elements.  Qualifying structured outdoor spaces include plazas, patios, courtyards, pedestrian plaza with benches, water feature, or other such focal feature or amenity.

3. If an applicant has successfully applied and received approval for a 100% density bonus as noted above in #1, the applicant may add up to four additional dwelling units per acre onto the project site per Section 7.06. Maximum overall density shall not exceed twelve dwelling units per acre.  The transfer of dwelling units shall either be applied for at Preliminary Plat or as a Major Amendment to the Planned Unit Development. 

4. If a density bonus, as provided herein, is approved by the DRB the final plat order shall specify a phasing plan that keeps conformance with the approved commercial and residential ratios.  At no time shall the project deviate from the ratio.  The DRB shall consider amendments to the ratios of 10% or less as a minor subdivision amendment.  The DRB shall consider amendments to the ratios of 10% or more as a major subdivision amendment.  The DRB shall not approve more dwelling units than allowed under the Development Regulations in effect at that time.

 

F. Additional Standards.  In addition to the Site Plan, Conditional Use, Planned Unit Development criteria, all development in the GD4 District shall also be subject to the following standards:

1. Siting

(a)   Relation to topography. Generally, buildings shall be placed so as to minimize breaking the skyline when observed from Arterial and Collector Roadways.  Buildings shall be designed to be “part of” not an extension of the hillside.  Specifically, in achieving this objective, the Development Review Board shall apply the following standards in the specified portions of the GD-4 District:

1. West of I89, south of US2, and east of Niquette Bay Road. As viewed from I89 or US2 looking westerly or southwesterly, buildings shall be located with a complete backdrop of existing trees to the sides of and above the building.

2. East of US2/7.  The existing wooded slope on the east side of the ravine parallel to US2/7 shall remain undisturbed except for a single roadway access across the ravine.  Buildings located east of the ravine shall be sited so that the existing tree line along the ravine is above the tallest point of the building as viewed from US2/7.  The Development Review Board may permit a minor portion (20% or less) of a building to be visible from a few intermittent segments of US 2/7 if it determines that all steps have been taken to minimize building visibility, including considering alternative siting.

3. Relation to other buildings.  Buildings shall be located so as to promote interconnected activity between neighboring buildings.  An applicant shall depict pedestrian walkways between buildings.

2. Building Details.

(a)   Height – Increases in height limits for buildings developed as part of a Planned Unit Development may be permitted where the following standards are met:

1.     The building is hidden from the view of persons utilizing arterial and collector roads by other buildings, trees or natural barriers, and/or

2.     The building is sited in a location where the existing grade lies below the pavement level of arterial and collector roads.

3.     The site is designed with the use of architectural features, color, and landscaping that are in character with the surrounding rural scenery and natural landscape.  In considering a request for increased building height, the Board shall give special consideration where the applicant locates the buildings so that they are: 1) framed or backed by a hillside; or 2) on an elevation below the elevation of adjacent and nearby Major Roadways.

(b)  Shape and massing.  The vertical mass of buildings shall be in character with other adjacent structures as well as with the topography of the site.  Bulky rectangular-form buildings with little variation in shape or design shall be avoided.  The Development Review Board may waive massing details for industrial buildings if the screening and/or siting removes any adverse visual impact from such buildings as viewed from adjacent roadways and properties. Variation may be accomplished by one or more of the following means:

1.     Physical offsets in which a building steps forward or back along its façade.

2.     Transitions in building height with steps up and down to achieve a sense of balance.  Abrupt changes in building height that disturb this sense of balance are not permitted.

3.     In lieu of physical offsets, the use of banding, changes in materials, trim and cornices.

4.     For retail buildings, physical offsets or design details shall be required at regular intervals of approximately 50’ or less along each façade of a building having a public entrance or visible from an arterial or .

(c)   Facades.

1.     The visible portion of buildings from arterial and collector roads shall be given special detailing and architectural consideration.  Other facades shall also reflect the reasonable use of appropriate building materials and colors so as to avoid a high degree of architectural contrast or the appearance of being unfinished.

2.     Facades shall build upward from the ground with defined bases, middles and tops.  The use of cornices and trim provides visual separation between layers and helps both to terminate the structure vertically as well as bridge several connected buildings together.

3.     On buildings constructed in connection with all industrial uses, the Development Review Board shall require only those building facades that are visible from arterial and collector roads to be finished to the standards of subsections 1. and 2. herein

(d)  Fenestration.

1.     The arrangements of openings along a facade are an important element for consideration.  Too many openings create visual clutter, while too few openings create large blank and uninteresting faces. The use of arches and lintels to define openings helps create a strong street edge and helps provide visual interest.

2.     Applicants are strongly encouraged to provide ample windows and other openings along all facades of a structure that are open to pedestrian access or by which pedestrians may travel.  Walls without windows are prohibited except where the Development Review Board finds such is justified by a public safety concern.  At a minimum, windows and other openings shall be provided at the pedestrian level.

3.     Entry doors shall be clearly defined with an increased level of detail.  For example, the use of entrances with awning and steps entrances helps to define pedestrian spaces and attract visitors.  Storefront windows shall be raised above the sidewalk to display merchandise at eye level while acting as a visual “wainscoting” to the pedestrian space.

4.     The Development Review Board may waive fenestration details for industrial buildings if the proposed screening and/or location of the building otherwise fully mitigates any adverse visual impact from such buildings as viewed from adjacent roadways and properties.

(e)   Materials. Whenever possible, the use of native and natural materials (wood, stone, and brick) is encouraged in design.  Glaring or reflective materials, vertical or metal siding, exterior insulation finishing systems, T-111, stucco or other synthetic building products shall not be used except: 1) in areas not visible to pedestrian and vehicular traffic; or 2) at positions above the pedestrian level.  If used, these materials shall be of a form that imitates the appearance of native and natural materials.

(f)   Color. Large areas of uniform and unbroken color are discouraged.  The use of cornices, trims, columns, pilasters and accent bands shall be used to break-up large expanses of colors.  Colors shall be compatible with the surrounding architecture and natural environment.  Excessively bright or vibrant colors shall be avoided.  In general the use of earth tones (grays, beiges, tans) is encouraged for base colors.  Accent and detail colors shall complement the base color.

(g)  Roofscape. On all structures, the rooftop collection of mechanical units, telecommunications infrastructure and other similar devices shall be screened from view from the ground and nearby buildings by architecturally attractive enclosures; alternatively, the Development Review Board may approve the use of architectural elements that minimize visual impacts.

3. Landscaping

(a)       Existing Vegetation.

1.     Retention:  Applicants shall be encouraged to protect mature trees, hedgerows and woodlots and to use such features as design elements in site plans.

2.     Protection:  Methods for protecting large caliper trees (over 8”) from damage during construction shall be outlined by the applicant and a condition of approval.

3.     Relocation:  In the event of relocation, Applicants are encouraged to relocate large caliper trees using appropriate methods whenever feasible.

4.     Transitions. Between different land uses, landscaping shall be established to reduce visual impacts and noise levels, to improve air quality, and to provide greater privacy.  The size or scale of the landscaping will correspond to the type of land use.  Some guidelines are as follows:

 

Table 4-1 Transitions Between Different Land Uses

Site

Land Use

Adjacent

Land Use

 

Planting Pattern

Residential

Open Space/

Agricultural

Pattern of open spaces and woodlands of native species arranged in a soft and transitional form.  No minimum necessary as long as goals are met.

Residential

Residential

Existing vegetation and new plantings shall be used to provide a buffer between abutting rear yards.

Residential

Commercial

A more densely arranged buffer of at least 50’ including a combination of deciduous and coniferous species.  For high traffic generators, berms may be required for noise abatement.  May be waived for PUDs if it facilitates appropriate mixed uses. 

Residential

Industrial

A berm 7' high or greater as needed to screen loading docks and other industrial operations.  Such a berm shall include evergreen plantings of sufficient density to screen for noise and visual impacts.

If industrial uses are setback at least 75’ from a residential boundary or if changes in topography provide sufficient relief, the Development Review Board may allow a densely arranged landscaped buffer at least 50’ wide in place of a berm.

 

4. Pedestrian walkways, circulation, and parking: 

(a) Pedestrian accessibility. This section sets forth standards for internal pedestrian circulation systems and sidewalks outside the Town’s Right-Of-Way.  Continuous internal pedestrian walkways, no less than 5 feet in width, shall be provided from the public sidewalk or right-of-way to the principal customer entrance of all buildings on the site.  At a minimum, walkways shall connect focal points of pedestrian activity such as, but not limited to, transit stops, street crossings, building and store entry points, and shall feature adjoining landscaped areas that includes trees, shrubs, benches, flower beds, ground covers, or other such materials for no less than 50 percent of its length.  Sidewalks, no less than 5 feet in width, shall be provided along the full length of the building along any façade featuring a customer entrance, and along any façade abutting public parking areas.  Such sidewalks shall be located at least six (6) feet from the façade of the building to provide planting beds for foundation landscaping, except where features such as arcades or entryways are part of the façade.  Internal pedestrian walkways shall be distinguished from driving surfaces through the use of durable, low maintenance surface materials such as pavers, bricks, or scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety and comfort, as well as the attractiveness of the walkways. Pedestrian facilities shall be maintained year round.

(c) Central features & community spaces.  Buildings should offer attractive and inviting pedestrian scale features, spaces, and amenities.  Entrances and parking lots should be configured to be functional and inviting with walkways conveniently tied to logical destinations.  Bus stops and drop-off/pickup points should be considered as integral parts of the configuration.  Pedestrian ways should be anchored by special design features such as towers, arcades, porticos, pedestrian light fixtures, bollards, planter walls, and other architectural elements that define circulation ways and outdoor spaces.  Examples of outdoor spaces are plazas, patios, courtyards, and window shopping areas.  The features and spaces should enhance the building and the center as integral parts of the community fabric.  Each establishment subject to these standards shall contribute to the establishment or enhancement of community and public spaces by providing at least two of the following: patio/seating area, pedestrian plaza with benches, public atrium plazas, completely enclosed walkway connections between buildings, transportation center, window shopping walkway, outdoor playground area, kiosk area, water feature, clock tower, or other such deliberately shaped area and/or a focal feature or amenity that, in the judgment of the Development Review Board adequately enhances such community and public spaces.  Any such areas shall have direct access to the public sidewalk network and such features shall not be constructed of materials that are inferior to the principal materials of the buildings and landscape.

(d) Outdoor furniture.  Outdoor furniture such as benches and other forms of seating, trash receptacles, lighting, etc. should be located for the convenience of the pedestrian and should be located in relation to street trees such that the amenity will remain unobstructed without excessive pruning of branches.  Benches shall be per the Town’s specification.  Acceptable alternatives to traditional benches include backless benches, sitting walls at varying heights, and rock seating.  Trash receptacles shall be logically placed to reduce litter however not visually prominent.  Receptacles are best sited in the shade downwind and a respectful distance from pedestrian noses, and located so that dripping from the receptacle will not cause unsightly pavement stains.  Receptacles shall be per the Town’s specifications, large enough to be obvious, and every third receptacle shall be designated and signed for recycling.

(e) Parking design.  Parking areas shall be designed to reduce the visual dominance of automobiles and shall be aesthetically compatible and sensitive to the built and natural landscape. Center block parking with multiple entrances from the street shall be employed wherever feasible. 

5. Dumpsters. The sharing or a dumpster by two or more users is encouraged.  All dumpsters shall be located out of public areas and screened by view by appropriate landscaping or fencing.  No dumpster areas or compaction areas, loading or other such uses shall be located within 50 feet of any public street or within 20 feet of any public sidewalk or internal pedestrian way.

6. Loading docks & delivery / loading operations.  Loading docks, truck parking, utility meters, HVAC equipment, trash collection, trash compaction, and other service functions shall be incorporated into the overall design of the building and the landscaping so that the visual and acoustic impacts of these functions are fully contained and out of view from adjacent properties and public streets, and no attention is attracted to the functions by the use of screening materials that are different from or inferior to the principal materials of the building and landscape.  Delivery and loading operations should not disturb adjoining neighborhoods, or other uses.  No delivery, loading, trash removal or compaction, or other such operations shall be permitted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.

 

 

 

4.05 Lakeshore One LS1

 

A.    Purpose. To regulate the use and development of lakefront property primarily for recreation, tourism and entertainment purposes in a manner that:

1.     Protects and enhances water quality;

2.     Mitigates flood hazards;

3.     Preserves and expands public access;

4.     Maintains and improves views of the lake from public vantage points;

5.     Maintains and improves views of the shoreline from the lake;

6.     Is oriented primarily to boater, pedestrian and bicycle traffic and secondarily to vehicular traffic;

7.     Promotes “greening” of shorelines, lot frontages and parking areas;

8.     Limits the amount of impervious surface and associated stormwater runoff; and

9.     Reduces the quantity and improves the quality of stormwater flowing into surface waters. 

 

B. Municipal Plan. These regulations hereby implement the relevant provisions of the Town of Colchester adopted municipal plan and are in accord with the policies set forth therein.

 

C. Permitted Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and accessory uses to those uses.  Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.  The following additional standards shall apply to the uses indicated in Table A-1:

1. Inns over 10 rooms in size shall be considered as a conditional use.

 

D. Conditional Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and approved pursuant to Article 8, and accessory uses to those uses.  Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

E. Area, Density, and Dimensional Requirements. In the Lakeshore One District, all requirements of this Section 4.05 and Table A-2 shall apply. 

1.  A structure encroaching into setbacks, including all applicable overlay districts may be rebuilt in the same footprint within ten years of demolition provided that the demolition is duly permitted and a compliant septic integrity report is submitted in accordance with Chapter Eight of the Colchester Code of Ordinances prior to construction.  The requirement for a septic integrity report may be waived by the Colchester Wastewater Official if in his or her determination the work will not impact the septic system and/or if substantial information on the septic system already exists.

2.   Lot coverage may be increased over 40% as listed in Table A-2 in accordance with subsection 4.05F herein.  If a project is deemed to comply with subsection 4.06F lot coverage maximums does not apply.

 

F. Green Infrastructure Requirements.

1. Land development that meets the following criteria shall utilize the Vermont League of Cities and Towns Green Infrastructure Simplified Sizing Tool for Small Projects to demonstrate that 90% of annual storm events, or the first inch of rainfall from impervious surfaces, are adequately treated on the site and do not overwhelm off-site drainage areas or otherwise cause erosion:

(a) Constructing or replacing a principal building; or

(b) Increasing the footprint of an existing principal building by more than 25% within a 5-year period; or

(c) Increasing the amount of impervious surface on a lot by 1,000 square feet or more over a 5-year period; or

(d) Disturbing 1,000 square feet or more of soil on a lot within a 5-year period excluding septic work; or

(e) Enlarging a structure within the Floodplain District; or

(f)Increasing lot coverage over 40% or increasing lot coverage by any amount if lot coverage already exceeds 40%.

2. If any of the following conditions exist on the site that make compliance with Section 4.05F(1) unattainable, as determined by a Professional Engineer, green infrastructure shall be used to the extent feasible on-site to maximize infiltration and minimize off-site runoff:

(a) Seasonally high or shallow groundwater as defined in the Vermont Stormwater Management Manual;

(b) Shallow bedrock as defined in the Vermont Stormwater Management Manual;

(c) Soils contaminated with hazardous materials as defined in 10 V.S.A. §6602(16);

(d) A stormwater hot spot as defined in the Vermont Stormwater Management Manual; or

(e) Other site conditions prohibitive of on-site infiltration of runoff subject to the review and approval of the Development Review Board.

3. Sites that require a State Stormwater Permit will be deemed to have complied with Section 4.05F(1) herein upon issuance.

 

G. Building Placement and Design Standards. Applicants shall submit a site plan and elevation drawings for new or expanded principal buildings to demonstrate that:

1. To the maximum extent feasible, buildings are designed to fit into the natural terrain and to minimize any change in grade on the site.

2. Buildings are located near the street with at least one entrance readily accessible and connected visually as well as by sidewalk.

3. Open space is oriented to the lake to the maximum extent feasible.

4. Proposed land development is located and designed to provide views of the lake from the street.

5.  The street-facing and lake-facing facades of buildings are comparable in design and appearance, exterior materials and finishes, and amenities.

6. Exterior wall surfaces facing a public roadway or parking area, or otherwise publicly visible, employ windows that offer views into the building interior to the maximum extent feasible given the intended function of the interior space. 

7.All sides of a structure shall receive design consideration. The front, sides, and rear of buildings shall be attractively designed and articulated to eliminate large spans of blank exterior wall.

8. The mass of large buildings are broken up by incorporating visible changes in wall plane and roof form. Traditional roofline types such as gabled, hipped, and gambrel are strongly encouraged. Type, shape, pitch and direction of roofs should be considered in the design. Flat roofs are discouraged.

9. The building facade includes elements such as porches, awnings, windows, outdoor seating, landscaping and/or similar features that will add visual interest and contribute to creating a pedestrian-oriented environment.

10. The building incorporates architectural features and details including but not limited to cornices, columns, corner trim, porticos, display window, awnings, dormers, or porches shall be considered in every building design. Traditional features and details associated with Vermont’s architectural heritage are strongly encouraged.

11. The building incorporates different exterior textures, colors and materials that add visual interest.  The use of traditional building materials such as granite, brick, fieldstone, wooden clapboard, wooden shingles, etc. is strongly encouraged. Alternatively, contemporary materials that simulate traditional materials, and that have the same visual effect, may be utilized.  The use of colors traditionally associated with the building style is encouraged.

12. All new vehicle use and parking areas are located to the side of principal buildings. Applicants are strongly encouraged to relocate or remove pre-existing parking areas located between the building and the street to the maximum extent feasible.

13. Any new vehicle or service entrances are located to the side of principal buildings and will be screened as viewed from the lake and the street.

14. Any new trash storage, building equipment, utilities or similar service functions are located to the side of principal buildings and will be screened as viewed from the lake and the street.

15. All new or expanded storage areas and structures that will not be fully enclosed will be located outside required setbacks. Applicants are strongly encouraged to relocate or remove pre-existing storage areas located between the building and the street to the maximum extent feasible.

16. All new or expanded outdoor storage areas will be screened as viewed from the lake and the street with a combination of fencing and landscaping.  Boat storage areas should prioritize screening of the base or cradles of boats realizing that the size of boat precludes options for full screening.

17. All new or expanded storage structures that are not fully enclosed and have any open sides that face the street or lake will be screened from view with a combination of fencing and landscaping. 

 

 

Figure 4-1. Building Placement and Design Standards Illustrated



 

 

4.06 Lakeshore Two LS2

 

A. Purpose. To foster the development of a small-scale, mixed-use village center on Malletts Bay that will offer residents and visitors access to recreation and entertainment opportunities, community-serving businesses, marine services, and lodging and dining options in a manner that:

1.   Protects and enhances water quality;

2.     Mitigates flood hazards;

3.     Maintains and improves views of the lake from public vantage points;

4.     Is oriented primarily to pedestrian and bicycle traffic and secondarily to  vehicular traffic;

5.     Promotes “greening” of lot frontages and parking areas;

6.     Decreases the amount of impervious surface and associated stormwater runoff; and

7.     Reduces the quantity and improves the quality of stormwater flowing into surface waters;

8.     Promotes economic development.

 

B. Municipal Plan. These regulations hereby implement the relevant provisions of the Town of Colchester adopted municipal plan and are in accord with the policies set forth therein.

 

C. Permitted Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and accessory uses to those uses.  Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.  The following additional standards shall apply to the uses indicated in Table A-1:

1. Inns over 10 rooms in size shall be considered as a conditional use;

 

D. Conditional Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and approved pursuant to Article 8, and accessory uses to those uses.  Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

1. Industrial uses lawfully in existence on January 1, 2016 shall be reviewed as a permitted use for expansions or other modifications.

 

E. Area, Density, and Dimensional Requirements. In the Lakeshore Two District, all requirements of this Section 4.06 and Table A-2 shall apply.  Lot coverage may be increased over 40% as listed in Table A-2 in accordance with subsection 4.06F herein.  If a project is deemed to comply with subsection 4.06F lot coverage maximums does not apply.

 

F. Green Infrastructure Requirements.

1. Land development that meets the following criteria shall utilize the Vermont League of Cities and Towns Green Infrastructure Simplified Sizing Tool for Small Projects to demonstrate that 90% of annual storm events, or the first inch of rainfall from impervious surfaces, are adequately treated on the site and do not overwhelm off-site drainage areas or otherwise cause erosion:

(a) Constructing or replacing a principal building; or

(b) Increasing the footprint of an existing principal building by more than 25% within a 5-year period; or

(c) Increasing the amount of impervious surface on a lot by 1,000 square feet or more over a 5-year period; or

(d) Disturbing 1,000 square feet or more of soil on a lot within a 5-year period excluding septic work; or

(e) Enlarging a structure within the Floodplain District; or

(f)Increasing lot coverage over 40% or increasing lot coverage by any amount if lot coverage already exceeds 40%.

2. If any of the following conditions exist on the site that make compliance with Section 4.06F(1) unattainable, as determined by a Professional Engineer, green infrastructure shall be used to the extent feasible on-site to maximize infiltration and minimize off-site run off:

(a) Seasonally high or shallow groundwater as defined in the Vermont Stormwater Management Manual;

(b) Shallow bedrock as defined in the Vermont Stormwater Management Manual;

(c) Soils contaminated with hazardous materials as defined in 10 V.S.A. §6602(16);

(d) A stormwater hot spot as defined in the Vermont Stormwater management Manual; or

(e) Other site conditions prohibitive of on-site infiltration runoff subject to the review and approval of the Development Review Board.

3. Sites that require a State Stormwater Permit will be deemed to have complied with Section 4.06F(1) herein upon issuance.

 

G. Building Placement and Design Standards. Applicants shall submit a site plan and elevation drawings for new or expanded principal buildings to demonstrate that:

1. To the maximum extent feasible, buildings are designed to fit into the natural terrain and to minimize any change in grade on the site.

2. Buildings are located near the street with at least one entrance readily accessible and connected visually as well as by sidewalk.

3. Exterior wall surfaces facing a public roadway or parking area, or otherwise publicly visible, should employ windows that offer views into the building interior given the intended function of the interior space

4. All sides of a structure shall receive design consideration. The front, sides, and rear of buildings shall be attractively designed and articulated to eliminate large spans of blank exterior wall.

5. The mass of large buildings is broken up by incorporating visible changes in wall plane and roof form. Traditional roofline types such as gabled, hipped, and gambrel are strongly encouraged. Type, shape, pitch and direction of roofs should be considered in the design. Flat roofs are discouraged.

6. The building facade includes elements such as porches, awnings, windows, outdoor seating, landscaping and/or similar features that will add visual interest and contribute to creating a pedestrian-oriented environment

7. The building incorporates architectural features and details including but not limited to cornices, columns, corner trim, porticos, display window, awnings, dormers, or porches shall be considered in every building design. Traditional features and details associated with Vermont’s architectural heritage are strongly encouraged.

7. The building incorporates different exterior textures, colors and materials that add visual interest.  The use of traditional building materials such as granite, brick, fieldstone, wooden clapboard, wooden shingles, etc. is strongly encouraged. Alternatively, contemporary materials that simulate traditional materials, and that have the same visual effect, may be utilized.  The use of colors traditionally associated with the building style is encouraged.

8. All new vehicle use and parking areas are located to the side or rear of principal buildings. Applicants are strongly encouraged to relocate or remove pre-existing parking areas located between the building and the street to the maximum extent feasible.

9. Any new vehicle or service entrances are located to the side or rear of principal buildings and will be screened as viewed from the lake and the street. Any new trash storage, building equipment, utilities or similar service functions are located to the side or rear of principal buildings and screened as viewed from the lake and the street.

10. All new or expanded storage areas and structures that will not be fully enclosed will be located outside required setbacks. Applicants are strongly encouraged to relocate or remove pre-existing storage areas located between the building and the street to the maximum extent feasible.

11. All new or expanded outdoor storage areas will be screened as viewed from the street with a combination of fencing and landscaping. Boat storage areas should prioritize screening of the base or cradles of boats realizing that the size of boat precludes options for full screening.

12. All new or expanded storage structures that will not be fully enclosed and have any open sides that face the street will be screened from view with a combination of fencing and landscaping. 

 
 

Figure 4-2. Building Placement and Design Standards Illustrated

 

COLCHESTER DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS

SUPPLEMENT 42

 

ARTICLE 5: COMMERCIAL & INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS

           

            5.01 Commercial District COM

            5.02 Industrial District IND

            5.03 Business District BD

 

 

5.01 Commercial District COM

 

A. Purpose. To provide designated areas to serve the needs of widely scattered residential developments with a range of retail, personal, professional and other compatible commercial type uses.

 

B. Municipal Plan. These regulations hereby implement the relevant provisions of the Town of Colchester adopted municipal plan and are in accord with the policies set forth therein.

 

C. Permitted Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

D. Conditional Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and approved pursuant to Article 8, and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

E. Area, Density, and Dimensional Requirements. In the COM District, all requirements of this Section 5.01 and Table A-2 shall apply.

 

F. Additional Standards.  In addition to the Site Plan, Conditional Use, Planned Unit Development criteria, all development in the COM District shall also be subject to the following standards:

1. Automotive Services uses shall be subject to the following:

(a) All repair work shall be carried out within an enclosed building.

(b) Outdoor storage of scrap or junk cars, spare parts or dismantled cars may be stored outside of a building only where the area for storage is enclosed within a six (6) foot high wall or privacy type fence.

 (c) Damaged vehicles awaiting disposition may be stored outside of a building only where the area for storage is enclosed within a six (6) foot high wall or privacy type fence.

(d) Up to five vehicles may be stored outside on the premises provided said storage does not exceed one (1) week in duration.

2. Gasoline Sales:

(a) Curb cuts shall be no less than 50 ft. from street intersections.

(b) Pumps, lubricating and other outside service devices shall be located at least 45 ft. from the front, side or rear lot lines, and at least 300 ft. from any lot occupied by a school, hospital, library or religious institution.

(c) Storage of trailers, campers or other such vehicles shall be prohibited.

3. Car wash.

(a) All washing facilities shall be within a completely enclosed building.

(b) Vacuuming and drying areas may be located outside the building but shall not be in the front yard and shall not be closer than 100 ft. from any residential district.

(c)Access points shall be located at least 50 ft. from the intersection of any two (2) streets.

(d) All off-street parking and waiting areas shall be hard surfaced and dust free.

(e) One (1) traffic lane shall be provided as means of exiting the facility without having to enter the car wash building, such lane to be in addition to a lane for vehicles waiting in line for the car wash and other access and circulation required herein in Article Ten.    

4. Drive-ups shall be subject to the following:

(a) shall not be located within 300 ft. of any lot occupied by a school, hospital, library, and shall not be located within 300 ft. of an abutting residential district .

(b) There shall be separate aisles for vehicle traffic entering and exiting the site.

(c) No parking shall be permitted in any part of the front yard setback.

(d) Drive-up service windows shall be on the side or rear of the building.

(e) Trash containers shall be located on concrete pads and enclosed within a screen a minimum height of the container(s).

5. Warehouse/Wholesale distribution business:

                                (a) No outside storage shall be permitted.

                                (b) Covered storage in more than one (1) building may be           permitted provided all area and dimensional requirements are met.

 

 

5.02 Industrial District IND

 

A. Purpose. To provide areas for manufacturing, wholesale, processing activities or related uses which are accessible to Arterial or Collector highways or railroad transportation facilities.

 

B. Municipal Plan. These regulations hereby implement the relevant provisions of the Town of Colchester adopted municipal plan and are in accord with the policies set forth therein.

 

C. Permitted Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

D. Conditional Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and approved pursuant to Article 8, and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

E. Area, Density, and Dimensional Requirements. In the IND District, all requirements of this Section 5.02 and Table A-2 shall apply.

 

F. Additional Standards.  In addition to the Site Plan, Conditional Use, Planned Unit Development criteria, all development in the IND District shall also be subject to the following standards:

1. All outside storage of material shall be in the rear and only where the area for storage is enclosed within a six (6) foot high wall or privacy type fence or opaque landscaping such as berms, hedges and/or shrubbery.

2. Automotive Repair and Automotive Body Work outside a fully enclosed building may be allowed subject to the following: 

(a) No work shall take place within the front yard.

(b) All work shall be screened from adjacent properties.

(c) All work shall meet the performance standards of Article Two.

3. All vehicle movements for loading and unloading shall be made off the public right‑of‑way.

4. Sanitary landfills shall meet all State of Vermont requirements for solid waste disposal.

5. Bulk fuel storage and distribution shall comply with all applicable State and Federal Regulations.

6. Equipment sales & service subject to the following:

(a) The lot or area shall be provided with a permanent, durable and dustless surface, and shall be graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulated within the area.

(b) Access to the outdoor sales area shall be at least 60 ft. from the intersection of any two (2) streets

(c) All repairs must be carried out within an enclosed building.

(d) No part of the required front yard setback shall be used for storage, parking or serve as a sales lot.

7. Salvage yards:

        (a) Must be approved by the Board of Selectmen and State of Vermont in accord with Title 24, V.S.A., Chapter 61, Subchapter 10.

        (b) No outside storage shall be permitted in any part of required front yard setback.

 

 

 

5.03 Business District BD

 

A. Purpose. To provide an area designated for the broadest possible scope of business, manufacturing, and service uses at the Exit 16 gateway to Colchester from Interstate 89.  The focus of this area shall be to foster commerce and trade including high-tech industry and supportive facilities.  Within this area, there shall also be supportive general services, care facilities, restaurants, recreation, and entertainment opportunities provided that these uses compliment business activities.

 

B. Municipal Plan. These regulations hereby implement the relevant provisions of the Town of Colchester adopted municipal plan and are in accord with the policies set forth therein.

 

C. Permitted Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

D. Conditional Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and approved pursuant to Article 8, and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

E. Area, Density, and Dimensional Requirements. In the Business District, all requirements of this Section 5.01 and Table A-2 shall apply.

 

F. Additional Standards.  In addition to the Site Plan, Conditional Use, Planned Unit Development criteria, all development in the Business District shall also be subject to the following standards:

1. Generally, accessory structures that are clearly subordinate to the primary structure shall be located within the rear or inner yard of the property.

2. Automotive Services uses shall be subject to the following:

(a) All repair work shall be carried out within an enclosed building.

(b) Outdoor storage of scrap or junk cars, spare parts or dismantled cars may be stored outside of a building only where the area for storage is enclosed within a six (6) foot high wall or privacy type fence.

 (c) Damaged vehicles awaiting disposition may be stored outside of a building only where the area for storage is enclosed within a six (6) foot high wall or privacy type fence.

(d) Up to five vehicles may be stored outside on the premises provided said storage does not exceed one (1) week in duration.

3. Gasoline Sales:

(a) Curb cuts shall be no less than 50 ft. from street intersections.

(b) Pumps, lubricating and other outside service devices shall be located at least 300 ft. from any lot occupied by a school, hospital, library or religious institution.

(c) Storage of trailers, campers or other such vehicles shall be prohibited.

4. Car wash.

(a) All washing facilities shall be within a completely enclosed building.

(b) Vacuuming and drying areas may be located outside the building but shall not be in the front yard and shall not be closer than 100 ft. from any residential district.

(c)Access points shall be located at least 50 ft. from the intersection of any two (2) streets.

(d) All off-street parking and waiting areas shall be hard surfaced and dust free.

(e) One (1) traffic lane shall be provided as means of exiting the facility without having to enter the car wash building, such lane to be in addition to a lane for vehicles waiting in line for the car wash and other access and circulation required herein in Article Ten.    

5. Drive-ups shall be subject to the following:

(a) shall not be located within 300 ft. of any lot occupied by a school, hospital, library, or religious institution and shall not be located within 300 ft. of an abutting residential district .

(b) There shall be separate aisles for vehicle traffic entering and exiting the site.

(c) No parking shall be permitted in any part of the front yard setback.

(d) Drive-up service windows shall be on the side or rear of the building.

(e) Trash containers shall be located on concrete pads and enclosed within a screen a minimum height of the container(s).

6. Warehouse/Wholesale distribution business:

                                (a) No outside storage shall be permitted.

                                (b) Covered storage in more than one (1) building may be           permitted provided all area and dimensional requirements are met.

7. All outside storage of material shall be in the rear and only where the area for storage is enclosed within a six (6) foot high wall or privacy type fence or opaque landscaping such as berms, hedges and/or shrubbery.

8. All vehicle movements for loading and unloading shall be made off the public right‑of‑way.

9. Bulk fuel storage and distribution shall comply with all applicable State and Federal Regulations.

10. Equipment sales & service subject to the following:

(a) The lot or area shall be provided with a permanent, durable and dustless surface, and shall be graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulated within the area.

(b) Access to the outdoor sales area shall be at least 60 ft. from the intersection of any two (2) streets

(c) All repairs must be carried out within an enclosed building.

(d) No part of the required front yard setback shall be used for storage, parking or serve as a sales lot.

11. Salvage yards:

        (a) Must be approved by the Board of Selectmen and State of Vermont in accord with Title 24, V.S.A., Chapter 61, Subchapter 10.

            (b) No outside storage shall be permitted in any part of required front yard setback.

COLCHESTER DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS

SUPPLEMENT 42

 

ARTICLE 6: OTHER DISTRICTS

           

            6.01 Agricultural District AGR

            6.02 Mobile Home Park District MHP

            6.03 Flood Plain District FP

            6.04 Agricultural Mixed Use District AMU

 

 

6.01 Agricultural District AGR

 

A. Purpose. To maintain preserve and enhance agricultural lands, uses, and rural character of the Town of Colchester and to protect soil, water and other natural resources, to maintain, preserve and enhance open space lands and to protect these lands from suburban development.

 

B. Municipal Plan. These regulations hereby implement the relevant provisions of the Town of Colchester adopted municipal plan and are in accord with the policies set forth therein.

 

C. Permitted Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

D. Conditional Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and approved pursuant to Article 8, and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

E. Area, Density, and Dimensional Requirements. In the AGR District, all requirements of this Section 6.01 and Table A-2 shall apply.

 

F. Additional Standards.  In addition to the Site Plan, Conditional Use, Planned Unit Development criteria, all development in the AGR District shall also be subject to the following standards:

1. Agricultural operations shall be subject to the following standards:

            (a) Farm buildings shall be a minimum of 100 feet from all property lines.

            (b) Feed lots, fenced runs, pens, and similar intensively used facilities for animal housing shall be a minimum of 100 feet from a Residential District as defined in Article 3.

2. Contractors Yard, Landscape use shall be subject to the following standards:

            (a) All equipment shall be stored within  fully enclosed building;

            (b) Only earth moving equipment shall be kept on site;

            (c) No more than six pieces of equipment shall be kept on-site;

            (d) The equipment shall be stored in a structure that is sufficiently removed or buffered from adjacent properties;

            (e) All structures associated with the use shall be either residential or agricultural in appearance and sited so as to minimize visual dominance of the site especially from the road and adjacent properties.

 

 

6.02 Mobile Home Park District MHP

 

A. Purpose. To regulate the establishment and development of mobile home parks within residential areas.

 

B. Municipal Plan. These regulations hereby implement the relevant provisions of the Town of Colchester adopted municipal plan and are in accord with the policies set forth therein.

 

C. Permitted Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

D. Conditional Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and approved pursuant to Article 8, and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

E. Area, Density, and Dimensional Requirements. In the MHP District, all requirements of this Section 6.02 and Table A-2 shall apply.

 

F. Additional Standards.  In addition to the Site Plan, Conditional Use, Planned Unit Development criteria, all development in the MHP District shall also be subject to the following standards:

1. All mobile home parks shall be reviewed as Planned Residential Developments as per Article 9. 

 

 

6.03 Flood Plain District FP

 

A. Purpose. In accordance with the purposes of 10 V.S.A. Chapter 32 and 24 V.S.A. §4424 to minimize adverse impacts of development upon the sensitive natural areas adjacent to Colchester's various watercourse and waterbodies. It is the purpose of this District to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, to prevent increases in flooding caused by the development of lands in areas of special flood hazard, and to minimize losses due to floods. Only open space uses not involving structures and impervious surfaces are intended for these areas. 

 

B. Municipal Plan. These regulations hereby implement the relevant provisions of the Town of Colchester adopted municipal plan and are in accord with the policies set forth therein.

 

C. Permitted Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table A-1, or otherwise listed below, are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

1. Public boat launching ramps, swimming areas (beaches), natural areas and hunting and fishing.

2. Seawalls, retaining walls and similar structures detached from and not an integral part of a building.

3. Stairs and associated landings detached from and not an integral part of a building.

4. Rehabilitation, repair, or reconstruction of a structure or building so long as the footprint is maintained or reduced.  There shall be no extension of the use or increase to square footage.  If the repair, rehabilitation, or reconstruction of the structure or building is more than 35% of the value of the pre-existing structure or building in a ten year period, the building or structure shall be floodproofed. Additionally, any building or structure substantially damaged shall be floodproofed.

5. Enlargement of residential structures that are floodproofed so long as the footprint is maintained or reduced.

6. Green infrastructure.

 

D. Conditional Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and approved pursuant to Article 8, and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

1.     Enlargement of buildings and structures lawfully in existence as of January 1, 2016 bordering West Lakeshore Drive between Prim Road and East Lakeshore Drive that are floodproofed and for which the applicant has submitted a study from a Professional Engineer based upon current FEMA guidelines and standards showing that the enlargement will not result in a loss of flood storage capacity, minimizes damage to structures from wave run-up, and implements green infrastructure in conformance with Section 4.05F and 4.06F herein. 

 

E. Area, Density, and Dimensional Requirements. In the FP District, all requirements of this Section 6.03 and Table A-2 shall apply.

 

F. Additional Standards.  In addition to the Site Plan, Conditional Use, Planned Unit Development criteria, all development in the FP District shall also be subject to the following standards:

1. All substantially improved, reconstructed, or enlarged buildings shall be floodproofed.  Floodproofed shall mean that the building or structure, excepting accessory structures, shall be raised so as to have the lowest horizontal member be one foot above base flood elevation by following FEMA compliant methods: piers, posts, columns, pilings, or foundation with flood gates. Floodproofing of accessory structures shall mean wet floodproofing utilizing FEMA compliant methods.  Additionally floodproofed shall also mean that structures are made reasonably safe from floodproofing through the following methods:

(a) anchoring in a FEMA compliant manner to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure during the occurrence of the base flood;

(b) use of methods and practices that minimize flood damage including the use of materials resistant to flood damage;

(c) electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;

(d) adequate drainage paths around structures to guide floodwater around and away.

2. All proposals for floodproofed structures shall be submitted to the State Department of Environmental Conservation or duly delegated agency and have an as-built FEMA Elevation Certificate submitted to the Administrative Officer prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.

3. Up to two inches of topsoil may be brought to a project site to re-establish ground cover and/or stabilize septic systems.

4. Summer seasonal items such as boats and other recreational items may be stored under floodproofed structures so long as the area is not completely enclosed and the area is screened by lattice or other mostly open screening to contain the items in the event of flood.

5. All appurtenances to a residential use, such as fuel tanks, shall be properly secured in accordance with FEMA standards.

6. Public utilities and tanks shall be placed underground and securely anchored so as to minimize flood damage.

7. The alteration or relocation of a watercourse is highly discouraged however if imminent threat to community services or personal property exist an application may be considered.  The flood carrying and sediment transport capacity with an altered or relocated portion of any watercourse shall be maintained, and any alteration or relocation shall not result in any decrease of stream stability.  Any applications for alterations or relocations of watercourses shall provide notice to the adjacent communities, the Steam Alteration Engineer and the NFIP Coordinator at the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources (ANR), and the Army Corps of Engineers.  No permit may be issued until after receipt of comments from ANR or 30 days from the date of notification, whichever is sooner.

8. No structures shall be constructed or expanded in the floodway.  No land development activities shall occur within the floodway or floodplain that increases the Base Flood level.

 

 

6.04 Agricultural Mixed Use District (AMU)

 

A.  Purpose. To maintain and enhance agricultural uses within the Shipman Hill Neighborhood and to encourage complimentary activities that will help to sustain these agricultural uses through diversification, agri-tourism, and low impact residential growth.

 

B.  Municipal Plan. These regulations hereby implement the relevant provisions of the Town of Colchester adopted municipal plan and are in accord with the policies set forth therein.

 

C.  Permitted Uses.  Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and accessory uses to those uses.  The following additional standards shall apply to the uses indicated in Table A-1:

1.  General sales with a significant component of goods sold being agricultural or other items produced on the premises shall be limited as follows:

(a) General sales may be permitted only on parcels of 10 acres or larger.  Contiguous parcels under the same ownership may be combined to satisfy this requirement.

(b) Maximum permitted gross building square footage for general sales is 5% of the square footage of the lot not to exceed 10,000 sq. ft.

2.  Distribution facility and warehousing with all storage within structures shall be limited as follows:

(a)   Distribution and warehousing may be permitted only on parcels of 30 acres or greater.

 

D.  Conditional Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and approved pursuant to Article 8, and accessory uses to those uses. Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

E.   Area, Density and Dimensional Requirements.  In the AMU District, all requirements of Table A-2 shall apply.  In addition, the minimum lot size for a residential lot shall be one-half-of-an-acre and the maximum lot size shall be one acre.  Density shall be determined under the Fixed Area Based Zoning Provisions of Section 6.04F.  The Development Review Board may, through the Site Plan Review Process of Article VIII herein, consider lot coverage maximums of up to 40% in conjunction with the uses enumerated in Section 6.04C(1) and (2).

 

F.  Fixed Area Based Zoning.

         1.  Definitions.

(a)   Parent parcel.  A parcel of land in the AMU District that is greater than 2 acres on December 21, 2004.

(b)  Development unit.  The number of units determined from density calculations for a parent parcel.  One development unit equals one dwelling unit to be developed within the parent parcel, subject to Section 6.04F.3, or one unit eligible for transfer under the Transferable Development Rights program (Section 7.06).

(c)   Unbuildable Land.  Class I or II wetland, floodplain or land that has an inadequate ability to support structures.

2.  The maximum number of development units per parcel is based on the total acreage of the parent parcel less the unbuildable land area.  An overall density of one dwelling unit per buildable acre is permitted in the AMU District.

3.  A maximum of one-fifth (1/5th) of all permitted development units may be built within the parent parcel.  All development units are eligible for transfer out of the AMU District under the Transferable Development Rights program (Section 7.06).

4.  Procedure for Determination of Development Units.  Prior to or concurrent with the first subdivision of a parent parcel, the subdivider shall submit sufficient information to enable the Development Review Board to determine the maximum number of permitted development units for the parcel and the number of dwelling units that may be developed within the parent parcel.  The Development Review Board shall issue Findings of Fact supporting its determination of available development units.

(Sample calculation:  The Development Review Board determines that a parent parcel contains 75 total acres and 15 acres of unbuildable land.  The net 60 buildable acres enable a maximum of 60 development units for the overall parcel.  One-fifth of those units, or a maximum of 12 dwelling units, may be clustered within the parent parcel.  The remaining 48 development units may be transferred out of the AMU District.  If no dwelling units are built within the parent parcel, 60 development units may be transferred).

5.  Subsequent to or concurrent with the first subdivision of a parent parcel, development units shall be assigned and shall be identified by a sequential numbering system such that each parent parcel has a unique set of numbers, one for each development unit.  The Planning and Zoning Office shall maintain a record of the total permitted development units for the parent parcel, the number of dwelling units built within the parcel, the number of transferred development units, and the unused number of units.

 

G.  Additional Standards.  In addition to the Site Plan, Conditional Use, Planned Unit Development criteria, all development in the AMU District shall also be subject to the following standards:

1.  Agricultural operations shall be subject to the following standards:

            (a) Farm buildings shall be a minimum of 100 feet from all property lines.

            (b) Feed lots, fenced runs, pens, and similar intensively used facilities for animal housing shall be a minimum of 100 feet from a Residential District as defined in Article 3.

2. All lots created for non-agricultural uses and all structures shall be located to minimize adverse impact on agricultural operations.  The Development Review Board may require clustering of lots or other means to accomplish this objective.

3. Auto, marine or equipment storage outside completely enclosed structures shall be fenced, landscaped, or otherwise located so as to screen the items being stored from all adjacent properties.

 

H.  Transferable Development Rights.  Development units, as determined in Section 6.04F.4, may be transferred out of the AMU District under the Transferable Development Rights program (Section 7.06).  For each development unit created in the sending district, the transfer rate shall be 1.0 TDR unit to be used in the R1, R2. and R3 Districts or 1.5 TDR units to be used in all other designated receiving districts (Section 7.06D).

(Sample calculation:  At the time of the first subdivision of a parent parcel, the Development Review Board determines that 60 development units are available for the overall parcel.  The maximum of 12 dwelling units are approved for development within the parent parcel, leaving 48 development units to be transferred.  The transfer ratio allows 48 TDR units to be developed in the R1, R2, and R3 Districts or 72 TDR units to be developed in any other receiving district).

ARTICLE 7: OVERLAY DISTRICTS

           

            7.01 General Development Four Commercial District GD4C

            7.02 General Development Four Openspace District GD4OS

            7.03 Shoreland District SD

7.04 Water Protection District WPD

7.05 Historic Preservation District HPD

7.06 Transfer of Development Rights District TDRD

7.07 General Development One Commercial District GD1C

 

 

7.01 General Development Four Commercial District GD4C

 

A. Purpose. To limit high-volume commercial uses such as retail stores, drive-through banks, restaurants and gas stations within the General Development Four District.  Development within GD4C shall be subject to strict guidelines of General Development Four.

 

B. Municipal Plan. These regulations hereby implement the relevant provisions of the Town of Colchester adopted municipal plan and are in accord with the policies set forth therein.

 

C. Permitted Uses. Those uses allowed as permitted uses in the General Development Four District may be permitted in the GD4C Overlay District in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.04 herein.  In addition to the uses permitted in Section 4.04 the following uses are permitted within GD4C:

(1) Banks with drive-in windows

 

D. Conditional Uses. Those uses allowed as conditional uses in the General Development Four District may be permitted in the GD4C Overlay District in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.04 herein.  In addition to the uses permitted in Section 4.04 the following uses are conditionally permitted within GD4C:

(1) Convenience store with gas pumps

(2) Short-order restaurant with drive-up service

(3) Gas sales without service and repair

(4) Drycleaner & laundromat majority of business is not walk-in

 

E. Area, Density, and Dimensional Requirements. In the GD4C District, all structures shall be subject to the area, density and dimensional requirements of the General Development Four District as set forth in Section 4.04 and Table A-2, Dimensional Standards of these regulations.

 

F. Additional Standards.  In addition to the Site Plan, Conditional Use, Planned Unit Development criteria, all development in the GD4C District shall also be subject to the following standards:

1. Existing convenience stores with gas pumps and gas sales operations without service and repair shall be allowed to continue and/or expand.

2. New convenience stores with gas pumps and gas sales operations without service and repair shall be located within 3,000 feet of the Interstate 89 right-of-way.

3. No new convenience stores with gas pumps nor new gas sales operations without service and repair shall be permitted or allowed within 3,000 feet of an existing convenience store with gas pumps or gas sales operations without service and repair use, except that this limitation shall not apply to the distance between gas sale uses located on opposite sides of the Interstate 89 right of way.

 

 

7.02 General Development Four Openspace District GD4OS

 

A. Purpose. To conserve open spaces of particular importance to viewscapes within the General Development Four District.

 

B. Municipal Plan. These regulations hereby implement the relevant provisions of the Town of Colchester adopted municipal plan and are in accord with the policies set forth therein.

 

C. Permitted Uses. Those uses allowed as permitted uses in the General Development Four District may be permitted in the GD4OS Overlay District in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.04 herein.

 

D. Conditional Uses. Those uses allowed as conditional uses in the General Development Four District may be permitted in the GD4C Overlay District in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.04 herein.

 

E. Area, Density, and Dimensional Requirements. In the GD4OS District, all structures shall be subject to the area, density and dimensional requirements of the General Development Four District as set forth in Section 4.04 and Table A-2, Dimensional Standards of these regulations.

 

F. Additional Standards.  In addition to the Site Plan, Conditional Use, Planned Unit Development criteria, all development in the GD4OS District shall also be subject to the following standards:

1. For all properties within the GD4OS 30% of the total acreage of any parcel to be developed shall be designated as open space.  If all of the GD4OS area on a property is designated as restricted open space with covenants to keep said space open in perpetuity, the Development Review Board may increase total lot coverage by 10% beyond that permitted in General Development Four District as set forth in Section 4.04 and Table A-2.

2. Structures within the GD4OS District shall be limited to ten feet in height.  The Development Review Board may increase the height of a building up to the height for the GD4 District designated in if 50% or more of the GD4OS on a property is designated as restricted open space with covenants to keep said space open in perpetuity in Section 4.04 and Table A-2.

3. The Development Review Board may approve use of the GD4OS for septic systems and stormwater treatment/detention systems, provided all GD4OS area on a property is designated as restricted open space with covenants to keep said space open in perpetuity.

 

 

7.03 Shoreland District SD

 

A. Purpose. To preserve the natural growth and cover of the shorelines, to preserve water quality, to prevent pollution, to regulate development and appearance of the shorelines, to prevent erosion, to prevent nuisance, and to preserve the property rights of the shoreline property owners.  The boundaries of the Shoreland District shall include all lands within 250 feet from the mean watermark of Colchester Pond, and Lake Champlain. This district overlays all other districts along the shoreline. 

 

B. Municipal Plan. These regulations hereby implement the relevant provisions of the Town of Colchester adopted municipal plan and are in accord with the policies set forth therein.

 

C. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the Shoreland District in accordance with the provisions of this Section 7.03 and Table A-2, Dimensional Standards.

1. Those uses which are permitted in the underlying zoning district.

2. Piers, docks and other structures attached to the shore and extending beyond the mean water mark are exempt from these Regulations, provided that such piers, docks and other structures comply with all state and federal regulations pertaining to such encroachments and are not integrated with other structures regulated herein.

3. Repair and reconstruction of existing residential structures including the installation of full basements that complies with the setbacks required in Chapter Eight of the Colchester Code of Ordinances.

4. Enlargement of residential structures that does not increase the degree of encroachment within 100 feet from the mean water mark. 

5. Shore based facilities for pumping and/or disposing of wastes from boats (subject to applicable Town and State Health Regulations).

6. Publically owned recreational uses such as picnic ground, parks, playgrounds, swimming areas (beaches), natural areas and hunting and fishing.

7. Seawalls, retaining walls and similar structures detached from and not an integral part of a building.

8. Paths, stairs and associated landings detached from and not an integral part of a building. 

9. Boat launching ramps.

10. Fences.

11. Removal of up to 25% of the trees one inch caliper or greater within a ten year period that is witnessed by the Colchester Administrative Officer or designee prior to removal.

 

D. Conditional Uses. The following uses are allowed in the Shoreland District as conditional uses subject to approval by the Development Review Board in accordance with the provisions of this Section 7.03 and Table A-2, Dimensional Standards.

(1) Enlargement of structures that increases the degree of encroachment within the 100 feet from the mean water mark. Such portion of the structure encroaching shall not exceed 10% of the building as measured from the exterior face of exterior walls excluding appurtenances such as decks, porches, overhangs, and stairs in existence at the time of application within a 10 year period. 

 

E. Area, Density, and Dimensional Requirements. In the Shoreland District structures shall be subject to the following area, density and dimensional requirements:

(1) Except for those uses specified in Section 7.03C & D all buildings and structures shall be setback 100 feet from the mean water mark.

(2) All buildings, structures, and lots shall comply with the minimum lot, dimensional, coverage, and height requirements of the underlying district.

 

F. Additional Standards.  In addition to the Site Plan, Conditional Use, Planned Unit Development criteria, all development in the Shoreland District shall also be subject to the following standards:

1. If piers, docks and other structures under Section 7.03C(2) are integrated with structures requiring approval hereunder, including but not limited to seawalls, retaining walls, stairs or landings, such integrated portions of the pier, dock or other structure under 7.03C(2) located landward of the mean water mark are subject to this Section 7.03F.

2. Existing natural shoreline vegetation should be incorporated into the project when reasonably possible.  Native plants and wildlife habitat should be considered and preserved to the greatest extent possible.  No more than 25% of existing trees, both native and non-native invasive species, one inch caliper or greater shall be removed along the shoreline for a distance of 100 ft from the mean water mark within a ten year period. The Development Review Board may permit more than 25% removal of existing trees of one inch caliper or greater in conjunction with a 1:1 replanting plan if it is determined that the removal of the trees will not have adverse impact on shoreline stability and the character of the area.  Removal of more than 25% of existing trees one inch caliper or greater shall require a survey of existing conditions including the size, location, condition and type of vegetation specifically indicating non-native invasive species versus native species.  Phasing of tree removal is encouraged, including for non-native invasives, to allow for replanted trees to become established and assist with bank stability.  Tree removal and replanting plans must take into account bank stability, stormwater runoff, and erosion control.  The replanting plan shall be prepared by a licensed Landscape Architect, Arborist, or Environmental Ecologist and shall have at least a one-to-one replacement ratio for all trees over one inch caliper with native trees. A Landscape Improvement Agreement may be required to provide surety for the proposed plantings.  Removal of dead trees or trees of immediate threat to human safety as well as reasonable pruning of existing trees is permitted. 

3. The proposal for filling, grading or erection of any structure within 100 ft. inland of the mean water mark shall require site plan review and approval by the Development Review Board per Article Eight and Section 2.13.  Specifically exempt from this requirement shall be those uses listed in Section 7.03C (4), (5), (8), and (10).

4. Requests for seawalls and similar structures under Section 7.03C(7)  shall require site plan approval by the DRB as specified in Article Eight.  In addition to the requirements of Section 7.03F, the DRB shall apply the following standards to the construction of seawalls and similar structures permitted under Section 7.03C(7):

(a) The applicant shall prove the required need of said seawall or similar structure.  Required needs include threat to personal property, excessive erosion, or imminent threat to water quality.  Expansion of usable property shall not constitute need.  All seawalls shall be constructed in a structurally sound manner fully complying with building codes in effect.

(b) The seawall or similar structure shall be designed by a Professional Engineer or Landscape Architect.  Exceptions may be made by the Board where Bio-Engineered solutions are proposed.

(c) The seawall or similar structure shall, to the extent structurally feasible, follow the existing contour of the shoreline and be located along the toe of the slope minimizing backfill and land disturbance.  The structure shall be scaled to meet the need and not larger than structurally required.  The Shoreline Stabilization Handbook, as amended from time to time, shall be consulted for project design.  Full design plans including a site plan with property boundary lines, contours including the 95 foot, 98 foot, and 102 foot elevations shall be submitted with the application including a scaled cross-section of the wall, descriptions of material to be used, a drainage plan, a construction access plan, and soil erosion / site stabilization plan.  Existing conditions shall be documented through site plans as well as photographs of the site from the waterbody.

(d) Visually massive structures are discouraged.  The project design should mitigate the visual impact of the structure as viewed from the water.  To this end, terracing, landscape plantings, and other aesthetic measures should be integrated into the structural solution.

(e) Whenever feasible, a coordinated solution to localized erosion problems should be taken amongst effected property owners. 

(f) The Professional Engineer or Landscape Architect that designed the structure shall be present with the Administrative Officer or designee during an inspection of the structure when half completed.  The same designer shall certify that the structure was built per the plan prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project.

5. The review of any proposed construction of shore-based facilities shall consider the following:

(a) Will not adversely affect water quality or be a source of nuisance by reason of noise or fumes.

(b) Will not interfere with or prevent use of adjacent shoreland property or its access to and from the water.

(c) Will be compatible with adjacent land uses.

(d) That necessary and adequate sanitary public utilities and parking facilities are available or will be made available.

(e) Will not create an adverse vehicle traffic condition.

6. Stairs shall be no more than 48 inches in width with associated platforms being no more than 48 inches in width and 48 inches in length.  All stairs shall have a handrail on at least one side.  Flexibility will be exercised with regard to the rise and run of stairs permitted under this section to accommodate pedestrian access yet minimize visibility from the lake and preservation of natural features. Paths shall not exceed 48” in width.

7. All stairs and paths shall minimally disturb existing contours on the site and where possible follow existing contour lines.  Stairs and paths shall make use of the natural vegetation and topography to blend with the shoreline.  All stairs and paths shall be screened from the water body through the use of landscaping.

8. The Department of Water Resources and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers may be requested to review, comment on, or approve all applications for construction below the 98 foot elevation prior to issuance of a building permit for said construction.  The Development Review Board and the Department of Planning and Zoning may utilize the recommendations of the Department of Water Resources and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers in its decision whether or not to issue a building permit for said construction.

9. Enlargement of a residential structure that increases encroachment within the 100 feet from the mean water mark shall demonstrate that said enlargement can not reasonably be accomplished without further encroachment due to topography, shape of the lot, or interior floor plan layout.  Enlargement that results in additional encroachment shall be adequately screened from the water body, shall make use of existing topography, shall utilize earth-tone colors, and shall make use of the natural vegetation and topography to blend with the shoreline.

10. Legal encroachments per Section 7.03 shall not be subject to the time limits established under Section 2.12B(2).

11. Requests for boat launching ramps under Section 7.03C(9)  shall require site plan approval by the DRB as specified in Article Eight.  In addition to the requirements of Section 7.03F(1), (2), and (3), the DRB shall apply the standards of 7.03F(4)(b)-(d) to the construction of ramps.

 

 

 

7.04 Water Protection District WPD

 

A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section to provide for the protection and improvement of the surface waters and wetland within the Town of Colchester. These regulations and standards are intended to lead to the establishment and protection of natural areas along the Town’s surface waters and wetlands to provide improved protection for water quality and the provision of open space areas and wildlife habitat.

It is the further purpose of this Section to provide for the retention of preexisting residential neighborhoods located along surface waters and streams in a manner consistent with the resource protection goals of this Section and the Municipal Plan.

 

B. Municipal Plan. These regulations hereby implement the relevant provisions of the Town of Colchester adopted municipal plan and are in accord with the policies set forth therein.

 

C. Surface Water Buffer Standards (“Stream Buffers”)

1. Applicability. The requirements of this Section shall apply to all lands not developed with a single-family dwelling or duplex dwelling as of December 21, 2004, and not under the jurisdiction of the Development Review Board, and described as follows:

(a) All land within eight-five (85) feet horizontal distance of the center of the main channel of Allen Brook, Indian Brook, Malletts Creek, Pond Brook and Sunderland Brook and from the center of all tributaries of the above named streams and all other minor streams which shall be subject to the provisions of (b) below.

(b) Initial assessment of a stream location can be made by consulting the Overlay District Map.  In the case of a conflict with the map, final assessment will be made by a wetland/aquatic biologist. The origin of a stream or tributary is defined as the point where an intermittent stream forms a distinct channel, as indicated by the presence of a streambed and/or high water marks. 

 2. General standards. It is the objective of these standards to promote the establishment of heavily vegetated areas of native vegetation and trees in order to reduce the impact of stormwater runoff, reduce sedimentation, and increase infiltration and base flows in the Town’s watercourses. Therefore, except as specifically permitted below and in Section 7.04C3 & 4, all lands within a required stream buffer defined above shall be left in an undisturbed, naturally vegetated condition. Supplemental planting and landscaping with appropriate species of vegetation to achieve these objectives shall be permitted. The specific standards for the vegetation and maintenance of stream buffers are as follows:

(a) No more than 25% of existing trees one inch caliper or greater shall be removed within 85 feet from the centerline of the stream within a ten year period. The Development Review Board may permit up to 40% of existing trees of one inch caliper or greater to be removed if it is determined that the removal of the trees will not have adverse impact on the character of the area.  Removal of dead trees or trees of immediate threat to human safety as well as reasonable pruning of existing trees is permitted.  Removal of more than 40% of existing trees may be approved by the Development Review Board in conjunction with a permitted or conditional use within underlying districts.

(b) Any altered or relocated portion of a watercourse shall maintain its flood carrying capacity.  Any areas within a required stream buffer that are not vegetated or that are disturbed during construction shall be seeded with a naturalized mix of grasses rather than standard lawn grass, and shall not be mowed more than one (1) time per calendar year after establishment.

(c) The creation of new lawn areas within stream buffers is not permitted after December 21, 2004.

(d) Accessory residential structures which do not exceed 120 square feet and residential pools that do not exceed 500 square feet are hereby exempted provided the primary structure is in existence on December 21, 2004.

(e) Enlargement, repair and reconstruction of residential structures in existence on December 21, 2004 are hereby exempted. 

(f) Residential fences where the primary structure is in existence on December 21, 2004 are hereby exempt.

3. Expansion of pre-existing structures within stream buffers. The expansion of pre-existing structures within stream buffers, except as provided in Section 7.04C2 above, shall be permitted only in accordance with the standards for noncomplying structures in Section 2.12 of these Regulations.

4. New uses and encroachments within stream buffers. The encroachment of new land development activities into the Town’s stream buffers is discouraged. The DRB may authorize the following as conditional uses within stream buffers, subject to the standards and conditions enumerated for each use.

(a) Agriculture in accordance with Vermont Department of Agriculture Acceptable Agricultural Practices, horticulture and forestry including the keeping of livestock, provided that any building or structure appurtenant to such uses is located outside the stream buffer.

(b) Clearing of vegetation and filling or excavating of earth materials, only to the extent directly necessitated for the construction or safe operation of a permitted or conditional use on the same property and where the DRB finds that:

(1) There is no practicable alternative to the clearing, filling or excavating within the stream buffer; and

(2) The purposes of this Section will be protected through erosion controls, plantings, protection of existing vegetation, and/or other measures.

(c) Encroachments necessary to rectify a natural catastrophe for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.

(d) Encroachments necessary for providing for or improving public facilities.

(e) Public recreation paths and bridges.

(f) Stormwater treatment facilities meeting the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources stormwater treatment standards, and routine maintenance thereof, including necessary clearing of vegetation and dredging. Evidence of a complete application to the VANR for coverage under the applicable permitting requirements shall be required to meet this criterion for encroachment into a stream buffer.  The conveyance of treated stormwater to a stream through a pipe or open channel shall occur at the invert elevation of the streambed, wherever possible, and shall be stabilized by a stone outfall.  A maintenance schedule for permanent stormwater best management practices shall be submitted and approved by the Town Engineer. A performance bond may be required for said improvements.

(g) Roadways or access drives for purposes of crossing a stream buffer area to gain access to land on the opposite side of the buffer, or for purposes of providing safe access to an approved use, in cases where there is no feasible alternative for providing safe access.  Roadways, access drives, and associated improvements shall meet the following standards:

(1) Wherever practicably feasible, the crossing shall occur at right-angle to the stream channel and the roadway or access drive should be located at least ten (10) feet from the edge of channel of the surface water.

(2) Unless otherwise approved by the Town Engineer, for streams up to 6 feet wide, arch (squashed) culverts with baffles or box culverts with baffles shall be used.  In either case, the invert of the structure shall be at grade with the streambed.  For streams 6 feet wide or greater, bottomless Plate Arches or bridges will be used to ensure passage of water during dry periods and minimize barriers to fish.  All roadway bridges or plate arches shall be capable of passing a 50‑year peak discharge.        

(3) Unless otherwise approved by the Town Engineer, for culvert headers there should be 4' of scour protection (below streambed) or a minimum of 1/2 culvert diameter.  Headers and wing walls should be high enough to retain road fills and provide for adequate roadway width.   Wing configuration shall be as necessary to retain fill slopes and control inlet and outlet erosion.

(h) Utility lines, including power, telephone, cable, sewer and water, to the extent necessary to cross or encroach into the stream buffer where there is no feasible alternative for providing or extending utility services.  Underground utility crossings should be located at least 3 feet below the streambed, so that future channel erosion does not expose them.

 (i) Outdoor recreation not involving the uses of mowed fields provided any building or structure (including parking and driveways however except bridges and boardwalks) appurtenant to such use is located outside the stream buffer.

(j) Research and educational activities provided any building or structure (including parking and driveways) appurtenant to such use is located outside the stream buffer.

(k) Hydro-electric power generation

 

 

D. Wetland Buffer Standards

1. Applicability. The requirements of this Section shall apply to all of the following lands:

(a) Lands designated as Class I and II wetlands

(b) All lands within fifty (50) feet horizontal distance of the edge of a Class I and II wetland

(c) Initial assessment of a wetland location can be made by consulting the National Wetland Inventory map and the Overlay District Map.  In the case of a conflict with the map, final assessment will be made by a wetland/aquatic biologist.

2. General standards. It is the objective of these standards to promote the establishment of heavily vegetated areas of native vegetation and trees in order to reduce the impact of stormwater runoff, reduce sedimentation, and increase infiltration and base flows in the Town’s wetlands. Therefore, except as specifically permitted below, all lands within wetlands and required wetland buffers defined above shall be left in an undisturbed, naturally vegetated condition:

 (a) Encroachment into Class I and II wetlands is permitted by the Town only in conjunction with issuance of a Conditional Use Determination (CUD) by the Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation and positive findings by the DRB pursuant to the criteria in Section 7.04D2(b) below.

(b) Encroachment into Class I and II wetland buffers may be permitted by the DRB upon finding that the proposed project’s overall development, erosion control, stormwater treatment system, provisions for stream buffering, and landscaping plan achieve the following standards for wetland protection:

(1) The encroachment(s) will not adversely affect the ability of the property to carry or store flood waters adequately;

(2) The encroachment(s) will not adversely affect the ability of the proposed stormwater treatment system to reduce sedimentation according to state standards;

(3) The impact of the encroachment(s) on the specific wetland functions and values identified in the field delineation and wetland report is minimized and/or offset by appropriate landscaping, stormwater treatment, stream buffering, and/or other mitigation measures.

(4) There shall be no adverse affect to soils or vegetation, impairment of the quantity and quality of surface and ground water, or soil erosion.

(5) Excavation of earth materials or filling with earth materials or other substances will be permitted only to the extent necessitated by a permitted or conditional use.

 

 

E. Fluvial Erosion Hazard Overlay District (FEH)

1. Purpose. To preserve the natural growth and cover of the shorelines, to preserve water quality, to prevent pollution, to regulate development and appearance of the shorelines, to prevent erosion, to prevent nuisance, and to preserve the property rights of the shoreline property owners.  The boundaries of the Water Protection District shall include all lands within 250 feet from the mean watermark of the Winooski River and the Lamoille River.

 

2. Municipal Plan. These regulations hereby implement the relevant provisions of the Town of Colchester adopted municipal plan and are in accord with the policies set forth therein.

 

3. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the FEH in accordance with the provisions of this Section 7.04 and Table A-2, Dimensional Standards.

a. Those uses which are permitted in the underlying zoning district.

b. Piers, docks and other structures attached to the shore and extending beyond the mean water mark are exempt from these Regulations, provided that such piers, docks and other structures comply with all state and federal regulations pertaining to such encroachments and are not integrated with other structures regulated herein.

c. Pumphouses designed and of a size for ordinary residential or seasonal camp use.

d. Repair and reconstruction of existing residential structures including the installation of full basements that complies with the setbacks required in Chapter Eight of the Colchester Code of Ordinances.

e. Enlargement of residential structures that does not increase the degree of encroachment within 100 feet from the mean water mark. 

f. Shore based facilities for pumping and/or disposing of wastes from boats (subject to applicable Town and State Health Regulations).

g. Recreational uses such as picnic ground, parks, playgrounds, swimming areas (beaches), natural areas and hunting and fishing.

h. Seawalls, retaining walls and similar structures detached from and not an integral part of a building.

i. Paths, stairs and associated landings detached from and not an integral part of a building. 

j. Boat launching ramps.

k. Fences.

 

4. Area, Density, and Dimensional Requirements. In the FEH structures shall be subject to the following area, density and dimensional requirements:

(1) Except for those uses specified in Section 7.04E(3) all buildings and structures shall be setback 100 feet from the mean water mark.

(2) All buildings, structures, and lots shall comply with the minimum lot, dimensional, coverage, and height requirements of the underlying district.

 

5. Additional Standards.  In addition to the Site Plan, Conditional Use, Planned Unit Development criteria, all development in the FEH shall also be subject to the following standards:

a. If piers, docks and other structures under Section 7.04(3)(b) are integrated with structures requiring approval hereunder, including but not limited to seawalls, retaining walls, stairs or landings, such integrated portions of the pier, dock or other structure under 7.04(3)(b) located landward of the mean water mark are subject to this Section 7.04(5).

b. Existing natural shoreline vegetation should be incorporated into the project when reasonably possible.  Native plants and wildlife habitat should be considered and preserved to the greatest extent possible.  No more than 25% of existing trees one inch caliper or greater shall be removed along the shoreline for a distance of 100 ft from the mean water mark within a ten year period. The Development Review Board may permit up to 40% of existing trees of one inch caliper or greater to be removed if it is determined that the removal of the trees will not have adverse impact on shoreline stability and the character of the area.  Removal of dead trees or trees of immediate threat to human safety as well as reasonable pruning of existing trees is permitted.  Removal of more than 40% of existing trees may be approved by the Development Review Board in conjunction with a permitted or conditional use as stated herein.

c. The proposal for filling, grading or erection of any structure within 100 ft. inland of the mean water mark shall require site plan review and approval by the Development Review Board per Article Eight and Section 2.13.  Specifically exempt from this requirement shall be those uses listed in Section 7.04(3)(d), (e), (i), and (k).

d. Requests for seawalls and similar structures under Section 7.04(3)(h)  shall require site plan approval by the DRB as specified in Article Eight.  In addition to the requirements of Section 7.04E(5), the DRB shall apply the following standards to the construction of seawalls and similar structures permitted under Section 7.04(3)(h):

(i) The applicant shall prove the required need of said seawall or similar structure.  Required needs include threat to personal property, excessive erosion, or imminent threat to water quality.  Expansion of usable property shall not constitute need.  All seawalls shall be constructed in a structurally sound manner fully complying with building codes in effect.

(ii) The seawall or similar structure shall be designed by a Professional Engineer or Landscape Architect.  Exceptions may be made by the Board where Bio-Engineered solutions are proposed.

(iii) The seawall or similar structure shall, to the extent structurally feasible, follow the existing contour of the shoreline and be located along the toe of the slope minimizing backfill and land disturbance.  The structure shall be scaled to meet the need and not larger than structurally required.  The Shoreline Stabilization Handbook, as amended from time to time, shall be consulted for project design.  Full design plans including a site plan with property boundary lines, contours including the 95 foot, 98 foot, and 102 foot elevations shall be submitted with the application including a scaled cross-section of the wall, descriptions of material to be used, a drainage plan, a construction access plan, and soil erosion / site stabilization plan.  Existing conditions shall be documented through site plans as well as photographs of the site from the waterbody.

(iv) Visually massive structures are discouraged.  The project design should mitigate the visual impact of the structure as viewed from the water.  To this end, terracing, landscape plantings, and other aesthetic measures should be integrated into the structural solution.

(e) Whenever feasible, a coordinated solution to localized erosion problems should be taken amongst effected property owners. 

e. The review of any proposed construction of shore-based facilities shall consider the following:

(i) Will not adversely affect water quality or be a source of nuisance by reason of noise or fumes.

(ii) Will not interfere with or prevent use of adjacent shoreland property or its access to and from the water.

(iii) Will be compatible with adjacent land uses.

(iv) That necessary and adequate sanitary public utilities and parking facilities are available or will be made available.

(v) Will not create an adverse vehicle traffic condition.

f. Stairs shall be no more than 44 inches in width with associated platforms being no more than 44 inches in width and 48 inches in length.  All stairs shall have a handrail on at least one side.  Flexibility will be exercised with regard to the rise and run of stairs permitted under this section to accommodate pedestrian access yet minimize visibility from the lake and preservation of natural features.  Paths shall not exceed 48” in width.

g. All stairs and paths shall minimally disturb existing contours on the site and where possible follow existing contour lines.  Stairs and paths shall make use of the natural vegetation and topography to blend with the shoreline.  All stairs and paths shall be screened from the water body through the use of landscaping.

h. The Department of Water Resources and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers may be requested to review, comment on, or approve all applications for construction below the 98 foot elevation prior to issuance of a building permit for said construction.  The Development Review Board and the Department of Planning and Zoning may utilize the recommendations of the Department of Water Resources and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers in its decision whether or not to issue a building permit for said construction.

i. Enlargement of a residential structure that increases encroachment within the 100 feet from the mean water mark shall demonstrate that said enlargement can not reasonably be accomplished without further encroachment due to topography, shape of the lot, or interior floor plan layout.  Enlargement that results in additional encroachment shall be adequately screened from the water body, shall make use of existing topography, shall utilize earth-tone colors, and shall make use of the natural vegetation and topography to blend with the shoreline.

j. Legal encroachments per Section 7.04 shall not be subject to the time limits established under Section 2.12B(2).

k. Requests for boat launching ramps under Section 7.04(3)(j)  shall require site plan approval by the DRB as specified in Article Eight.  In addition to the requirements of Section 7.04E(5)(a), (b), and (c), the DRB shall apply the standards of 7.04(5)(d)(ii)-(iv) to the construction of ramps.

 

 

 

7.05 Historic Preservation District HPD

 

A. Purpose. To encourage the preservation and rehabilitation of historic structures within the Fort Ethan Allen National Register Historic District.  Development should be sensitive to Colchester’s historic and archaeological sites and structures as these serve as visible reminders of the community’s past.  Changes to historic structures should be sympathetic to the structure, and to the extent possible, in accordance with the Secretary of Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties.

 

B. Municipal Plan. These regulations hereby implement the relevant provisions of the Town of Colchester adopted municipal plan and are in accord with the policies set forth therein.

 

C. Permitted Uses. Those uses allowed as permitted uses in the underlying  districts as specified in Table A-1 may be permitted in the HPD Overlay District in accordance with the provisions of Section 7.05 herein.

 

D. Conditional Uses. Those uses allowed as conditional uses in the underlying zoning districts as specified in Table A-1 may be allowed in the HPD in accordance with the provisions of Section 7.05 and Article 8, Conditional Uses, herein.

 

E. Area, Density, and Dimensional Requirements. In the HPD District, all structures shall be subject to the area, density and dimensional requirements of the underlying district and Table A-2, Dimensional Standards of these regulations with the following exceptions:

1. The following exceptions to setbacks and lot coverages shall be permitted for lots that meet the following criteria: the lot was in existence prior to January 1, 1983, the proposed project meets or exceeds the minimum standards set forth below and in Section 7.05F herein, and no adverse affect to a National Register eligible or listed property is created by the project.

(a) Side and Rear Setbacks. Encroachment of a structure into a required side or rear setback may be approved by the Development Review Board subject to the provisions of Article 8, Conditional Uses, up to a distance equal to 50% of the side or rear setback requirement of the district, but in no event shall a structure have a side or rear setback of less than five (5) feet. In no case shall there be less than 10 feet between structures.  In addition, the Development Review Board shall determine that the proposed encroachment will not have an undue adverse affect on:

(1) views of adjoining and/or nearby properties;

(2) access to sunlight of adjoining and/or nearby properties;

(3) adequate on-site parking; and

(4) safety of adjoining and/or nearby property.

(b) Front Setbacks. Encroachment of a structure into a required front yard setback may be approved by the Development Review Board subject to the provisions of Article 8, Conditional Uses, up to the average front setback of principal structures on adjacent lots on the same street frontage, but in no event shall a structure have a front setback of less than five (5) feet.  In no case shall there be less than 10 feet between structures.  In addition, the Development Review Board shall determine that the proposed encroachment will not have an undue adverse affect on:

(1) views of adjoining and/or nearby properties;

(2) access to sunlight of adjoining and/or nearby properties;

(3) adequate on-site parking; and

(4) safety of adjoining and/or nearby property.

(c) Processing of a Request. Any request under subsections (a) – (b) above to expand an existing structure, or place a new structure shall include the submission of survey data prepared by a licensed surveyor showing the location of affected property lines, existing and/or proposed structures, and any other information deemed necessary by the Administrative Officer.

(d) Lot Coverage. For lots that are five thousand (5,000) square feet or greater in size, but less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, lot coverage may exceed the maximum allowed for the district up to a maximum of eighty percent (80%) for total lot coverage. For lots that are less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in size, lot coverage may exceed the maximum allowed for the district up to a maximum of ninety percent (90%) for total lot coverage.

 

F. Additional Standards.  In addition to the Site Plan, Conditional Use, Planned Unit Development criteria, all development requiring review by the Development Review Board in the HPD District shall also be subject to the following standards:

1. The Board shall evaluate the historical, architectural, or cultural value of the building(s), structure(s), or site(s) and its relationship and contribution to the setting;

2. The Board shall evaluate the compatibility of the proposed exterior design, arrangement, orientation, texture, and materials with the existing buildings or structures and its setting; or if new construction, compatibility with the surrounding area;

3. The Board shall evaluate the scale and general size of the proposed building or structure in relation to existing surroundings, including consideration of such factors as the building's overall height, width, street frontage, number of stores, roof type, facade openings (windows, doors, etc.), and architectural details;

4. The Board shall evaluate factors including open space, yards, off-street parking, screening, fencing, entrance drives, sidewalks, signs, lights, and/or any landscaping that might affect the character of any building within the Historic Preservation District, shall be considered as well as those factors which relate to the placement of a structure or group of structures which might affect the overall streetscape;

5. The Board shall evaluate the impact the proposal will have on the surroundings, and the extent to which it will preserve and enhance the historic, architectural and cultural qualities of the Historic Preservation District, and the community. The Board shall be guided by the following:

(a) every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use which will require minimum alteration to the structure and its environment;

(b) rehabilitation or renovation work shall not destroy the distinguishing qualities or character of the structure and its environment. Historic material or architectural features should not be removed or altered;

(c) deteriorated architectural features should be repaired rather than replaced where ever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the new material should match the material being replaced in composition, design, texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing architectural features should be based on physical or pictorial evidence rather than on conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural features from other buildings;

(d) changes which may have taken place in the course of time are evidence of the history and development of the structure and its environment, and these changes shall be recognized and respected;

(e) all structures are recognized as products of their own time. Alterations to reproduce an earlier period are discouraged;

(f) additions to existing structures are acceptable if such design, materials and construction are of quality and are compatible with the size, scale, material, and character of the neighborhood, structures, and its environment;

(g) whenever possible, new additions or alterations to structures shall be done in such a manner that if they were removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the original structure would be unimpaired;

(h) every reasonable effort shall be made so that structures not be razed or demolished, in order to preserve the historic streetscape;

(i) new construction shall be sympathetic to architectural features and materials which are in keeping with the character of the historic buildings found within the Historic Preservation District. New structures should enhance, and maintain the integrity of the District and its structures.

 

 

7.06 Transfer of Development Rights District (TDRD)

A.  Purpose.  The Town of Colchester hereby establishes Transferable Development Rights, in accordance with 24 V.S.A. Section 4423 of the Vermont Municipal and Regional Planning and Development Act, in order to protect the agricultural resources and open spaces of the town and to promote residential development in areas that are consistent with the goals of the town’s Municipal Plan.

Transferable Development Rights are acquired in designated sending areas and applied in designated receiving areas in accordance with the procedures of this section.

B.  Definitions.

1.   Sending areas: the designated areas of town within which Transferable Development Rights may be created and acquired for use in a receiving area. (See Section 7.06C)

2.   Receiving areas: the designated areas of town within which Transferable Development Rights, created and acquired in another area of town, may be applied to increase permissible density of use on a specific lot. (See Section 7.06D)

3.   Sending unit: one unit of development that is removed from the sending area and is available for transfer to a receiving area.

4.   Transferable Development Right: the right to build one unit of development within a designated receiving area.  One unit of development equals one residential dwelling unit.

 

C.  Sending Areas.  Sending areas, or areas from which Transferable Development Rights may be acquired, shall include designated parcels within the Agricultural Mixed Use District (AMU).

1.  TDR Calculation.  Development rights available for transfer to the receiving area shall be assigned at the rate of one (1) TDR for each sending unit used in the R1, R2, & R3 Districts and one-and-one-half (1.5) TDRs for each sending unit used in all other receiving districts.

2.  Permitted Uses After TDR Transfer.  Permitted uses on property in the sending area from which development rights have been severed through execution of an easement agreement, per Section E herein, shall be limited to the following:

(a)   Temporary Emergency, Construction and Repair Residences

(b)  Commercial Greenhouse Operation

(c)   Roadside stands for the sale of produce grown on the premises

(d)  Stables and Arenas for Horses

(e)   Agricultural Operation

(f)   Sivicultural Operation

(g)  Firewood Operation

(h)  Privately owned facilities outdoor recreational facilities limited to paths and trails

(i)    Publicly owned outdoor recreational facilities limited to paths and trails

 

D.  Receiving Areas.  The receiving areas, or the areas within which Transferable Development Rights acquired in sending areas may be applied, shall consist of all land in the R1, R2, R3, GD1, GD2, GD3 and GD4 Zoning Districts.

1.   Existing Development Rights.  In addition to transferable development rights acquired from sending areas, there shall also exist an inherent right to develop the receiving property under the normal density indicated in Table A-2.

2.   Permitted Uses.  Uses permitted on land in the receiving area shall consist of those uses listed in Table A-1.

3.   TDR Usage Rates.  Development may occur in conformance with the provisions of this section at the rate of one (1) Transferable Development Right for each one dwelling unit.

4.   Maximum Permitted Density.  Transferable Development Rights acquired under this section may be applied to any property in the receiving area, with the exception of GD3 and GD4, up to a maximum of two times the normal density indicated in Table A-2.  In the GD3 and GD4 receiving areas, the maximum density may be up to three times the normal density indicated in Table A-2 provided the criteria of Section 4.03E3 and Section 4.04E3 are met.

E.  Procedures.

1.   Creation of Transferable Development Rights.  A Transferable Development Right may be created after the Development Review Board has determined the number of development units available in a parent parcel in accordance with Section 6.05F.4.  A landowner may designate one or more development units to be made available for transfer.  A Transfer of Development Right is created when a development unit designated above is made transferable upon execution and filing of an "Easement Agreement" between the landowner as grantor and the Town of Colchester as grantee.  The Director of Planning and Zoning shall execute the easement agreement which then shall be filed in the land records and a copy sent to the Colchester Assessor.  The easement agreement shall:

(a) establish a restriction on the affected property limiting it to those uses listed in Section 7.06C.2 above for a period of 50 years following the date of execution of the agreement, and

(b)  list by identifying number the specific development units being used for the creation of Transferable Development Rights.

At any time prior to execution of a Deed of Transfer the landowner may revoke such easement by recording in the land records an agreement to that effect as signed by the Director of Planning and Zoning with a copy sent to the Colchester Assessor.

2.   Transfer of Transferable Development Rights.  Transferable Development Rights may be transferred from one owner to another by execution and filing of a "Deed of Transfer" which shall include identification by number of the development units being transferred.  Each transferred development unit shall create one (1) Transferable Development Right for use in the R1, R2, and R3 Districts or one-and-one-half (1.5) Transferable Development Rights for use in all other receiving districts.  After execution of the Deed of Transfer by both the seller and the buyer of the Transferable Development Rights, the deed shall be filed in the Colchester land records and a copy sent to the Assessor.

3.   Use of Transferable Development Rights.  All development applications utilizing Transferable Development Rights shall be reviewed under the same development review criteria used for other applications in the receiving district.  As a condition of approval, the required Transferable Development Rights shall be permanently attached to the parcel of land being developed by executing and filing a "Document of Attachment" which:

(a) shall be executed by an individual who has clear ownership of both the receiving parcel and the Transferable Development Rights which are to be attached to the receiving parcel;

(b)          shall identify by number the Transferable Development Rights to be attached, with reference to the book and page number in which the Easement Agreement which created them is recorded, and any Deeds of Transfer by which their ownership has been transferred; and

(c) shall be filed in the Colchester land records and a copy sent to the Assessor.

 

 

7.07 General Development One Commercial District GD1C

 

A. Purpose. To limit high-volume commercial uses such as contractors yards, drive up, and gas stations within the General Development One District.  Development within GD1C shall be subject to strict guidelines of General Development One.

 

B. Municipal Plan. These regulations hereby implement the relevant provisions of the Town of Colchester adopted municipal plan and are in accord with the policies set forth therein.

 

C. Permitted Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and approved pursuant to Article 8, and accessory uses to those uses.  Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

D. Conditional Uses. Those uses indicated in Table A-1 and approved pursuant to Article 8, and accessory uses to those uses.  Any uses not listed in Table A-1 are prohibited. Items that are not customary as accessory uses to those listed in Table A-1 are prohibited.

 

E. Area, Density, and Dimensional Requirements. In the GD1C District, all structures shall be subject to the area, density and dimensional requirements of the General Development One District as set forth in Section 4.01 and Table A-2, Dimensional Standards of these regulations.

 

F. Additional Standards.  In addition to the Site Plan, Conditional Use, Planned Unit Development criteria, all development in the GD1C District shall also be subject to the following standards:

1. Multi-family dwellings shall be subject to Planned Residential Development Review, as per Article 9.

2. Residential units and commercial uses may be permitted to occupy the same building subject to the Conditional Use and Site Plan criteria and the following standards:

            (a) The residential units shall have an entrance separate from the proposed commercial use.

            (b) Multiple commercial uses within the building may be considered however the commercial uses shall not adversely affect the proposed residential units.  Hours of operation of the commercial uses may be restricted to ensure no adverse affect to the residences.

ARTICLE 8: SITE PLAN AND CONDITIONAL USE REVIEW

 

8.01 General Purpose

8.02 Definition of Site Plan

8.03 Uses and Actions Subject to Site Plan Approval

8.04 Approval of Site Plans by Development Review Board

8.05 Application, Review, and Approval Procedure

8.06 General Review Standards

8.07 Specific Review Standards

8.08 Integration of Procedures

8.09 Administrative Review

8.10 Conditional Use Review: General Provisions and Standards

 

 

8.01 General Purpose

It is the purpose of this Article to regulate site development plans in order that adequate light, air, convenience of access, and safety from fire, flood, and other danger may be secured; that congestion in the public streets may be lessened or avoided; that the public health, safety, and general public welfare may be promoted; and that the preservation of historic landmarks, sites, districts, and buildings be promoted. The site plan review process and the conditional use review process will allow the Town of Colchester to review the arrangement, layout, use interrelationships and neighborhood impacts of sites intended for development or redevelopment and to ensure the aesthetic quality of such design to conform to the character of the neighborhood and the goals of the municipal plan. In reviewing site plans and conditional uses, appropriate conditions and safeguards may be imposed with respect to the adequacy of pedestrian and vehicular access, circulation, parking, landscaping and screening, and to encourage the conservation of energy.

 

 

8.02 Definition of Site Plan

As used in this Article, the term site plan shall mean a rendering, drawing, or sketch prepared to specifications contained in this article. The site plan shall show the arrangement, layout, and design of the proposed use of a single parcel or assembled parcels of land.

 

 

8.03 Uses and Actions Subject to Site Plan Approval

 

A. Site Plan Approval Required. Site plan approval shall be required prior to issuance of a building permit in all districts, except as provided in subsection B, for:

1. Any new use, change in use, or expansion of use in any district.

2. Uses subject to conditional use permit approval. See Section 8.10 below.

3. Any alteration or change to an approved site plan.

4. New parking lots or expansions of existing parking lots.

5. Any structure formerly used as a residence proposed for conversion to non-residential use.

6. Notwithstanding subdivision approval, any planned unit development that denotes building footprints, parking, circulation, and other related amenities. See Article 9, Planned Unit Development, for specific PUD regulations.

7. Seawalls, fill in excess of 100 cubic yards, and any other special circumstance specifically requiring site plan approval herein listed in the Development Regulations.

8. Accessory on-farm business.

 

B. Excluded from Site Plan Review. Specifically excluded from the provisions of this article are:

1. One-family dwelling on a single lot, its accessory structures, and related features such as decks, pools, sheds, and detached garages.

2. Two-family dwelling on a single lot, its accessory structures, and related features such as decks, pools, sheds, and detached garages.

3. Agricultural and horticultural uses.

4. Forestry uses.

5. Repair and replacement of existing driveways, curb cuts, aprons, and sidewalks.

6. Repairs to existing swimming pools.

7. Fences and walls as provided in these Development Regulations.

8. Repair and replacement of interior amenities (such as carpeting) that are one hundred percent (100%) internal to an existing building or structure.

9. Exterior renovations to an existing building or structure that do not increase, alter or otherwise modify the outer envelope of said building or structure or in any way alter the building from its duly permitted Town approvals, except in Historic Preservation District (see Article 7).

10. Interior renovations to an existing building that do not increase or alter the use or otherwise increase parking needs, wastewater or water requirements, vehicle trip ends, or otherwise modify the use of the property so as to violate the previously approved site plan for the property.  This shall include amendments to cumulative impact statements for the changing of tenants.

 

 

8.04 Approval of Site Plans by Development Review Board

 

A. Authority. Per 24 V.S.A Section 4416, the Development Review Board (DRB) shall have the authority to review and approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove site plans prepared to the specifications set forth in this Article, except as provided for administrative site plan reviews.

 

B. Review Period. Where site plan review by the DRB or Administrative Officer is required, the DRB or the Administrative Officer shall act to approve or disapprove any such site plans within the time required by 24 V.S.A. Section 4464. Failure to so act within said period shall be deemed approval. Copies of the DRB or Administrative Officer’s decision, referred to as the findings of fact and order, shall be sent to the applicant.

 

C. Combined Decision for Conditional Uses. Where a conditional use permit is required, the DRB shall make the determination on the conditional use permit and on the site plan permit required for the conditional use and shall issue one (1) set of findings of fact pertaining to both.

 

 

8.05 Application, Review, and Approval Procedure

 

A. Pre-Submission (Technical Review Committee). Prior to a formal submission, the applicant should contact the Administrative Officer to inquire as to whether or not a Technical Review Committee is recommended for the project.  If the Administrative Officer determines that a Committee meeting is recommended, the Officer may setup a meeting with appropriate Town officials and the applicant to discuss the proposed site plan. The intent of such a conference is to enable the applicant to inform the Department of Planning and Zoning of the proposal prior to the preparation of a detailed site plan and for said Department to review the basic site design concept, advise the applicant as to potential problems and concerns, and to determine generally the type of information to be shown on and submitted with the site plan.

 

B. Submission. A site plan generally shall be prepared by a registered architect, licensed landscape architect, licensed land surveyor, licensed engineer, or professional land planner. The site plan shall be submitted to the DRB for approval.

 

C. Fees. All submissions for site plan approval shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the Selectboard in Chapter Six of the Colchester Code of Ordinances and amended from time to time. 

 

D. Application for Site Plan.

The land owner and, where applicable, building owner of the property shall sign the permit application or a letter of agency shall be submitted with the application demonstrating that the applicant may sign on the behalf of the owner(s). A digital copy of a site plan application and sets of plans drawn to scale in accordance with Appendix G

herein, shall include the following information for the Administrative Officer to deem the application complete and ready to send to the DRB for its review:

1. Existing conditions plan and data:

(a) A list of the owners of record of abutting properties, which may be generated by the Planning & Zoning Department or by the applicant.

(b) Boundaries of existing zoning and overlay districts on the subject property and adjacent zoning and overlay district boundaries.

(c) Area and boundaries of the property, building or setback lines as required in this chapter, and lines of existing streets and adjoining lots, as shown on a survey. 

(d) Reservations, easements and areas dedicated to public use shall be shown.

(e) Lot dimensions and survey data, and section and lot numbers of the subject property. The preferred scale shall be not less than one (1) inch equals thirty (30) feet.

(f) Such map shall show the applicant’s entire property, adjacent properties, streets within two hundred (200) feet of the site, approximate location and dimensions of all existing structures, and location of all existing structures on adjacent properties and within one hundred (100) feet of the site boundary. At the discretion of the Administrative Officer the required area of the site plan may be increased.

(g) Location of watercourses, waterbodies, wetlands, floodplains, and floodplain boundaries as determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or as mapped by the Town of Colchester, watercourses, wetlands, rock outcrops, wooded areas, existing vegetation, and other significant natural features on the site.

(h) Topographic contours and profiles as needed.  Existing and proposed contours should be shown at a maximum vertical interval of two (2) feet.

(i) Location of, square footage, and height of existing structures and uses on the site.

(j) Existing structures and access points on adjacent properties, including those directly across a public street.

2. Development plan and data:

(a) The title of the development, date, North arrow, scale, name and address of the owner of record and of the applicant, if other than the owner, and of the engineer, architect, landscape architect or surveyor preparing the plan shall be shown on a site plan map. Where the applicant or owner is a corporation, the DRB may require the names and addresses of all officers, directors and principal stockholders of said corporation. The preferred scale shall be not less than one (1) inch equals thirty (30) feet.

(b) Lines and dimensions of all property that is offered, or to be offered, for dedication for public use, with purpose indicated thereon, and of all property that is proposed to be served by deed covenant for the common use of the property owners of the development.

(c) Estimated project construction schedule, phasing, and date of completion.

(d) Estimated cost of all site improvements.

(e) If a restaurant is proposed, the number of seats and square footage of floor area provided for patron use but not containing fixed seats should be provided.

(f) All means of vehicular access and egress to and from the site onto public streets (dimensions, widths, & turning radii), and all provisions for pedestrian access and circulation.  Existing highway geometries should be given that include access points near the project.  Sight distance in both directions of all driveway intersections should also be shown on the plans.  The linear footage and width for proposed roads/driveways should be provided.

(g) Elevations, floor plans, and sections of proposed structures showing the proposed location, use, design and height of all structures, key boxes, and building sprinkler hook-ups. Plans shall also show any proposed division of buildings into units of separate occupancy and location of drives and access thereto.

(h) The location and layout of any off-street parking or loading areas, traffic circulation areas, truck circulation patterns, loading areas, areas for snow storage, bike racks, pedestrian walkways, and fire lanes.

(i) Analysis of traffic impacts, including traffic level of service/capacity analysis for existing and future conditions. Estimated daily and peak hour traffic generation, and an estimate of traffic generation during the peak hour of the adjacent street traffic.  A traffic study may be required by the Administrative Officer in accordance with Appendix D herein.

(j) Lot area in square feet and acres, and lot coverage calculations including building, overall, and front yard coverage.

(k) The location of all proposed waterlines, valves and hydrants and sewer lines or wells and sewage tanks, fields, lines and/or septic test pit and percolation information.  Information on water fire flows and pressures is also required.

(l) Detailed landscaping plan, including type, size, and location of all materials used and plans for buffer screening and fencing in conformance with Article 10, Section 10.04, Landscaping, Screening, and Street Trees.

(m) Cut sheets for all proposed outdoor lighting within the site including mounting heights and a point by point lighting scheme.

(n) The general location of any free-standing signs.

(o) The location of any outdoor storage for equipment and materials if any, and the location, type and design of all solid waste-related facilities, including dumpsters and recycling bins.

(p) Location and design of all energy distribution facilities, including electrical, gas, and solar energy.

(q) Recreation areas if required.

(r) Preliminary grading, drainage, landscaping and buffering plan in accordance with Article 2.

(s) The extent and amount of cut and fill for all disturbed areas, including before-and-after profiles and cross sections of typical development areas, parking lots and roads, and including an erosion and sedimentation control plan, and proposed locations of sediment sink/setting pond and interceptor swales.

(t) Detailed plans of retaining walls, steps, ramps, paving, and drainage structures.

(u) Estimate of all earthwork, including the quantity of any material to be imported to or removed from the site or a statement that no material is to be removed or imported.

(v) Proposed stormwater management system, including (as applicable) location, supporting design data and copies of computations used as a basis for the design capacities and performance of stormwater management facilities.

 (w) The location of all existing and proposed site improvements, including drains, culverts, retaining walls and fences.

(x) Finished grades of walls, pavements, and storm drains.

 3. Other: Any other information or data that the Administrative Officer or DRB shall require for a full assessment of the project pursuant to this article.

 

F. Development Review Board Action.

1. The DRB shall review the site plan application in accordance with 24 V.S.A. Section 4464. The DRB shall review the application against the site plan criteria in this Article 8 and any other applicable standards in these Regulations. If the DRB determines that the site plan and supporting material fail to demonstrate compliance with applicable standards, it shall deny the site plan. However, if it further determines that with a minor modification or modifications the site plan and supporting material would comply with applicable standards, the DRB may, in its discretion, impose a condition or conditions requiring such modification or modifications and approve the site plan. For the purpose of this section, a minor modification is one that leaves no part of its implementation to the discretion of the applicant.

2. Upon approval, a copy of the DRB’s findings of fact and order shall be sent to the applicant and recorded in the Town Clerk's office.

3. Upon approval, the applicant shall provide a copy of the site plan in digital format meeting the Town of Colchester “Digital Format Requirements” in Appendix G. 

 

G. Waiver of Application Requirements. The Administrative Officer shall have the authority to, when reasonable, waive any application requirements for site plan approval. Any such waiver may be exercised in the event any such requirements are 1) found not to be requisite in the interest of public health, safety, or general welfare or 2) inappropriate to a particular site plan because of the particular character or limited nature of a new development or change in use or conditions peculiar to a site or 3) will cause extraordinary and unnecessary hardship.

 

H. Expiration of Approval. Development Review Board approval of a site plan shall expire if any of the following circumstances occurs:

1. A complete application for a building permit is not submitted within twelve (12) months of the DRB approval, except where the phasing of development over a longer period has been specifically provided for in the findings of fact at the time of site plan approval.  The said twelve (12) month period shall be extended by any action caused by court proceedings.

2. Work authorized under a building permit is not commenced and diligently pursued through the completion of substantial construction within twelve (12) months of receiving a building permit.

3. Upon prior written request to the DRB, including a statement of justification for the requested time extension, the time period for obtaining a building permit may be individually extended for a maximum period of twelve (12) calendar months from the otherwise specified termination dates.

 

I. Field Changes and As-Built Plans

1. Field Changes

(a) During construction, the Administrative Officer may authorize or require, at his/her own determination or upon the request of the applicant, minor adjustments to the approved site plan when such adjustments are necessary in light of technical or engineering considerations. Such minor adjustments shall be consistent with the spirit and intent of the approved site plan.

(b) Where unforeseen conditions are encountered which require any material change to an approved site plan or where the developer wishes to modify the approved plan for other reasons, a site plan application shall be filed with the DRB or Administrative Officer for review in accordance with procedures required for the amendment of applications.

2. As-Built Plans

(a) Upon completion of any development or redevelopment pursuant to an approved site plan involving field changes as set forth in (1) above, and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the applicant shall submit to the Administrative Officer an as-built plan, prepared and certified by a licensed engineer, architect, landscape architect or surveyor, showing the location of all site improvements as constructed. Such plan shall be based on a field survey.

(b) Said as-built plan shall be reviewed by the Administrative Officer to determine if it is in compliance with the approved site plan. The Administrative Officer shall specify its compliance with or variation from the approved site plan by signature and shall file a revised site plan in digital format meeting the Town of Colchester “Digital Format Requirements” in Appendix G. 

(c) If variations from the approved final site plan exist, an amended site plan shall be filed with the DRB for review in accordance with the same procedures required for initial applications.

 

J. Technical Legal, or Consultant Review of Site Plans and Supporting Documents. The DRB may require an independent technical or legal review of the application.  The site plan review applicant shall pay for the cost of such review per Chapter Six and a Half of the Colchester Code of Ordinances. The Development Review Board may table review of the application pending receipt of an independent technical review.

 

K. Escrow Requirements. The owner or developer shall provide a suitable escrow account or letter of credit to guarantee the completion of all required landscaping, site restoration, and public improvements. In the case of public improvements, a Public Improvement Agreement shall be signed and the escrow account or letter of credit shall be sufficient to guarantee the improvements for a period of two (2) years following completion.  In the case of landscaping, a Landscape Agreement shall be signed and the escrow account or letter of credit shall be sufficient to guarantee all planting for a period of two (2) years.  Once the landscaping or public improvements are installed, the amount bonded for may be reduced to 10% of the original amount.  Agreements and escrows shall be submitted to the Town prior to issuance of a permit. 

 

 

8.06 General Review Standards

The following general criteria and standards shall be used by the DRB in reviewing applications for site plan approval. The criteria are intended to provide a framework within which the designer of the site development is free to exercise creativity, invention, and innovation while improving the visual appearance of the Town of Colchester. The DRB shall restrict itself to a reasonable, professional review, and, except as otherwise provided in the following subsections, the applicant shall retain full responsibility for design.

 

 

8.07 Specific Review Standards

A. The DRB shall consider the following in its review of a site plan application:

1. Will not result in undue water or air pollution.

2. Does have sufficient water available for the reasonably foreseeable needs of the subdivision or development.

3. Will not cause unreasonable soil erosion or reduction in the capacity of the land to hold water so that a dangerous or unhealthy condition may result.  See Section 2.13.

4. Will not cause unreasonable road congestion or unsafe conditions with respect to use of the roads existing or proposed.

5. The adequacy of landscaping, screening and setbacks in regard to adjacent properties.

6. Will not have an undue adverse effect on historic sites or rare and irreplaceable natural areas.

7. Will not have an undue adverse effect on scenic or natural beauty of the area and aesthetics. Please address the following:

(a)             Describe how the project is suitable for its surroundings, the locations from which it can be viewed and the potential impact on open space.

(b)            Does the project violate the Town’s Municipal Plan, Development Regulations, Town Official Map, Town Overlay Map, Chapter Four “Building Code and Building Construction Ordinance”, Seven “Fire Prevention and Protection”, Eight “On-Site Sewage Disposal Regulations”, Ten “Sewers”, or Fourteen “Construction Standards Applicable to Land Development” of the Colchester Code of Ordinances, or other applicable regulations intended to preserve the aesthetics or scenic beauty of the area?

(c)             Is the project out of character with its surroundings or does it significantly diminish the scenic qualities of the area?

8. Efficiency of allocation and distribution of street and public facility installation, construction and maintenance.

9. Will not place an unreasonable burden on the ability of the local government to provide municipal or governmental services and facilities.

10. Will not adversely affect the character of the area.

11. Conformance with the Town Municipal Plan.  Proposed site plans shall conform to the Town Municipal Plan and all bylaws of the Town including the Town Development Regulations and Town Official Map.

12. Landscaping and Screening Requirements. See Section 10.04 Landscaping, Screening, and Street Trees.

13. Off Street Parking, Loading, and Circulation Requirements.

Parking and Circulation. See Section 10.01 and Section 2.19.

14. Exterior Lighting. See Section 10.02 and Section 2.19.

15. Compliance with Article 10.

 

 

8.08 Integration of Procedures

 

A. General. There may be applications where the particular circumstances of a proposed development require compliance with other procedures in these regulations, such as conditional use permit review. In such cases, the DRB shall integrate site plan review as required by this article with the other procedural and/or submission requirements per 24 V.S.A. Section 4462. Such integration of procedures may require, upon mutual written consent of the DRB and the applicant, reasonable modification of the time schedules otherwise stated in this article or in said related regulations or requirements.

 

 

8.09 Administrative Review

 

A. Authority. The Department of Planning and Zoning is hereby authorized to conduct administrative review and approval of site plan applications for permitted uses, as provided below.

 

B. Determination of Eligibility. All determinations of eligibility for administrative review are subject to the discretion of the Director of Planning and Zoning. The Administrative Officer shall not approve administrative amendments to conditional uses or variances. The Administrative Officer may review, approve, approve with conditions, or deny administrative amendments to site plans involving a permitted use, and site plans of duly approved subdivisions, if the proposed amendment meets one or more of the following criteria:

1. Relocation of site improvements and/or accessory structures that have been previously approved provided that such relocations do not alter the approved coverage for the site.

2. Re-approval of plans if a permit issued by the DRB has expired within the preceding six months and no changes or alterations of any kind are proposed, including those outlined in (4) below.  The Administrative Officer shall only re-approve such plans once.

3. Approval of plans showing as-built adjustments beyond standard field adjustments, provided that such adjustments do not require the amendment of any condition of approval in the most recent findings of fact.

4. Minor alterations to an approved landscaping plan such as substitution of appropriate similar species or landscaping or hardscaping materials, provided that the total value of landscaping proposed in the amended plan is equal to or exceeds the amount approved by the DRB.

5. An increase in building area and/or impervious coverage totaling less than five thousand (5,000) square feet or three percent (3%) of the overall site coverage, whichever is smaller. Applicants are advised that the cumulative total increase in building area and/or site coverage cumulatively permitted through all administrative amendments on any one lot shall not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet or three percent (3%) of the overall site coverage, whichever is smaller. DRB approval shall be required for any amendment exceeding these limits at any one time as well as for any property exceeding these limits cumulatively through this process over a five year period. 

6. All coverage and other limitations pursuant to these regulations shall apply in determining whether an administrative amendment shall be approved.

7. Changes in use of all or part of a building or structure with prior site plan approval to a permitted use in the applicable zoning district provided the proposed use, whether solely or in combination with other uses subject to the same approval, will not result in any permitting requirement or threshold being exceeded or violated.

8. The Administrative Officer may request permission from the DRB at a regular meeting to review a site plan application that does not meet the aforementioned criteria as an administrative review.

 

C. Reporting of Decisions. All administrative approvals shall be reported by the Administrative Officer to the DRB at its next meeting following the date of the approval, and all such decisions of the Administrative Officer shall state that the decision may be appealed in accordance with 24 V.S.A Section 4471.  The DRB reserves the right to review and issue supplementary Findings of Fact and Order within 15 days following the date of approval by the Administrative Officer.   An interested person may request the Board review the application within 15 days following the date of approval by the Administrative Officer. The decision granted by the Administrative Officer shall be sent to all abutters and interested persons.  If no interested person or majority of the DRB objects within 15 days following the date or approval by the Administrative Officer, the application shall be deemed approved.

 

 

 

 

 

 

8.10 Conditional Use Review: General Provisions and Standards

 

A. Municipal Plan. These regulations hereby implement the relevant provisions of the Town of Colchester adopted Municipal Plan and are in accord with the policies set forth therein.

 

B. Definition of Conditional Use. A conditional use shall be defined as a use permitted in a particular zoning district upon showing that such use in a specified location will comply with all the general and specific standards for the location or operation of the use as specified in these regulations and as authorized by the DRB. Uses requiring a conditional use permit are listed in Table A-1, Table of Uses. In granting approval for a conditional use, the DRB may attach such additional, reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of these regulations.

 

C. Uses and Actions Subject to Conditional Use Review. Conditional use permit approval shall be required prior to issuance of a building permit in all districts where such uses are listed as conditional uses in the District Regulations. The land owner and, where applicable, building owner of the property shall sign the permit application or a letter of agency shall be submitted with the application demonstrating that the applicant may sign on the behalf of the owner(s).  Any alteration, extension or other change to an existing conditional use shall require review under the requirements of this section.

 

D. Review and Approval Procedure. Per 24 V.S.A Section 4414(3) a use designated as a conditional use in any district may be permitted by the DRB, after public notice and public hearing pursuant to 24 V.S.A. Section 4464, according to the following procedures:

1. Any conditional use is subject to site plan review and shall be reviewed under the requirements of Article 8, Site Plan and Conditional Use Review or if a PUD or within a PUD the use shall additionally be subject to the requirements of Article 9, Planned Unit Development.

2. The DRB may require submission of plans, data, or other information in addition to the requirements of Article 8, as it deems necessary.

3. The DRB shall act to approve or disapprove a requested conditional use within the time required in 24 V.S.A. Section 4464, and failure to so act shall be deemed approval.

4. In approving a conditional use, the DRB may attach additional requirements as it may deem necessary to implement the provisions of the Colchester Municipal Plan and these regulations.

5. The application and any supporting materials submitted shall be in digital format in accordance with Appendix G herein.

 

E. General Review Standards. The DRB shall review the proposed conditional use for compliance with all applicable standards as contained in these regulations including specifically Articles Two and Article 10 and Appendix G. The proposed conditional use shall meet the following standards:

1. The proposed use, in its location and operation, shall be consistent with the planned character of the area as defined by the Town of Colchester Municipal Plan.

2. The proposed use shall conform to the stated purpose of the district in which the proposed use is to be located.

3. The DRB shall take into consideration minimum lot size; size, design, and location of structures and service areas; and distance from adjacent or nearby uses.

3. The proposed use shall not result in an undue adverse effect on any of the following:

(a) The capacity of existing or planned community facilities;

(b) The character of the area affected as defined by the purpose or purposes of the zoning district within which the project is located and specifically stated policies and standards of the Municipal Plan;

(c) Traffic on roads and highways in the vicinity;

(d) Bylaws and ordinances in effect; or

(e) Utilization of renewable energy resources.

 

F. Expiration of Conditional Use Permits. A conditional use permit shall expire if: 1) work authorized under the DRB approval is not commenced and diligently pursued within twelve (12) months of receiving DRB approval, or 2) the conditional use shall cease for more than six (6) months for any reason, unless an umbrella approval has been granted.

ARTICLE 9:  SUBDIVISION REVIEW

9.01 General Purpose

9.02 Uses and Actions Subject to Subdivision Approval

9.03 Approval of Subdivisions by Development Review Board

9.04 Application, Review and Approval Procedure

9.05 Review Standards

9.06 Integration of Procedures

9.07 Planned Unit Development

 

 

9.01 General Purpose.

 

It is the purpose of this Article to regulate subdivisions for the purpose of assuring orderly growth and coordinated development in the Town of Colchester and assure the comfort, convenience, safety, health and welfare of its citizens. Further, the review of subdivisions shall be based on the following broad considerations:

 

A. Conformity with, or implementation of, the Municipal Plan of the Town of Colchester.

 

B. Conformity and compatibility with other applicable bylaws, including but not limited to the Capital Budget and Program.

 

C. Recognition of a desirable relationship to the land form, topography, geology, natural drainage and surface water runoff, and to the ground water table.

 

D. Recognition of desirable standards of subdivision design including provision for safe and convenient pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and for suitable building sites for the land use(s) contemplated.

 

E. The provision of adequate safeguards to protect the general public from the hazards of flooding, fire, overcrowding, or other threats to public health or safety.

 

F. Provisions for the preservation, protection, and/or conservation of natural resources, such as land, air, vegetation, and water, upon which the continued prosperity, safety, health, and welfare of the community and surrounding region may depend.

 

G. Adequate provisions for the public facilities and services such as parks, open space, recreation areas, school sites, police and fire protection, off-street parking, water supply, sewage disposal, which are deemed necessary for general public and convenience.

 

H. Encouragement of variety, innovation, flexibility, and greater efficiency in the designing layout and use of land in planned unit developments and planned residential developments as provided under the Vermont Planning and Development Act (Title 24 V.S.A., Chapter 117), as amended.

 

 

9.02 Uses and Actions Subject to Subdivision Approval

 

A. Subdivision Approval Required.  Prior to the recording of a plat or the issuance of a building permit, final plat approval shall be required for the creation of any subdivisions or planned unit developments except as otherwise provided herein for boundary line adjustments (BLAs).

 

B. Boundary Line Adjustments. An application for lot line adjustment shall be a plat prepared by a Vermont licensed land surveyor and consented to by all involved land owners indicating all lots that are proposed to be modified as a result of the proposed lot line adjustment submitted to the Administrative Officer with a title block for date and signature of the Administrative Officer. The survey shall be sufficient to clearly indicate the area, metes, bounds, and ties of each of the affected lots. The survey shall include all structures and site improvements and delineate all building/structure setbacks, lot coverage, parking spaces, wells, and septic systems and any other details as may be specified by the Administrative Officer.  The Administrative Officer shall approve an application for a minor lot line adjustment, provided that the following criteria are met:

1. The Wastewater Official has reviewed the lot line adjustment and deemed it to comply with Chapter Eight of the Colchester Code of Ordinances;

2. The lots are of the same zoning;

3. No new lots are created through the adjustment;

4. The sale or exchange of parcels of land is between adjacent property owners;

5. The relocation of the lot-line does not result in the creation of a non-conforming lot, structure or use;

6. The proposed change does not violate any conditions imposed from prior municipal approvals; and

7. The title block includes the following text: “This is a boundary line adjustment, not a subdivision.  The Town does not confirm or attest to the accuracy of this document or related title issues.  Further subdivision requires approval by the Development Review Board.”

8. The application is authorized by the owners of all lots at issue.  For the purpose of this provision, “authorized” shall mean the actual signature of the affected property owners.

 

 

9.03 Approval of Subdivisions by Development Review Board

 

A. Authority.  Per 24 V.S.A. Sections 4417 & 4418, The Development Review Board (DRB) shall have the authority to review and approve, approve with modifications, or disprove plans for subdivision and/or planned unit development prepared to the specifications set forth in Article.

 

B. Review Period.  Where subdivision review by the DRB is required, the DRB shall act on any such subdivision within the time required by 24 V.S.A. Section 4464.  Failure to act within said period shall be deemed approval.  Copies of the DRB’s decision, referred to as the findings of fact and order, shall be sent to the applicant.

 

C. Combined Decision for Site Plan or Conditional Use.  Where a site plan or conditional use permit is required, the DRB shall make the determination on the  permits and shall issues one (1) set of findings of fact and order pertaining to all permits.

 

D. Acceptance of Streets.  The approval of a final plat or the filing for record thereof shall not constitute or be evidence of an acceptance of any street, park or other open space shown on such plan. Such acceptance shall be by resolution of the Selectboard which shall set forth the fact of such acceptance for public purposes, describing the same by reference to a warranty deed dedicating the site thereof to the Town free and clear of all liens and encumbrances.

 

 

9.04 Application, Review and Approval Procedure

 

A. Pre-Submission (Technical Review Committee). Prior to a formal submission, the applicant should contact the Administrative Officer to inquire as to whether or not a Technical Review Committee (TRC) is required or recommended for the project.  A TRC is required prior to sketch submittal for all major subdivisions and prior to final plat submittal for all combined preliminary and final plat hearings.  If the Administrative Officer determines that a Committee meeting is required or recommended, the Officer may setup a meeting with appropriate Town officials and the applicant to discuss the proposed site plan. The intent of such a conference is to enable the applicant to inform the Department of Planning and Zoning of the proposal prior to the preparation of a detailed plan and for said Department to review the basic site design concept, advise the applicant as to potential problems and concerns, and to determine generally the type of information to be shown on and submitted with the subdivision application.

 

B. Submission. A subdivision plan generally shall be prepared by a licensed land surveyor, licensed engineer, or professional land planner. The plan shall be submitted to the DRB for approval. Preliminary and final plat applications shall be accompanied by a plat (both existing and proposed) of the project prepared by a licensed land surveyor.

 

C. Fees. All submissions for subdivisions applications shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the Selectboard in Chapter Six and one half of the Colchester Code of Ordinances and amended from time to time. 

 

D. Sketch Plan Submittal. Any subdivider of land shall submit to the Development Review Board a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision.  The DRB will not issue findings on the sketch application however will provide feedback to the application as to whether the sketch plan meets the purposes of these Regulations and make specific suggestions to be incorporated by the applicant in subsequent submissions.  The sketch application and plans, drawn to scale, submitted shall comply with Appendix G herein and include the following information for the Administrative Officer to deem the application complete and ready to send to the Development Review Board for its review:

1. Existing conditions plan and data:

(a) A list of the owners of record of abutting properties, which may be generated by the Assessor’s Department or by the applicant.

(b) Boundaries of existing zoning and overlay districts on the subject property and adjacent zoning and overlay district boundaries.

(c) Area and boundaries of the property, building or setback lines as required in this chapter, and lines of existing streets and adjoining lots, as shown on a survey. 

(d) Reservations, easements and areas dedicated or to be dedicated to public use shall be shown.

(e) Lot dimensions, section and lot numbers of the subject property. The preferred scale shall be one (1) inch equals thirty (30) feet.

(f) Such map shall show the applicant’s entire property, adjacent properties, streets within two hundred (200) feet of the site, approximate location and dimensions of all existing structures, and location of all existing structures on adjacent properties and within one hundred (100) feet of the site boundary. At the discretion of the Administrative Officer, the required area of the site plan shall be increased.

(g) Location of watercourses, waterbodies, wetlands, floodplains, and floodplain boundaries as determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or as mapped by the Town of Colchester, watercourses, wetlands, rock outcrops, wooded areas, existing vegetation, and other significant natural features on the site.

(h) Topographic contours and profiles as needed.  Existing and proposed contours should be shown at a maximum vertical interval of two (2) feet.

(i) Existing structures and access points on adjacent properties, including those directly across a public street.

2. Development plan and data:

(a) The title of the development, date, North arrow, scale, name and address of the owner of record and of the applicant, if other than the owner, and of the engineer, architect, landscape architect or surveyor preparing the plan shall be shown on a site plan map. The preferred scale shall be not less than one (1) inch equals thirty (30) feet.

(b) Property lines and dimensions of all land that is offered, or to be offered, for dedication for public use, with purpose indicated thereon, and of all property that is proposed to be served by deed covenant for the common use of the property owners of the development.

(c) Lot area in square feet and acres, and lot coverage calculations including building, overall, and front yard coverage.

(d) Preliminary grading, drainage, landscaping and buffering plans.

 

E. Preliminary and Final Plat Submittals. Following the DRB review of a sketch plan application, any subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat application, for major subdivisions, or a final plat application for minor subdivisions.  In the case of major subdivisions, a final plat application shall be submitted after the approval of the preliminary plat application.  Preliminary and final plat applications may be considered simultaneously by the DRB with its prior requested consent at sketch plan consideration. Preliminary and final plat applications and plans, drawn to scale, submitted shall comply with Appendix G herein and include the following information for the Administrative Officer to deem the application complete and ready to send to the Development Review Board for its review:

 

1. Existing conditions plan and data:

(a) A list of the owners of record of abutting properties, which may be generated by the Assessor’s Department or by the applicant.

(b) Boundaries of existing zoning and overlay districts on the subject property and adjacent zoning and overlay district boundaries.

(c) Area and boundaries of the property, building or setback lines as required in this chapter, and lines of existing streets and adjoining lots, as shown on a survey. 

(d) Reservations, easements and areas dedicated or to be dedicated to public use shall be shown.

(e) Lot dimensions and survey data, and section and lot numbers of the subject property. The preferred scale shall be not less than one (1) inch equals thirty (30) feet.

(f) Such map shall show the applicant’s entire property in a closed bound survey, adjacent properties, streets within two hundred (200) feet of the site, approximate location and dimensions of all existing structures, and location of all existing structures on adjacent properties and within one hundred (100) feet of the site boundary. At the discretion of the Administrative Officer the required area of the site plan shall be increased.

(g) Location of watercourses, waterbodies, wetlands, floodplains, and floodplain boundaries as determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or as mapped by the Town of Colchester, watercourses, wetlands, rock outcrops, wooded areas, existing vegetation, and other significant natural features on the site.

(h) Topographic contours and profiles as needed.  Existing and proposed contours should be shown at a maximum vertical interval of two (2) feet.

(i) Location of, square footage, and height of existing structures and uses on the site.

(j) Existing structures and access points on adjacent properties, including those directly across a public street.

2. Development plan and data:

(a) The title of the development, date, North arrow, scale, name and address of the owner of record and of the applicant, if other than the owner, and of the engineer, architect, landscape architect or surveyor preparing the plan shall be shown on a site plan map. The preferred scale is one (1) inch equals thirty (30) feet.

(b) ) Property lines and dimensions of all land that is offered, or to be offered, for dedication for public use, with purpose indicated thereon, and of all property that is proposed to be served by deed covenant for the common use of the property owners of the development.

(c) Estimated project construction schedule, phasing, and date of completion.

(d) All means of vehicular access and egress to and from the site onto public streets (dimensions, widths, & turning radii), and all provisions for pedestrian access and circulation.  Existing highway geometries should be given that include access points near the project.  Sight distance in both directions of all driveway intersections should also be shown on the plans.  The linear footage and width for proposed roads/driveways should be provided.

(e) Elevations, floor plans, and sections of proposed structures showing the proposed location, use, design and height of all structures, key boxes, and fire department connections. Plans shall also show any proposed division of buildings into units of separate occupancy and location of drives and access thereto.

(h) The location and layout of any off-street parking or loading areas, traffic circulation areas, truck circulation patterns, loading areas, areas for snow storage, bike racks, pedestrian walkways, and fire lanes.

(i) Analysis of traffic impacts, including traffic level of service/capacity analysis for existing and future conditions. Estimated daily and peak hour traffic generation, and an estimate of traffic generation during the peak hour of the adjacent street traffic.  A traffic study may be required in accordance with the standards set forth in Chapter Fourteen of the Colchester Code of Ordinances (Public Works Standards).

(j) Lot area in square feet and acres, and lot coverage calculations including building, overall, and front yard coverage.

(k) The location of all proposed waterlines, valves and hydrants and sewer lines or wells and sewage tanks, fields, lines and/or septic test pit and percolation information.  Information on water fire flows and pressures is also required.

(l) Detailed landscaping plan, including type, size, and location of all materials used and plans for buffer screening and fencing.

(m) Cut sheets for all proposed outdoor lighting within the site including mounting heights and a point by point lighting scheme.

(n) The general location of any free-standing signs.

(o) The location of any outdoor storage for equipment and materials if any, and the location, type and design of all solid waste-related facilities, including dumpsters and recycling bins.

(p) Location and design of all energy distribution facilities, including electrical, gas, and solar energy.

(q) Recreation areas if required.

(r) Preliminary grading, drainage, landscaping and buffering plan.

(s) The extent and amount of cut and fill for all disturbed areas, including before-and-after profiles and cross sections of typical development areas, parking lots and roads, and including an erosion and sedimentation control plan, and proposed locations of sediment sink/setting pond and interceptor swales.

(t) Detailed plans of retaining walls, steps, ramps, paving, and drainage structures.

(u) Estimate of all earthwork, including the quantity of any material to be imported to or removed from the site or a statement that no material is to be removed or imported.

(v) Proposed stormwater management system, including (as applicable) location, supporting design data and copies of computations used as a basis for the design capacities and performance of stormwater management facilities.

 (w) The location of all existing and proposed site improvements, including drains, culverts, retaining walls and fences.

(x) Finished grades of walls, pavements, and storm drains.

(y) Proposed streets and lots within the subdivision names and numbered in numerical order within blocks in accordance with Chapter 17 of the Colchester Code of Ordinances.

(z) Final Plat Supporting Documents

(1)            A copy of all proposed deeds, agreements, or other documents which convey or relate to the use of a privately owned street or right-of-way including a completed contract between the land owner and the Town regarding the number of lots or dwelling units to be served by the proposed right-of-way or private street and the responsibility for the roadway maintenance.

(2)            Copies of proposed deeds, agreements or other documents showing the manner in which open space including park and recreational areas and school site areas, are to be dedicated, reserved and maintained and a certificate of the Town Attorney that these documents are satisfactory.

(3)            A copy of such covenants or deed restrictions as are intended to cover all or part of the tract.

(4)            A prospectus describing the management organization if the DRB requires the creation of an owners’ association or management organization.

 3. Other: Any other information or data that the Administrative Officer or DRB shall require for a full assessment of the project pursuant to this article.  The Administrative Officer shall have the authority to, when reasonable, waive any application requirements for final plat approval. Any such waiver may be exercised in the event any such requirements are:

(a) found not to be requisite in the interest of public health, safety, or general welfare or;

(b) inappropriate to a particular site plan because of the particular character or limited nature of a new development or change in use or conditions peculiar to a site.

 

F. Development Review Board Action.

1. The DRB shall review the subdivision application in accordance with 24 V.S.A. Section 4464. The DRB shall review the application against the subdivision criteria in this Article 9 and any other applicable standards in these Regulations. If the DRB determines that the subdivision application and supporting material fail to demonstrate compliance with applicable standards, it shall deny the subdivision. However, if it further determines that with a minor modification or modifications the subdivision and supporting material would comply with applicable standards, the DRB may, in its discretion, impose a condition or conditions requiring such modification or modifications and approve the site plan. For the purpose of this section, a minor modification is one that leaves no part of its implementation to the discretion of the applicant.

2. Upon approval, a copy of the DRB’s findings of fact and order shall be sent to the applicant and recorded in the Town Clerk's office.

3. Upon approval, the applicant shall provide a copy of the approved subdivision plans in digital format meeting the Town of Colchester “Digital Format Requirements” in Appendix G. 

 

G. Waiver of Application Requirements. The Administrative Officer shall have the authority to, when reasonable, waive any application requirements for subdivision approval. Any such waiver may be exercised in the event any such requirements are 1) found not to be requisite in the interest of public health, safety, or general welfare or 2) inappropriate to a particular site plan because of the particular character or limited nature of a new development or change in use or conditions peculiar to a site or 3) will cause extraordinary and unnecessary hardship.

 

H. Expiration of Approval.

1. For minor subdivisions, the subdivider shall submit a final plat application within one year after the meeting on the sketch plan or the applicant shall resubmit the sketch plan prior to submitting the final plat application.

2. For major subdivisions, the subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat application within one year after the meeting on the sketch plan or the applicant shall resubmit the sketch plan prior to submitting the preliminary plat application.

3. For major subdivisions, the subdivider shall submit a final plat application within one year after approval of the preliminary plat application or the preliminary plat application shall become null and void.  

4.  Development Review Board final plat approval shall expire if any of the following circumstances occur:

a.  if such approved plat is not duly recorded in mylar form with the office of the Town Clerk within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the findings of fact and order signature.  Such plat shall be prepared by a licensed surveyor and shall comply with the requirements of the Vermont Statutes Annotated, as presently enacted or as hereinafter from time-to-time amended.  Plats shall be in mylar form with overall dimensions of 18” by 24” with two inches (2") outside of the borderlines on the left side for binding and a one-inch (1") margin outside the border along the remaining sides.  Such Mylar shall incorporate the following title block:

“Approved by Resolution of the Development Review Board of the Town of Colchester, Vermont on the _____ day of ___________________, 20_____, subject to the requirements and conditions of said Resolution.  Signed this ________day of ________________, 20_____, by ____________________, Chairman or Clerk.”

b. if the approved project is a major subdivision and it is not substantially constructed within one (1) year of the date of the findings of fact and order signature, said approval shall become null and void.  The Board may consider at the time of final plat application, a phased completion schedule not to exceed ten (10) years provided public improvements are proposed to be completed in a timely manner. 

 

I. Modifications.  Any modification to an approved final plat plan requires an application for amendment.  The DRB may require that the subdivider return to the sketch or preliminary plat stage of the approval process.  Minor amendments may be processed as a final plat application. No changes, erasures, modifications, or revision shall be made on any subdivision plat after approval has been given by the DRB and endorsed in writing on the plat, unless said plat is first resubmitted to the Board and the Board approves such modification.

 

J. Technical or Consultant Review. The DRB may require a subdivider to pay the costs and fees of an independent technical or legal review of the application, and its supporting documents, including required conveyancing and organizational documents. The DRB may table review of the application, or may withhold execution of the final approved plat pending receipt of an independent technical review.

 

K. Escrow Requirements. Prior to issuance of any permits, the subdivider shall furnish the Town with a suitable escrow account or letter of credit to guarantee the completion of all required landscaping, site restoration, and public improvements.  To this end, the subdivider shall also complete a Public Improvement Agreement acceptable to the Town Attorney prior to issuance of any permits.   The amount of such guarantee shall be 110% of the cost of the improvements as listed in the Public Improvement Agreement and approved by the Town Engineer.    The escrow account or letter of credit shall be sufficient to guarantee the improvements for a period of two (2) years following completion or acceptance of street, whichever is later.  In the case of landscaping, a Landscape Agreement shall be signed and the escrow account or letter of credit shall be 110% of the cost of landscaping and shall be sufficient to guarantee all planting for a period of two (2) years in accordance with Section 10.04 herein.  Once the landscaping or public improvements are installed or accepted, the amount bonded for may be reduced to 10% of the original amount. 

 

L. Certificate of Title.  The final plat application for a minor or major subdivision, shall be accompanied by a Certificate of Title showing the clarity of suitable ownership of all property and easements to be dedicated or acquired by the Town, and said Certificate of Title shall be approved by the Town Attorney.  The Town Attorney shall require that the applicant shed liens or other encumbrances prior to acceptance by the Town.  Copies of all proposed deeds conveying property, easements, offers of dedication, or other assets to the Town shall be approved by the Town Attorney prior to issuance of any permits; all fees associated with such approval shall be paid by the applicant.  All such deeds must be accepted or refused by the Town prior to the release of any escrows or letters of credit or sections thereof.

 

M. Design Standards.  All required improvements shall be designed and installed in accordance with Chapter Fourteen of the Colchester Code of Ordinances (Public Works Standards) and Chapter Seven Colchester Code of Ordinances (Fire), these Regulations, and other applicable Town regulations and standards.

 

Where the Director of Public Works concludes that conditions make it necessary or preferable to diverge from the Town’s standards and makes such a request to the Development Review Board, but not in any other circumstances, the DRB may approve a design, installation, or location of public improvements that does not meet the applicable standards of Chapter Fourteen of the Colchester Code of Ordinances  (Public Works Standards), Chapter 10 of the Colchester Code of Ordinances (Sewers), Chapter Fourteen of the Colchester Code of Ordinances.   Such requested modification(s) may or may not meet Chapter Fourteen of the Colchester Code of Ordinances (Public Works Standards).

 

N. Improvements to be Dedicated to the Town.  If it is determined upon inspection of the improvements that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with plans and specifications filed by the subdivider, the inspector shall report on his/her findings to the Administrative Officer.  The Administrative Officer shall then notify the subdivider, and if necessary, the bank or bonding company, and take all necessary steps to preserve the Town's rights under the bond, escrow or letter of credit.  The applicant shall be required to maintain all improvements and provide for snow removal on streets and sidewalks until acceptance of said improvements by the Town of Colchester. 

              

 

9.05 Review Standards.  The following general criteria and standards shall be used by the DRB in reviewing applications for subdivision approval.  

 

A. Required Improvement List.  The following are required improvements: Monuments; lot markers; landscaping; water supply infrastructure as specified in Chapter Eight of the Colchester Code of Ordinance and / or the Chapter Fourteen of the Colchester Code of Ordinances  (Public Works Standards) and / or septic and / or sewage infrastructure as specified in Chapter Eight of the Colchester Code of Ordinance and / or Chapter Fourteen of the Colchester Code of Ordinances and / or Chapter 10 of the Colchester Code of Ordinance; roadways and associated improvements, such as but not limited to signage, as specified in Chapter Fourteen of the Colchester Code of Ordinances; street trees as specified in Chapter Fourteen of the Colchester Code of Ordinances; sidewalks and paths as specified in Chapter Fourteen of the Colchester Code of Ordinances; street lighting as specified in Chapter Fourteen of the Colchester Code of Ordinances; stormwater infrastructure as specified in Chapter Fourteen of the Colchester Code of Ordinances; fire hydrants as specified in Chapter Fourteen of the Colchester Code of Ordinances; other capital improvements as required by the Board.

 

B. Suitability of the Land. The DRB shall not approve an application if development is subject to adverse physical limitations which would be harmful to the safety, health and general welfare of the surrounding adjacent areas unless adequate methods to solve the physical limitations are established.  Land subject to periodic flooding, poor drainage, inadequate capability to withstand structures including streets, utilities and buildings, or other hazardous conditions shall not ordinarily be developed or subdivided.  The project shall not have an undue adverse effect on a National Register or National Register eligible historic site or a rare and irreplaceable natural area as defined by the Vermont Nongame and Natural Heritage Program.

 

C. Lot Layout. Lots shall be laid out in such a way that they can be developed in full compliance for lot size, frontage, density and all other requirements of the Development Regulations and giving consideration to topography, soils and drainage conditions.  Lot size, frontage, and buffer requirements may be waived or modified by the DRB for a planned unit development as defined herein.  Corner lots shall be of sufficient dimensions so that any structure placed thereon shall conform to the building setback line of each street.  Where possible the DRB shall encourage:

1.     Maintaining contiguous tracts of open land with adjoining parcels;

2.     Connections with and extend planned per the Official Map and  existing road, sidewalk, path, and utility corridors;

3.     Side lot lines shall generally form right angles to the road; and

4.     Irregularly shaped lots shall not be created unless warranted by topography, surface waters, or to avoid fragmentation of significant natural or cultural features.

 

D. Building Envelopes. The Development Review Board may require the designation of building envelopes that limit the location of buildings, structures and parking areas to one or more portions of a subdivided lot.  The size and shape of each building envelope shall be established in accordance with these regulations.  The DRB may also require the identification of specific building footprints, if, in its judgment, such information is needed to determine conformance with these regulations.

 

E. Monuments and Lot Corner Markers. Permanent right-of-way monuments shall be set at all street intersections, and at all angles and curves or other critical points in street lines as will enable a land surveyor to correctly stake out any lot in the subdivision.  Each monument shall be a precast concrete post four inches by four inches (4" x 4") at the top by forty-eight inches (48”) long.  The top shall have a center mark which shall be the point of reference.  The monuments shall be set in place after all other street improvements are completed.  Lot corner markers shall be set at corners and angle points of all lots, plots, or parcels, and located in the ground to finished grade.

 

F. Energy Conservation. In order to conserve energy, all subdivisions should use the least areas of roadway and the least length of sewer, water and utility lines within environmentally and economically sound limits.  Buildings should be sited so as to take advantage of southeast, south, and southwest orientations where possible.  Landscaping should be effectively used for providing wind barriers and reducing heat loss and heat gain.  Cluster development (planned unit development) should be encouraged wherever feasible and in accordance with the Town Plan.

 

G. Water. The subdivider shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Development Review Board that adequate potable water exists on or off site to serve the proposed subdivision and:

1.     The subdivider shall be responsible for installing water supply and/or distribution facilities in accordance with Chapter Eight of the Colchester Code of Ordinances, Chapter Fourteen of the Colchester Code of Ordinances  (Public Works Standards),  and standards of the Fire District or Water District having jurisdiction;

2.     Where connection to a pre-existing water system is proposed, the subdivider shall provide evidence as to the adequacy of the system, and supporting legal documentation concerning access, available capacity, and water quality; and

3.     Source protection areas shall be designated on final plat plans.

 

H. Sewage Disposal. The subdivider shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Development Review Board that wastewater collection and disposal capacity exist on or off site to serve the proposed subdivision.

1. Municipal Sewage.  For properties proposed to be serviced by municipal sewage, the subdivider shall be responsible for installing sewage infrastructure and / or facilities in accordance with Chapter Eight of the Colchester Code of Ordinances, Chapter Fourteen of the Colchester Code of Ordinances (Public Works Standards), and Chapter 10 of the Colchester Code of Ordinances.  Within designated sewer service areas, the subdivider may be required to provide improvements to facilitate future development.  The subdivider shall be required to provide such pumping and other facilities as may be necessary. 

2. On-Site Septic. The subdivider shall be responsible for installing septic facilities in accordance with Chapter Eight of the Colchester Code of Ordinances.

 

I. Site Preservation and Landscaping. The development shall have adequate landscaping, screening and setbacks in regard to adjacent properties in accordance with Section 10.04 herein.

1. Existing Features. The preservation of site amenities, such as trees, brooks or drainage-ways, historic sites, and other features that are an asset to the site and/or community, shall be preserved insofar as possible through harmonious design and appropriate construction methods.  Floodplains District and Watercourse Protection District, as defined herein, and all other significant natural features shall be delineated and clearly marked with stakes and flagging or temporarily fenced before and during the excavation and construction phases of a subdivision.  These lands shall not be disturbed during construction.

2. Natural Cover. Land shall be subdivided and improved in reasonable conformity to existing topography in order to minimize grading, cut and fill, and retain, insofar as possible, the natural contours, limit storm water runoff, and conserve the natural cover and soil.  No topsoil, sand or gravel shall be removed from the subdivision for any other purpose than to meet construction needs of that particular subdivision.

3. Landscaping.  Subdivisions shall be adequately screened from view of adjacent roads and neighborhoods.  A sufficient mixture of deciduous and coniferous trees shall be provided.

 

J. Streets. Roadways and associated improvements, such as but not limited to signage, shall be required to service subdivisions as specified in Chapters Seven (Fire) and  Fourteen (Public Works Standards)  of the Colchester Code of Ordinances  and Official Map.  Roadways shall include but shall not be limited to: street trees, sidewalks, paths, street lighting, stormwater infrastructure, fire hydrants, etc.

1. Arrangement - The arrangement of streets in the subdivision shall provide for the continuation of streets of adjoining subdivisions and for proper projection of streets through adjoining properties which are not yet subdivided, in order to make possible necessary fire protection, movement of traffic and construction or extension presently or when later required, of needed utilities and public services such as sewers, water and drainage facilities. To this end, the use of a grid or block pattern for streets is encouraged.  Streets in mixed-use growth centers should encourage an emphasis on pedestrian and bicycle traffic while providing accommodation for vehicular traffic.  Bicycle paths may connect mixed-use growth centers with other neighboring areas.  Pedestrian protection devices as provided by roadway geometry, signage, pavement markings, etc., should be encouraged to the extent permissible under the Colchester Code of Ordinances, Chapter 14, or as otherwise approved by the Department of Public Works.

2. Topography - Streets shall be logically related to the topography so as to produce usable lots, reasonable grades, and safe intersections in appropriate relation to the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets.  Adequate provisions shall be made to control the drainage of each street by an adequate storm water system, subject to the approval of the Town Engineer.

3. Street Names – All streets shall be named in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17 of the Colchester Code of Ordinances. The subdivider may recommend proposed names to the Development Review Board.  The DRB, in consultation with the designated E911 coordinator, shall designate a name for a proposed road as part of its approval process. Streets shall be identified by the name on the proposed plat.

3. Design and layout of cul-de-sacs shall provide for possible future streets and extensions to other subdivisions or other properties not yet subdivided. Where provisions are made for the continuation of a street beyond the cul-de-sac for future road development, the land outside the normal street right-of-way may revert to the abutting property owners at such time as the street is continued beyond the cul-de-sac.

4. Where a private drive or road is proposed that has the potential to serve more than four units, provisions shall be made to accommodate for appropriate right-of-way and the drive or road so designed so as to facilitate the drive/road conversion to the appropriate public road standards as codified in Chapter Fourteen of the Colchester Code of Ordinances.

5. Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow road (below standards set herein) or when the Official Map or Municipal Plan indicates plans for realignment or widening of a road that would require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the subdivider may be required to show areas for widening or realigning such roads on the Plat, marked "Reserved for Road Realignment (or Widening) Purposes".  It shall be mandatory to indicate such reservation on the Plat when a proposed widening or realignment is shown on the Official Map.  Land reserved for such purposes shall not be counted in satisfying setback or yard or area requirements herein but shall be included to satisfy density requirements.

6. All proposed layouts and designs shall provide safe access to and for the traveling public at all times.           

7. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial or collector street, the DRB may require marginal access streets (street parallel to arterial or collector street providing access to adjacent lots), reverse frontage (that is frontage on a street other than the existing or proposed arterial or collector street) with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property line, or such other treatments as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.

8. Where a tract is subdivided into lots at least twice as large as the minimum size required in the zoning district in which a subdivision is located, the DRB may require that streets and lots be laid out so to permit future development in accordance with the requirements contained in these Regulations.

9. The approval of the Subdivision Plat shall not be deemed to constitute or be evidence of any acceptance by the Town of any street, easement, offer of dedication, recreation area, or open space shown on such Subdivision Plat.

10. The number of dwelling units served by a project sharing a common single access to a public street or road shall not exceed fifty (50) units.

11.  In no case shall a new public road be permitted where its principal access is from a private road unless that private road is upgraded to a public road in conformance with the Town of Colchester Code of Ordinance Chapter 14, Public Works Specifications and Standards roadway design standards as amended from time to time and duly accepted by the Colchester Selectboard.

 

K. Pedestrian Access. Permanent Pedestrian easements, up to twenty feet (20’) in width, may be required in order to facilitate pedestrian circulation within the subdivision, access to adjoining neighborhoods, public property, or community focal points such, but not limited to: parks, schools, shopping centers, centers of employment, and community recreation facilities, etc.

 

L. Utilities. All utilities shall be underground.  The subdivider shall coordinate subdivision design with the utility companies to insure adequate and suitable areas for underground installation, both for the proposed subdivision and areas adjacent to the subdivision.  Easements of sufficient width shall be provided in locations acceptable to the Town Engineer, so as to serve both the proposed subdivision and existing and anticipated development outside the subdivision.

 

M. Traffic. The development shall not cause unreasonable highway congestion or unsafe conditions with respect to use of the highways existing or proposed.  A traffic impact study may be required of the project in compliance with Chapter 14 of the Colchester Code of Ordinances at the request of the Town Engineer.

 

N. Stormwater & Erosion Control. All development shall be in conformance with Chapter Fourteen of the Colchester Code of Ordinances

 

O. Excavation and Grading. All excavating and filling required for construction of public improvements shall be as specified within Chapter Fourteen of the Colchester Code of Ordinances (Public Works Standards). No stumps, wood, roots, other fibrous materials or refuse shall be used as fill.  The DRB may require the developer to submit evidence of boring and/or other soil investigations to determine the depth, composition and stability of the subgrade of the project area.

 

P. Outdoor Lighting. Illumination of areas such as streets, sidewalks, private ways, parking areas, loading and unloading areas, principal entryways and/or other locations, shall be provided in accordance with Section 10.02 herein and Chapter Fourteen of the Colchester Code of Ordinances.  All proposed street lights within public rights-of-way shall be constructed so as to become the property of the Town upon acceptance of the street by the Colchester Selectboard.

 

Q. Municipal Facilities & Recreation Areas. Land shall be set aside for municipal and recreational purposes as deemed necessary by the DRB for compliance with the planned unit development regulations herein as well as compliance with the Official Map as noted in Section 2.02 herein.

 

R. Governmental Services.  The development shall provide for efficiency of allocation and distribution of street and public facility installation, construction, and maintenance.  The project shall not place an unreasonable burden on the ability of the municipality to provide municipal or governmental services, including educational services, and facilities. To this extent, cul de sacs are discouraged and connections to existing or planned development is required where-ever feasible.

 

S. Aesthetics.  The development shall not have an undue adverse effect on scenic or natural beauty of the area and aesthetics. The development shall be suitable for its surroundings as defined by the locations from which it can be viewed and the potential impact on open space.  The development shall not be out of character with its surroundings.  The development shall not significantly diminish the scenic qualities of the area.

 

T. Town Plan. Proposed subdivisions shall conform to the Town Plan and all bylaws of the Town herein.  The DRB may require reasonable modification or appropriate phasing of the proposed subdivision.

 

U. Owners’ Association.  Where applicable, the DRB may require the creation of a suitable owners’ association to manage and maintain private infrastructure, including, but not limited to, private roads and streets, shared drinking water, shared wastewater, shared stormwater, common area maintenance, and other obligations to be shared amongst the lot owners; such mechanism shall be included in the deeds to the affected properties.  All proposed owners’ association documents must meet the approval of the Town Attorney. 

 

 

9.06 Integration of Procedures

 

A. General. There may be applications where the particular circumstances of a proposed development require compliance with other procedures in these regulations, such as site plan permit or conditional use review. In such cases, the DRB shall integrate subdivision review as required by this article with the other procedural and/or submission requirements per 24 V.S.A. Section 4462. To the extent that subdivision review criteria may be duplicative with other review criteria such as site plan criteria, the criteria may be cross-referrenced.  Such integration of procedures may require, upon mutual written consent of the DRB and the applicant, reasonable modification of the time schedules otherwise stated in this article or in said related regulations or requirements.

 

 

9.07 Planned Unit Development

 

A. Purpose. In accordance with the provisions of 24 V.S.A., Sec. 4417 Planned Unit Developments are designated by these Regulations to enable and encourage flexibility of design and development of land as a single entity for a variety of uses; the plan of which does not correspond to minimum dimensional requirements of the zoning district being considered.  Development shall be designed in such a manner as to promote the most appropriate use of land, to preserve and maintain agricultural and forestry lands, to facilitate the adequate and economical provisions of streets and utilities, to encourage efficient construction, and to preserve the natural and scenic qualities of the open lands of the Town.

 

B. Review and Approvals.  Planned Unit Development proposals requiring any extensions of public infrastructure and/or containing five or more lots/units shall be reviewed and evaluated as major subdivisions.  In addition, any dimensional modifications of the applicable Development Regulations under consideration as Planned Unit Developments shall be evaluated in accordance with the following general and specific standards herein.

 

C. General Standards.

1. A Planned Unit Development (PUD) may include commercial and industrial uses, or residential and commercial uses, but shall not combine residential and non-compatible uses such as industrial uses.  A Planned Unit Development may include a Planned Residential Development component.

2. A Planned Residential Development is a PUD exclusively for residential development.

3. Minimum total area of development shall be one and one-half acres. 

4. The overall density allowable for the proposal shall be the same as for the land in the underlying district.  Additional residential units achieved through density bonuses and transfer of development rights shall be exempt from this provision

5. The proposal shall be an effective and unified treatment of the development possibilities on the project site, and the proposed development plan shall make appropriate provision for the preservation of streams and stream banks, steep slopes, Class II and III wetlands, floodplains, forested areas, agricultural land, and unique, natural and manmade features.

6. The proposal shall be consistent with the Town’s Municipal Plan and all applicable Bylaws, Regulations, and Ordinances.

7. The proposal shall provide for the preservation of open space and/or agricultural, forestry, natural resource, or habitat lands. 

8. Buffer strip - The DRB shall require provision of a buffer zone feet at the perimeter of the Planned Unit Development within Residential Districts  in accordance with Table 9.07D(2)(a) excepting front yards.  The buffer zone must be kept free of buildings and structures and must be landscaped, screened, or protected by natural features so that adverse effects on surrounding areas are minimized.  All road and driveway connections shall be located so as to be outside the buffer, however a singular crossing for a road, driveway, or other utility access is allowed without the need for a PUD Buffer amendment.  Multiple buffer crossings or other road/drive buffer reductions may be considered by the DRB under these standards The presence of existing structures within a proposed PUD buffer does not count as an intrusion requiring the applicant request a modification of the buffer.  Utility and Wastewater systems are considered intrusions into the buffer for which a modification must be requested.  Recreational paths and amenities as well as walls and fencing may be located within the buffer without counting as an intrusion.

9. A plan shall be submitted to the Development Review Board (DRB) with a preliminary subdivision plat application showing the location, height and space of buildings, open spaces and their landscaping, streets, driveways and off‑street parking spaces and all other physical features accompanied by a statement setting forth the nature of all proposed modifications of the area and dimensional requirements of the applicable Development Regulations.

 

D. Specific Standards.

1. In a PUD the Development Review Board may, at its discretion, amend the requirements of the Dimensional Standards listed in Table A-2 provided the DRB determines that the request is in accordance with Table 9.7D(1)(a) below:

 

Table 9.07D(1)(a)

Requirement

How should a request for alteration be evaluated?

PUD Buffer

The applicant should show the project meets the purpose of planned unit developments as stated herein on projects over three acres.

Lot Coverage

Lot coverage may be increased by up to an additional 20% if the additional impervious area is designed to retain 90 % of the one year storm or the first inch of rainfall through green infrastructure.

Public Road Frontage

For projects over three acres, the applicant should show that  the project meets the purpose of planned unit developments as stated herein and that the project will result in the consolidation of curb cuts, sharing of access routes, and minimizing land disturbance.  Frontage may be completely waived.

Lot Size

For projects over three acres, the applicant should show that the project meets the purpose of planned unit development as stated herein.  Minimum lot size shall not be less than 10,000 sq. ft. except for Footprint Lots as defined herein.

Internal Setbacks

The applicant should show that the project meets the purpose of planned unit developments as stated herein for lots over three acres.  Elevations of the proposed buildings should be provided that demonstrate the project’s ability to blend with or improve the character of the area. Interior front yard setbacks may be reduced if the DRB determines such waivers will improve pedestrian circulation.

 

2. In a PUD the Development Review Board may, at its discretion, permit reductions of the width of the buffer strip as set forth herein. In doing so the DRB shall find that the proposed landscaping and/or fencing to be provided in accordance with the table below will offer equivalent screening of the noise, light, and visual impacts of the new development.  Supplemental plantings are not to be imposed unless a reduction in buffer is requested. The following conditions shall govern any modification of the PUD Buffer:

 

Table 9.07D(2)(a): PUD Buffer Requirements

Parent Project Site

Buffer Requirement

0 to 3 acres R1, R2, R3, MHP, & AMU Districts

Up to 50 feet with no less than a ten (10) foot wide strip landscaped with dense evergreen trees or solid fencing and other plantings as a screen.

3+ to 10 acres R1, R2, R3, MHP, R5, & AMU Districts

Up to 50 feet with no less than 20 feet landscaped with trees as a screen.

10 + acres R1, R2, R3, MHP, & AMU Districts

Up to 50 feet with no less than 30 feet landscaped with trees as a screen.

10 + acres R5, R10, & AGR Districts

Up to 100 feet with no less than 50 feet landscaped with trees as a screen.

 

3. Lot size and dimensional requirements:

a. Within a PUD the DRB may waive the minimum lot sizes requirements if the project is consistent with the Town’s Municipal Plan and Chapters Seven and Eight of the Colchester Code of Ordinances.

b. A lot less than 10,000 sq. ft. shall only be allowed as a footprint lot as defined herein.

c. Footprint lots shall be adequately sized so as to contain a building and all expected appurtenances such as stairs, patios, egress windows, bulkheads, decks, HVAC units, etc.

d. A footprint lot may only bisect a building where there is a clear structural separation such as a fire wall as provided for in Chapter Four of the Colchester Code of Ordinances and the State of Vermont Fire & Building Safety Code, and which meets all applicable Town and State building code standards.

e. Footprint lots shall not extend more than two feet beyond the building.

4. Open Space. Open space or common land shall be set aside and made a part of any PUD subject to the below listed specific requirements:

a. The DRB shall require a portion of the development parcel to be designated as open space except for those properties under three acres or five units in size, or properties located within the GD3, COM, BD, and IND districts, as these districts are currently designated for dense commercial or mixed use.  For projects 3-5 acres, up to 25% of the site may be required. For projects over 5 acres but less than 50 acres, a minimum of 25% of the site will be required to be open space. For sites over 50 acres, the DRB may reduce the required open space to less than 25% of the site but no less than 15% of the site.

b. Open space land may, at the discretion of the DRB, be utilized fully or partially as informal recreational areas. Active recreational amenities may be located on an open space lot but shall not count toward the required open space area. In GD Districts structured recreational areas such as parks are encouraged.  In all other districts, the majority of the open space should be open and devoid of significant structural improvements.

c. In delineating proposed open space, applicants shall be guided by the Colchester Open Space Plan, as amended from time to time, the Municipal Plan, and the standards herein.  Wherever feasible, the open space shall be contiguous to other open space on adjacent lots and contain natural resources as identified in the Open Space Plan. All unbuildable areas (surface waters, floodplains, wetlands and steep slopes) should be included in the designated open space.   Open space should adjoin the largest practicable number of lots or units within the development and pedestrian access to the open space lot shall be provided for use by all lots or units within the development.  No open space lot shall have a length to width ratio of greater than 4:1 or be less than 60 feet in width.  Open space within a PUD buffer, not in common ownership, shall not count toward the open space area.

 d. Plans for development of recreational areas must be presented simultaneously with the presentation of all plans for development.

e. Development of the open space will either be completed prior to the conveyance of lots, units, or dwelling units or an escrow or performance bond shall be posted with the Town to insure completion of the development of the open space within a period of time stipulated by the DRB.

f. Open Space and Recreational Amenities should generally be placed on its own lot and shall always be collectively owned and accessible to the lot and/or unit owners of the project.  The cost and responsibility of maintaining recreational amenities or open space shall be borne by a community association such as a homeowners’ association.  The applicant shall, at the time of preliminary plat application, provide draft legal documents for review and approval by the Town’s Attorney providing for the upkeep of amenities or open space in perpetuity by a homeowners’ association or similar association.  Such mechanisms may include but shall not be limited to: dedication of development rights, conservation easements, homeowner’s associations, and restrictive covenants or other appropriate grants or restrictions. Further subdivision of residual land shall be prohibited.

g. Open space for purposes of protecting natural or archaeological resources or for agricultural or forestry purposes shall be given preference over open space preserved for purposes of recreational or other uses.

5. Recreational Amenities. Informal recreation amenities as defined by this ordinance shall be provided for projects resulting in five or more new units or lots with sites larger than 3 acres (except for non-residential projects). Any project involving 50 or more new units shall be required to provide an active recreational amenity as defined by this ordinance.

6. Varied types of dwellings (single, duplex, and multifamily) attached and detached are encouraged within a PUD.  Varied yet complementary types of architectural style, construction, lot sizes, building material, and exterior colors are strongly encouraged. Identical replication of structures, textures and color is strongly discouraged.

7. Congregate Housing Density Bonuses.  The DRB may grant density bonuses for PUDs which provide “Congregate Housing”, as defined herein.  Within these limits maximum density will be determined by the DRB after review of a density plan prepared by the applicant in accordance with other sections of this article. The density plan shall be based on single family units not duplexes.  To qualify for the density bonus a development must meet the following criteria:      

a. The development must constitute “Congregate Housing”, as defined in Article 12 of this Development Regulation.  This definition includes the requirement that at least 80 percent of all occupied units in such a project must be occupied by persons aged 55 or older (the 80% requirement applies to occupants, not owners): and no person under 19 years of age shall reside in any unit for more than ninety (90) days in any calendar year, except that in the event of a person(s) under 19 years of age who is (are) disabled and is (are) dependent upon the qualified occupant (at least 55 years old), said dependent person shall be permitted to reside in the unit on a permanent basis.

b. Executed declaration of covenants and restrictions insuring compliance with the definitional requirements of “Congregate Housing” as set forth herein and referencing the requirements of an executed “Congregate Housing Compliance Agreement” as set forth herein under Section 9.01D(5)(c) shall be provided to the DRB for review, approval and execution prior to Final Plat Approval.  Language shall be included in all covenants prohibiting changes to said document without prior written approval from the DRB.

c. The developer shall submit an executed “Congregate Housing Compliance Agreement” to the DRB insuring the provision for and continued maintenance of significant facilities and services as outlined herein.

(1)  Significant facilities and services specifically designed to meet the physical or social needs of older persons may include, but are not limited to:

·       Social and recreational programs designed for persons over the age of 55 years;

·       Educational programs designed to serve the interests of persons over the age of 55 years;

·       Property maintenance and referral services;

·       Information and counseling about services for persons over the age of 55 years;

·       Emergency and preventative health care services;

·       Accommodations for public and private transportation services within the community and to social services, shops and so forth;

·       Dining facilities for persons over the age of 55 years and other services designed to encourage residents to use the services available to them.

(2)  In addition to meeting the 80 percent requirement in Section (a) above, and providing significant facilities and services in conjunction with congregate housing, the developer, its assigns and successors, and eventually the development, must publish and adhere to policies and procedures that demonstrate an intent to provide housing for people aged 55 and older. Examples of such documents include, but are not limited to:

·       Description of development in media and other communications;

·       Marketing materials and other sales representations;

·       Age-verification procedures;

·       Covenants or lease provisions;

·       Written rules and regulations;

·       Actual practices in enforcing the relevant lease provisions or rules and regulations.

(3)  All documents supporting these criteria shall be submitted to the DRB for review and approval prior to Final Plat approval. The “Congregate Housing Compliance Agreement” shall be referenced in the executed declaration of covenants and restrictions required herein under Section 9.01D (5) (b).

d.     Minimum acreage, open space and other PUD requirements are met.

e.      A maximum of two (2) bedrooms per unit.

f.      Detached Congregate Housing PUD Density Bonuses. The DRB may consider and approve detached single family/duplex congregate housing with density up to twice that otherwise allowed in R-1, R-2, R-3, GD-1, GD-2, GD-3, and GD-4 Districts as a permitted use subject to PUD standards and review. Maximum density will be determined by the DRB after review of a density plan prepared by the applicant in accordance with other sections of this article. The density plan shall be based on single family units not duplex or multi-family units.  Within these limits, maximum density will be determined by the DRB after review of a density plan prepared by the applicant in accordance with other sections of this article. The density plan shall be based on single family units not duplexes.

g.     Multi-Family Housing for the Elderly as a PUD Density Bonuses. The Development Review Board may consider and approve multi-family housing for the elderly with density greater than three and up to four times that otherwise allowed in GD-1, GD-2, GD-3, or GD-4 Districts as a permitted use subject to PUD standards and review; where, in addition to the above criteria noted in Section 9.07D(7)(a-e), the project is served by municipal sewer, municipal water and by public transportation or other equivalent transportation alternatives to be approved by Staff. Maximum density will be determined by the DRB after review of a density plan prepared by the applicant in accordance with other sections of this article. The density plan shall be based on single family units not duplex or multi-family units.

ARTICLE 10: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

 

10.01 Off Street Parking, Loading, & Circulation

            10.02 Outdoor Illumination

10.03 Outside Storage & Display

10.04 Landscaping, Screening, and Street Trees

10.05 Utility Cabinets and Similar Structures

10.06 Trash Containers

10.07 Numbering Systems

10.08 Solar Collectors

10.09 Wind Turbines

10.10 Telecommunications Towers & Commercial Satellite Dishes

            10.11 Satellite Dishes Other than Commercial Satellite Dishes.

10.12 Bus Shelters

10.13 Home Occupations & Businesses

10.14 Seasonal Dwelling Unit Conversion

10.15 Change of Occupancy

 

 

10.01 Off Street Parking, Loading, and Circulation

 

A. Purpose. In order to minimize traffic congestion, air pollution, and the risk of motor vehicle and pedestrian accidents, as well as to promote other elements of sound community planning, parking, loading spaces, circulation, and access shall be required of all structures and land uses. Parking spaces, aisles, and circulation shall be provided and kept available as an accessory use to all permitted and conditional uses of structures, lots, and land in amounts not less than those specified in Section O. The requirements of this section shall apply under the following circumstances:

1. All new structures erected for use on a property.

2. Any structure which is hereafter altered or enlarged.

3. All new uses of a property.

4. Any use of a property which is hereafter altered or enlarged.

5. The property is located outside of the General Development Three District.

 

B. Location of Off Street Parking, Loading, and Vehicle Entrances.

1.     Except as provided in Section F, off street parking and loading that is required for a use or uses under this section shall be located entirely on the property on which the use or uses exist. The Development Review Board may approve required off street parking that is located off the property on which a use or uses exist, according to Section E.

2.     The location, aisle widths, and layout of interior drives shall provide for efficient interior circulation and the safety of pedestrians and vehicles.

3.     The location of parking areas and loading docks shall prevent conflicts with entering and exiting traffic onto a public street and prevent conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians. The distance between access points and parking areas shall be adequate to minimize blockage and to prevent back-ups onto the public street.

4.     All loading and unloading shall be provided off-street.  To this end, no commercial or industrial use overhead doors, loading or unloading shall be permitted on the front side of properties except as provided herein.  All loading and unloading should occur within the rear or side yard.  Within the Industrial and Business Districts, overhead doors may be permitted on the front of buildings provided that the following are provided:

(a)   the location of the overhead doors is not out of character with the neighborhood

(b)  adequate parking and circulation can be provided

(c)   the unloading and loading area is adequately screened from the street and adjacent properties.

(d)  Overhead doors on the front of buildings shall not be allowed along arterial or collector roads.

5.     The location of parking areas shall not detract from the design of proposed buildings and structures or from the appearance of the existing neighboring buildings, structures and landscape.

6.     Pedestrian Safety. Insofar as practical, pedestrian and bicycle circulation shall be separated from motor vehicle circulation. Safe and convenient pedestrian circulation, including appropriate sidewalks, shall be provided on the site and its approaches. The pedestrian circulation plan shall be designed to minimize conflicts with vehicular traffic.

7.     Vehicle Entrance. Clearly marked ingress and egress for vehicles to the site shall be provided.  No curb cuts or vehicle entrance from any public street shall be constructed or maintained except in conformance with all applicable standards of the Colchester Code of Ordinances Chapter 14 and Vermont Agency of Transportation.  Curb cuts shall generally be limited to one per property or project.

 

C. Layout Requirements for Parking Spaces, Aisles, and Circulation. All parking spaces and maneuvering lanes shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete paving and shall be striped to delineate parking spaces and lanes as per Appendix B excepting marinas, parks, and one or two family dwellings.   If weather conditions preclude paving or striping, a temporary occupancy permit may be issued for a period not to exceed six (6) months.  The layout of parking spaces and aisles shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Internal Landscaping of Parking Areas.

Except for parking spaces accessory to a one-family or two-family dwelling, all off-street parking areas subject to review by the Development Review Board, shall be landscaped with appropriate trees, shrubs, and other plants including ground covers, as approved by the Development

Review Board. The Development Review Board shall consider the adequacy of the proposed landscaping to assure the establishment of a safe, convenient, and attractive parking area and the privacy and comfort of abutting properties.

(a) In all off-street parking areas containing twenty or more parking spaces, at least ten percent of the interior of the parking area shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, and other plants. At least one (1) major deciduous shade tree, whose caliper is equal to or greater than  three (3) inches, shall be provided within each parking area for every three thousand (3,000) square feet of paved area or every ten (10) parking spaces, whichever is greater. The trees shall be spaced evenly throughout the lot interior to provide shade and reduce glare. Overall, there shall be a mix of large canopy tree species.

(b) Planting islands

1. Planting islands shall be provided. Such islands and the landscaping within them shall be designed and arranged in such a way as to define major circulation aisles, entrances, and exits, to channel internal traffic flow, to prevent indiscriminate diagonal movement of vehicles, and to provide relief from the visual monotony and shade-less expanse of a large parking area. All islands shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, grasses, and/or ground covers. Plant materials judged to be inappropriate by the

Development Review Board will not be approved.

2. Islands should be constructed that promote stormwater treatment or a stormwater management plan.  Curbs of such islands shall be constructed of concrete, stone, or bituminous material and shall be designed to facilitate surface drainage and prevent vehicles from overlapping sidewalks and damaging the plants. At the Development Review Board’s discretion, curb-less parking areas and planting islands may be allowed where these specifically provide for stormwater run-off into vegetated areas for treatment.

3. Maintenance and responsibility. All planting shown on an approved site plan shall be maintained by the property owner in a vigorous growing condition throughout the duration of the use. Plants not so maintained shall be replaced with new plants at the beginning of the next immediately following growing season.

4. Snow storage areas must be specified and located in an area that minimizes the potential for erosion and contaminated runoff into any adjacent or nearby surface waters.

(c) Screening shall be provided where headlights from vehicles on site may be visible and project parallel to a public street.

2. Parking areas shall provide convenient access to building entrances and shall minimize conflict between pedestrian and vehicle circulation. 

3. The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, unregistered motor vehicles, commercial trucks, or the repair of vehicles within designated parking spaces is hereby prohibited.

4. The placement of parking within front yards is discouraged.  Except for parking spaces accessory to a one-family or two-family dwelling, no parking shall be permitted within the front yard setback. All parking within the front yard should be screened from the road. At no point should the majority of parking spaces on the site be located within the front yard.  Within the GD1 District, existing parking areas within the front yard may remain if the following conditions are met:

            (a) Parking areas shall not be located within 15 feet of the edge of the right-of-way.

            (b) Suitable landscaping of the parking area shall be provided as herein required in these regulations.

            (c) The extent of existing development is greater than the amount of the lot that is being redeveloped.

5. Connections between adjacent lots are encouraged where feasible to minimize street traffic for short trips.  The Development Review Board should require an applicant to construct a connection to an adjacent lot and / or provide an easement for a future connection.

6. Parking spaces, aisles, and circulation and other associated driveways shall be setback five feet from the property boundaries unless a shared drive or shared parking is proposed.

 

D. Determination of Parking and Loading Spaces.

1. All structures and land uses shall be provided with a sufficient amount of off-street parking to meet the needs of persons employed at or making use of such structures or land uses, and sufficient off-street loading facilities to meet the needs of such structures or land uses, but not less than the minimum standards of Section O.

2. No certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance shall be issued for any structure or land use until the required off-street parking and/or loading spaces have been established. Required off-street parking and/or loading facilities shall be maintained as long as the use of structure exists which the facilities are designed to serve.

3. The following methods shall be used to determine the number of required off-street parking and loading spaces:

(a) The requirement for a single use shall be determined directly from the schedule of such requirements in Section O.

(b) The requirement for a combination use made up of several component uses (e.g., a restaurant and bar; or a retail store combined with an office building or a storage area) shall be determined by establishing the requirement for each component use from the schedule in Section O of such requirements and adding them together.

(c) When the required number of spaces is determined to result in a fraction, it shall be increased to the next highest whole number.

 (d) If the use is not specifically listed in the schedule of such requirements, the requirements shall be the same as for the most similar use listed, as determined by the Administrative Officer.

(e) When the schedule requires the number of spaces to be calculated per employee and employees are on the site in shifts, the number to be used is the number of employees present during the largest shift. In all other cases it shall mean the total number of employees on the site or who will use the site for parking at any one time.

(f) A garage or a carport may be used to meet the requirements of this section. A driveway may only be used to meet the requirements of this section where it serves a one-family or two-family dwelling provided that the parking is not stacked.

(g) Uses which require Development Review Board approval pursuant to Article 8 may be required to provide off-street parking spaces in excess of the requirements of this section Table 10-2.

4. The number of parking spaces on a property shall not exceed 110% of the required number of parking spaces.

5. Properties with a required number of parking spaces exceeding 250 spaces shall be classified large scale parking facilities.  New construction or any change to existing uses that requires additional parking on site will require the applicant employ parking mitigation to reduce the number of surface parking spaces.  Qualifying parking mitigation shall include but not be limited to: structured parking, parking shuttles, employee carpool plans, incentives for employees to use alternative transportation such as bicycles, a mass transportation plan for employees such as purchasing bus or train passes for employees, telecommuting plans for employees, shared parking, and other similar plans.  The Development Review Board shall have the discretion to require parking mitigation for large scale facilities as appropriate taking into consideration stormwater, surface water impairment, the character of the neighborhood, traffic, pedestrian safety, landscaping, and circulation.

 

E. Shared Parking on Two or More Lots.

1. Required parking and loading spaces shall normally be provided upon the same lot as the use or structure to which they are accessory. However, shared parking may be allowed where a parking area or parking space is used jointly for more than one use.

2. Off-street parking spaces required for structures or land uses on two or more adjacent lots may be provided in a single common facility on one or more of said lots provided that the Development Review Board approves a plan meeting the regulations of this sub-section.

3. As a matter of public policy, the Town of Colchester finds that the coordination of off-street parking areas between adjoining nonresidential sites is desirable to allow for traffic circulation between sites rather than having all traffic entering and exiting the existing road system to proceed from site to site. This coordination can take various forms, from a simple paved connection to a more elaborate plan to provide both a connection and shared parking arrangements. Such connection and shared parking are not to be considered a parking waiver, but an agreement between the landowners and the Town of Colchester to effect an overall circulation and parking plan and provide the required number of parking spaces in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section O for the respective use(s). For these reasons, in its review of a site plan, the Development Review Board may, at its discretion, allow for parking spaces to be provided both on and off site, provided that:

(a) The applicant(s) provides an acceptable overall design and an accurate site plan for all properties affected by the shared parking proposal. Such design and plan shall be approved by the Development Review Board. The owner or owners of the property where the off-site parking will be provided are co-applicants to the site plan application.

(b) The lots shall be adjacent. However at its discretion, the

Development Review Board may consider a shared parking plan where the parking serves a Planned Unit Development, college, or hospital use.

(c) The applicant shall record appropriate legal documents to ensure that the off-site parking spaces shall be available for use by the user or users for which the off-site parking spaces are being sought. Such legal documents shall be acceptable to the Town Attorney in form and content. The Town of Colchester shall be a party to the legal document.

(d) Such legal documents shall assure the continued existence of the parking lot or facility to serve said structures or land uses as long as they may exist. Such agreement shall also guarantee that upon termination of such joint use, each subsequent use of the premises will provide off-street parking for its own use in accordance with the requirements of this section and Section O.

(e) The required number of parking spaces is to be provided and spaces that are paved must be striped and must be shown on an approved plan.  The number of required parking spaces may be reduced provided that a reserved parking plan is approved as per Section H.

(f) In no event shall parking and loading spaces for a non-residential use be located in any residential district.

 

F. Shared Parking on a Single Lot. Where the Development Review Board determines that a proposed development consisting of two or more uses located on a single parcel will generate different hourly, daily and/or seasonal parking demand due to the varied hours of operation of each use and frequencies of customer and employee occupancy of available parking spaces, the Development Review Board may approve a site plan utilizing shared parking. The applicant shall provide the parking space count and justification analysis. Approved shared parking requires the present construction of a lesser number of spaces, provided that:

1. The applicant shall provide the Development Review Board with a shared parking plan which shall be based upon the following:

(a) A complete and accurate description of the proposed uses, floor areas devoted to such uses, the number of seats or rooms assigned to each use, and the days and hours of operation of each use for each day of the week and for any seasonal variations in operations.

(b) A complete and accurate description of the number of employees and their respective shifts.

(c) A complete and accurate description of the projected total peak hour or daily period of occupancy by patrons for each proposed use during weekdays, Saturday, Sunday and any seasonal variations in peak hour or period of occupancy.

2. In all cases, at least two-thirds (2/3s) of the number of required parking spaces shall be provided. A reserved parking plan shall be required.  The Administrative Officer may order the property owner to construct the reserved parking spaces if need arises as per Section H.

3. The approval of such shared parking shall be automatically terminated upon the termination of the operation of any of the involved uses.

 

H. Reserved Parking. In the event that an applicant can demonstrate to the

Development Review Board that its present parking needs do not necessitate the construction of the number of parking spaces required herein, the Development

Review Board may approve a site plan requiring the present construction of a lesser number of spaces. In such an event, the site plan shall show sufficient spaces reserved for future parking requirements with the combined number of spaces being not less than that required by Appendix B, Figure VII. In all cases, at least two-thirds (2/3s) of the number of required parking spaces shall be provided. The remaining reserved space shall remain unpaved or kept pervious until such time as it is needed, unless the reserved area is used for internal circulation. The reserved area shall be shown on any site plan. The Administrative Officer may order the property owner to install the reserved parking spaces if the need for additional spaces arises. For example, a change in the use(s) or the ownership of the parcel may be enough to require the installation of the parking spaces. In the event that the owner fails to install the additional parking spaces within one hundred twenty (120) days of being so ordered, the Administrative Officer shall revoke the certificate of occupancy for the premises, and the Town Attorney may take appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction to restrain the use of said premises. When this subsection is utilized, the site plan shall contain a statement, signed by the applicant in such a form as shall be approved by the Town Attorney, consenting to the provisions contained herein. In addition, the property owner shall be required to submit a covenant, for filing in the Town Clerk’s office, in such a form as shall be approved by the Town Attorney indicating consent to the provisions of this subsection.

 

I. Handicapped –Accessible Parking Spaces. Parking spaces for handicapped persons shall be provided for all non-residential uses. The size, number, and location of spaces shall comply with the ADA Accessibility Guidelines. Handicap accessible spaces are required to be eight feet (8'0") wide, with an adjacent access aisle five feet (5'0") wide. One in every six (6) accessible spaces must have an access aisle eight feet (8'0") wide and must be signed "van accessible". The number of accessible spaces required is shown in Table 10-1 below. Handicapped parking spaces and aisles shall be level with surface slopes not exceeding 1:48 in all directions.

 

Table 10-1 Minimum Number of Accessible Parking Spaces Required

 

Total parking spaces in lot

Number of accessible spaces in lot

1 to 25

1

26 to 50

2

51 to 75

3

76 to 100

4

101 to 150

5

151 to 200

6

201 to 300

7

301 to 400

8

401 to 500

9

501 to 1,000

2% of total number

1,001 and over

20, plus 1 for every 100, or fraction thereof, over 1,000

 

J. Recreational Vehicles. Parking or storage facilities for recreational vehicles shall be provided in all multi-family residential developments of eighteen (18) units or more. Recreational vehicles shall not be stored on any common open lands other than those specifically approved for such purpose by the DRB through the review process.  The Development Review Board may waive this provision only upon demonstration by the applicant that the storage and parking of recreational vehicles shall be prohibited within all private and common areas of the development.  Commercial properties shall only park recreational or utility vehicles in approved display or storage areas.  On a residential property, no person shall park, store, or use a recreational vehicle, or utility vehicle, or similar vehicular equipment unless the following requirements are met:

1.     Such vehicular equipment shall be stored in rear or side yard.  Minimum five (5) foot side yard setback.

2.     Such vehicular equipment is stored or parked on private property no closer than eighteen inches to any proposed or existing public sidewalk and so as not to project into the public right-of-way;

3.     On corner lots, any such vehicular is not parked in the triangular area formed by the three points established by the intersection of property lines at the corner and the points thirty feet back from this intersection along each property line;

4.     No recreational or utility vehicle is used for the conduct of business or for living or housekeeping purposes except when located in an approved mobile home park or in a campground providing adequate sanitary facilities.

5.     Any recreational or utility vehicle parked or stored out-of-doors is adequately blocked or tied down or otherwise secured so that such vehicle does not roll off the lot and is not moved about by high winds; and

6.     No vehicular equipment regulated by this section is stored out-of-doors on a residential lot unless it is in condition for safe and effective performance of the functions for which it is intended.

7.      Office trailers, office/storage trailers and semi-van trailers may be allowed as temporary facilities for construction projects when approved with a building permit from the Administrative Officer.  No other uses of trailers shall be allowed except as a special emergency facility when approved by the Development Review Board as a conditional use.

 

K. Bicycle Parking or Storage Facility. A bicycle parking or storage facility shall be provided for properties with twenty (20) or greater parking spaces.  One bicycle parking space should be provided for each twenty (20) car spaces required by these regulations.

 

L. Structured Parking. Structured parking may be required by the Development

Review Board in conjunction with approval of a site plan or PUD. Structured parking shall be defined as any structure consisting of more than one level and used to store motor vehicles. The parking structure may be stand-alone or may be part of or attached to another structure. Such structures typically comprise parking decks, garages, or roof-top parking areas. The Development Review Board may require design elements for parking structures that specifically address safety, security, lighting, landscaping, and visual aesthetics as conditions for approval.

 

M. Commercial Vehicles on Residential Properties. Parking of one (1) commercial vehicle per property shall be permitted subject to the following limitations:

1.     The parking or storage of any garbage truck, tractor and/or trailer of a tractor-trailer truck, dump truck, construction equipment, cement-mixer truck, or moving/hauling van is prohibited on any residential property.

2.     Any commercial vehicle parked in a residential district shall be owned and/or operated only by an occupant of the property at which it is parked.

3.     The commercial vehicle must be parked off-street in a garage, carport or driveway.  The commercial vehicle shall not be located in the front yard.

4.     The length of the commercial vehicle shall be less than 22’ and its height shall be less than 7’.

 

N. Exemptions, Waivers, and Modifications of Requirements.

1.  Exemptions. Existing buildings and uses are exempt as follows:

(a) Structures and land uses lawfully in existence or in use or for which zoning permits have been approved by December 21, 2004 shall not be subject to the parking or loading space requirements set forth in this section and in Section O.

 (b) However, no structure or lot lawfully in use prior to December 21, 2004 shall be enlarged unless the off-street parking and truck loading space requirements of this section are complied with to the same extent as would be required if the entire pre-existing structure or use and the proposed enlargement were being submitted as if they were a new application. The Development Review Board shall require additional off-street parking and truck loading spaces with respect to the proposed enlargement, but at its discretion may not require additional spaces with respect to the preexisting part of the structure or use.

2. Waivers. Where the Development Review Board determines that a proposed land use or structure is adequately served by existing or proposed public parking facilities, the Development Review Board may waive the off-street parking space requirements stipulated in Section O, by no more than thirty-three percent (33%) provided that a reserved parking plan is approved as per Section H.

3. Modifications of Requirements. Where the Development Review Board determines that unique usage or special conditions exist, it may require off-street parking spaces and loading areas greater than the requirements of this section and Section O. The Development Review Board may reduce the requirements of Section O for the number of off-street parking spaces and loading areas for non-residential uses and structures if it determines that overlapping use of parking spaces or other unique characteristic cause the requirement to be unnecessarily stringent provided a reserved parking plan is provided as per Section H.

 

 O. Parking Requirements.

Notes applicable to Table 10-2:

 

1. Any spaces required as part of the operational function, such as display, storage or queuing spaces at the transfer station or service station, are in addition.

2. Parking need varies according to type of facility and will be determined during site plan approval.

3. Definitions applicable to Tables 10-2: “Employee” means the number of employees working at the specific location on the main shift plus any overlap from prior or later shifts.

 

 

Table 10-2: Parking Requirements

 

Use

Parking Space Requirement

Notes

Single-Family Dwelling

2 spaces per dwelling

 

Two-Family Dwelling

2 spaces per dwelling plus 1 space for every four units

 

Multi-Family Dwelling

2 spaces per dwelling plus 1 space for every four units

 

Accessory Apartment

1 space per dwelling

 

Community Care Home & Halfway House

1 space per sleeping room plus 2 spaces

 

Congregate Housing

1.2 spaces per dwelling plus 1 space for every 4 units

 

Boarding House and Bed & Breakfast

1.5 per guest bedroom plus 2 spaces

 

Hotel & Motel

1 space per room plus .33 spaces per max occupancy in meeting & banquet rooms

 

Extended Stay Hotel

1 per room plus 1 per employee

 

Campground

N/A

2

Home Occupation

1 space per employee plus 1

 

Home Business

1 space per employee plus two

 

Convenience Store

4 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA

 

Shopping Center

5 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA if GFA is 400,000 SF or less; 5.5 per 1,000 SF GFA if more than 400,000 SF

 

General Merchandise w/o Drive-up

4 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA

 

General Merchandise w/ Drive-up

5.8 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA

1

Retail Food Establishment < 5,000 SF GFA

6.7spaces per 1,000 SF GFA

 

Retail Food Establishment > 5,000 SF GFA

6 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA

 

Wholesale Establishments

.5 per 1,000 SF GFA plus any requirements for office area

 

Equipment Sales and / or Repair

2 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA

 

Commercial Greenhouse

2 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA

 

Mobile Home & Marine Sales

2 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA

 

Auto & Auto Acc. Sales

2 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA

 

Rental

2 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA

1

Office, General

3.5 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA

 

Office, Research

3 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA

 

Office, Medical

5 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA

 

Radio & TV Studio

2 spaces per employee

 

Financial Institution & Bank w/o Drive-up

3.6 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA

 

Bank w/ Drive-up

5.8 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA

1

Personal or Business Service

2 spaces per treatment station or 4 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA whichever is greater

 

Artist Production Studio

2 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA

 

Funeral Home

1 space per 40 SF of assembly room

 

Crematorium

2 spaces per treatment station or 4 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA whichever is greater

 

Drycleaner

4 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA

 

Animal Services

1 space per employee plus .5 per 1,000 SF GFA

 

Auto Service & Body Work

2 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA

 

Car Wash

2 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA with a minimum of 2

1

Gas Sales

5 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA

1

Printing & Binding Facility

2 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA

 

Photocopy & Printing Shop

2 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA plus 5 per 1,000 SF GFA of retail area

 

Manufacturing & Processing

.5 space per 1,000 SF GFA plus 1 space per employee

 

Lumber & Contractor's Yard

1 space per employee plus .5 per 1,000 SF GFA

 

Salvage Yard

2 spaces plus 1 per employee

1

School, Elementary & Secondary & Trade

1 space per classroom and other rooms used by students, staff, or faculty, plus .25 per student of driving age

 

School, College

1 space per classroom and other rooms used by students, staff, or faculty, plus .5 per student

 

Religious Use

.5 space per seat or seating capacity

 

Cultural Facilities

.33 space per maximum permitted occupancy

 

Social Clubs, Bars, Nightclubs, Taverns, & Adult Use

.5 space per maximum permitted occupancy

 

Recreation Facility, Indoor

.33 space per maximum permitted occupancy

 

Recreation Facility, Outdoor

.33 space per seat or per person in maximum occupancy

2

Drive-In Movie Theater

N/A

2

Marinas & Yacht Clubs

.8 space per boat berth

 

Residential Marine Association

1 space per boat berth

 

Hospital

2 spaces per bed

 

Nursing Care, Mental Health Facilities, & Correctional Facility

.3 space per bed

 

Day Care

1 space per employee plus .1 per licensed enrollment capacity

 

Restaurant, Standard

22 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA

 

Restaurant, Short-Order & Seasonal Mobile Food Unit

12 per 1,000 SF GFA

 

Auto Parking Garages, Lots, & Storage

1 space per employee

1

Storage of Materials

.5 space per 1,000 SF GFA

 

Ag, Sivicultural, & Mining Operations

 1 space per employee

 

Cemetery

1 space per employee, minimum of 2 spaces

 

Waste Facilities

1 space plus 1 per employee

1

Transit Centers

1 space per employee

1

Public Garage

.5 space per 1,000 SF GFA plus 1 space per employee

1

Municipal Facility

3 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA

 

Community Center

.33 space per maximum permitted occupancy

 

National Guard & Civil Defense Operations

.5 space per 1,000 SF GFA plus 1 space per employee

1

Post Office

5 spaces per 1,000 SF GFA

 

Essential Service & Tower Facilities

1 space per employee, minimum of 2 spaces

 

 

 

10.02 Outdoor Illumination

 

A. Purpose. While exterior lighting is necessary and desirable for many activities, the Town recognizes that excessive or poorly designed exterior lighting can have adverse impacts on neighboring properties, cause safety hazards on nearby streets, raise ambient light levels in the community, and generally cause environmental degradation. With this in mind, it is the intent of this section to achieve a balance between lighting needed to safely undertake the tasks being illuminated and lighting that causes adverse impacts.

 

B. General Requirements.

1. No outdoor lighting fixtures may be installed on commercial, industrial, multi-family or mixed use properties without first obtaining approval from the Development Review Board except as provided in Subsection Two below. Where a development is seeking Site Plan Approval under this Ordinance, exterior lighting shall be included in the Site Plan Application. However, up to two additional fixtures may be added to an approved lighting plan upon approval by the Administrative Officer, provided that the standards in this section are satisfied.

2. A residential unit may install lighting fixtures that do not exceed a cumulative impact of 6,000 initial lumens (the equivalent of three 150-watt incandescent bulbs) without Town approval. Lighting installations exceeding the 6,000 initial lumen level and lighting of private tennis courts, swimming pools, or other outdoor areas must first be approved by the Administrative Officer through the building permit process.  The Administrative Officer may choose to refer an application made under this provision to the Development Review Board for approval.

3. Except where alternatives are specifically allowed, all lighting fixtures shall be at a minimum semi-cut-off fixtures (Semi-cut-off fixtures have an intensity at 80 degrees from nadir does not exceed 200 candela per 1000 lamp lumens, nor at 90 degrees from nadir does intensity exceed 50 candela per 1000 lamp lumens).

4. All lighting fixtures shall be fitted with appropriate shields to ensure that lighting is directed only to the area to be illuminated, and do not cast direct light beyond the boundaries of the property on which they are located.

5. All lighting fixtures shall be fitted with incandescent, metal halide, or fluorescent lamps. Exceptions may be made to additions to existing installations if the Development Review Board determines that bringing the entire installation into conformance would be cost prohibitive.

6. Actual or estimated illumination levels shall be measured horizontally at ground level unless otherwise specified in these regulations.

7. The use of ornamental lighting fixtures in a unified lighting design to define a sense of place is encouraged.

 

 

C. Lighting Districts. For the purpose of this Section, the Zoning Districts established in this Ordinance shall be grouped into lighting districts as follows:

1. Lighting District 1: Commercial District, (COM), Industrial District, (I) and Business District (BD).

2. Lighting District 2: Mobile Home Park District, Low Density/ Rural Residential Districts (RR - R10), and Low/Medium Density Residential Districts (R‑1, R‑2 & R‑3)

3. Lighting District 3: General Development Districts (GD‑1, GD‑2, GD-3, and GD-4) and Lakeshore Districts (LS1 & LS2)

4. Lighting District 4: The Agricultural/Open Land District and Agricultural Mixed Use District.

 

D. Parking Lot Lighting. Parking lot lighting shall be designed to provide the minimum lighting necessary to ensure adequate vision and comfort in parking areas, and to not cause glare or direct illumination onto adjacent properties or streets.

1. Alternatives to semi-cut-off fixtures: The lighting design for an area may suggest the use of fixtures of a particular "period" design or architectural style, either as an alternative to or a supplement for the semi-cut-off fixtures described above.

(a) If such fixtures are not semi-cut-off fixtures as defined above, the maximum initial lumens generated by each fixture shall not exceed 2,000 (equivalent to a 150 watt incandescent bulb).

(b) Mounting heights of such fixtures shall not exceed twenty (20) feet.

(c) Illumination levels must meet the requirements set forth in the table below.

2. In Lighting Districts 2 and 4, parking areas shall not be illuminated unless there is a clear hazard to be illuminated, in which case the standards noted in the table below shall apply.

3. At least 75 percent of all parking lot lighting fixtures shall be turned off no more than one hour after the close of business.

4. Parking area illumination standards for the various districts are as shown in the following table. Illumination levels are to be measured in footcandles (fc), horizontally at grade level. The average illumination level is to be computed for the area of the parking lot only.

 

Lighting District

 

1

2

3

4

Max. Mounting Ht.

20 ft

12 ft

15 ft

10 ft

Average Illumination Level shall not exceed*

 

1.2 fc

1.0 fc

1.0 fc

1.0 fc

Uniformity ratio (Max To min) shall not exceed

 

20:1

20:1

20:1

20:1

*The average shall be measured horizontally at grade level, computed over the area of the parking lot.

 

E. Lighting of Gasoline Station/Convenience Store Aprons and Canopies:

Lighting of gasoline station/convenience store aprons and under canopies shall be adequate to facilitate the activities taking place in such locations.

1. Areas on the apron away from gasoline pump islands shall be considered to be parking areas, and illumination shall meet the standards set forth in Section 10.02D. If there are no gasoline pumps, the entire apron shall be considered to be parking area.

2. Lighting of areas around gasoline pump islands and under canopies sheltering pump islands shall meet the following standards:

(a) The minimum illumination level shall be not less than 2.0 footcandles and the maximum illumination level shall be not more than 10.0 footcandles.

(b) Light fixtures mounted under a canopy shall be recessed so that the lens cover is recessed into or flush with the underside (ceiling) of the canopy, or must be shielded by the fascia of the canopy so that direct illumination cannot be directed above an angle of 85 degrees from vertical.

(c) No light fixtures may be mounted on the top of the canopy, and the sides of the canopy (fascia) shall be opaque and shall not be illuminated.

 

F. Lighting of Exterior Sales/Display Areas. Illuminating levels on exterior sales/display areas shall be adequate for the activities taking place in such locations, and shall not be used to attract attention to the activity. The applicant, in conjunction with the Development Review Board, shall designate areas to be used as exterior sales/display as opposed to passive storage or parking.

1. Areas used for passive storage or parking shall be illuminated in accordance with Section 10.02D of these Regulations.

2. Areas designated for exterior display or sales shall have an average horizontal illumination level at grade level of no more than 5.0 footcandles and a maximum horizontal illumination at grade level of no more than 10 footcandles.

3. The average illumination level shall be computed only for the area used for vehicle storage.

4. Lighting fixtures may be fitted with metal halide or incandescent lamps.

5. Fixture mounting heights shall not exceed 15 feet above grade.

6. Exterior sales/display areas may be illuminated only when the establishment is open for business, except for lighting approved as security lighting in accordance with section 10.02G of these regulations.

 

G. Security Lighting. Any security lighting must be a part of an overall security plan which includes illumination, surveillance, and response, and which clearly delineates the area to be illuminated for security purposes. To the extent that the designated area is illuminated for other purposes, independent security lighting is discouraged.

1. All applications for approval of security lighting shall include a written security plan demonstrating the need for and purposes of security lighting and a site plan showing the area to be illuminated for security purposes and the location of all security lighting fixtures.

2. All security lighting fixtures shall be shielded and aimed so that illumination is directed only toward the designated area to be illuminated. In no case shall illumination be directed above a horizontal plane. All fixtures shall include shields that prevent the light source or lens from being visible from adjacent properties and roadways. The use of general purpose floodlighting fixtures is prohibited.

3. Security lighting may illuminate vertical surfaces up to a level eight (8) feet above grade or eight (8) feet above the bottoms of doorways or entries, whichever is greater.

4. Security lighting fixtures may be mounted on poles located no more than ten (10) feet from the perimeter of the designated area being illuminated.

5. Security lighting designed to illuminate a perimeter (such as a fence) shall include motion sensors and be designed to be off unless triggered by an intruder located within five (5) feet of the perimeter.

6. Security lighting in the Lighting Districts 2 and 4 shall be allowed only if unusual hazardous conditions make it necessary. In such cases, indirect and reflected lighting techniques shall be used and all fixtures shall be shielded so that the light source or lens is not visible from adjacent properties or streets.

7. The average illumination level of ground level areas shall be measured horizontally at grade level, and computed over the area designated as being illuminated in the security plan.

8. The average illumination level of vertical surfaces shall be measured at a height of 5 feet above grade, and computed over the area of the surface designated to be illuminated in the security plan.

9. Security lighting shall meet the following standards:

 

Lighting District

 

1

2

3

4

Max. Mounting Ht.

 

20 ft

 

Discouraged

 

15 ft

 

Discouraged

 

Average Horizontal

Illumination level at

ground level*

 

1.5 fc

 

Discouraged

 

1.0 fc

 

Discouraged

 

Average Vertical

Illumination Level

At 5' above grade**

 

1.5 fc

 

Discouraged

 

1.0 fc

 

Discouraged

 

*The average shall be measured horizontally at grade level, computed over the area designated in the security plan as needing illumination.

**The average shall be measured vertically at the designated height, and, computed over the area designated in the security plan as needing illumination.

 

H. Walkway Lighting. In some cases walkways not illuminated by nearby street lighting may be illuminated. In such cases, the lighting shall meet the following standards:

1. The average illumination level on a walkway or pathway surface not exceed 0.5 footcandles, measured horizontally at grade level.

2. The area over which the average illumination level is computed shall include the walkway surface plus an area on each side not more than three feet in width.

3. Lighting fixtures other than full cut-off fixtures may be used but shall be designed to direct illumination downward, and light sources shall have an initial output of no more than 1,000 lumens.

 

I. Recreational Facility Lighting. There is a variety of outdoor recreation facilities that may be illuminated to allow nighttime use. Examples include tennis courts, ball fields, golf driving ranges, swimming pools, outdoor skating rinks, and small ski areas. The regulations in this section are intended to allow illumination of such activities while minimizing adverse impacts such as glare, unwanted illumination of nearby properties and streets, and skyglow. Such lighting shall be consistent with the following regulations:

1. A lighting plan shall be submitted, prepared by a qualified lighting professional, who documents the need for the level of illumination being provided, and which demonstrates how the desired illumination levels will be achieved while meeting the following requirements.

2.  Lighting fixtures may be other than full cut-off fixture, and shall be specified, mounted and aimed so that their beams fall within the primary playing area and immediate surroundings, and so that no direct illumination is directed off of the site.

3. Light fixtures shall be shielded and/or designed so that light is not directed above a horizontal plane.

4. Light sources shall not be directly visible from nearby streets.

5. Lights on recreation facilities shall be turned off except when the facilities are in use or being maintained.

 

J. Lighting of Building Facades. Low level illumination of building facades behind and beneath covered walkways may be allowed in the Lighting Districts 1 and 3. In all districts, parts of buildings may be illuminated if they have cultural or religious significance (e.g. steeples, bell towers, and clock towers). Facade lighting shall meet the following requirements:

1. The maximum illumination level on any vertical surface shall not exceed 5.0 footcandles.

2. If a first floor facade is illuminated by lights mounted under a canopy sheltering a walkway, the average horizontal illumination of the walkways shall not exceed 3.0 footcandles at grade level. If there is no walkway under the canopy, the average horizontal illumination shall not exceed 1.0 footcandles at grade level.

3. Roofs shall not be illuminated.

4. Light fixture under translucent (i.e. fabric) canopies shall be shielded so that illumination is not directed to the underside of the canopy.

5. Ground mounted fixtures or fixtures pointing upward shall not be allowed. Downward directed lighting must be used.

6. Lighting fixtures shall be shielded so that the light source and/or lens are not visible from adjacent properties or streets.

 

K. Outdoor Work Site Lighting. In some cases it may be appropriate to illuminate outdoor work sites to enable night time work. 10.02B & D notwithstanding, illumination of outdoor work sites may be approved by the Administrative Officer as a part of issuance of a Zoning/Building Permit.  With the exception of temporary lighting for emergency repairs (which shall not require prior approval), illumination of work sites shall meet the following requirements:

1. The lighting shall be installed to illuminate the actual work site and as little of the surrounding area as possible.

2. Lighting fixtures shall not be aimed towards adjacent or nearby streets.

3. Lighting fixtures shall be aimed and/or shielded to that light is not directed above a horizontal plane.

4. The lighting shall be turned on not more than thirty (30) minutes before work is to start, and turned off no more than thirty (30) minutes after work is completed.

 

L. Seasonal Holiday Lighting.  Temporary seasonal holiday lighting may be displayed at residential and commercial properties, provided that the following conditions are met:

1. Seasonal holiday lighting may not be moving or otherwise animated to the point of being distracting.

2. Seasonal holiday lighting may be displayed only for a reasonable period before and after the holiday with which the lighting is associated.

 

M. Nighttime Illumination of Governmental Flags.  The Town encourages those who fly the Flag of the United States to observe the custom prescribed in the United States Flag Code of displaying the flag from sunrise to sunset.  However, if governmental flags are to be flown at night and are to be illuminated, the regulations in this Section apply.

1. Application. An applicant for nighttime illumination shall submit to the Administrative Officer an application for a Building Permit along with a Lighting Design Plan as described in (I) below.

2. Flag Type. Only governmental flags may be illuminated. Nongovernmental flags may not be flown on a pole with an illuminated governmental flag. No more than three (3) governmental flags may be flown on the same pole.

3. Dimensional Requirements. A governmental flag to be illuminated may not exceed sixty (60) square feet in size. Flagpoles may not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height.

4. Lighting Fixtures. A flag shall be illuminated by no more than two (2) fixtures per pole. There shall be no more than two (2) fixtures per property used to illuminate flags, irrespective of the number of flagpoles installed on a property. Only narrow beam spotlights with glare controls (such as but not limited to louvers, grids, full hoods, or "barn door" baffles) may be used. The fifty percent (50%) beam spread of the fixture(s) used shall correspond to the area of the flag(s) to be illuminated. Fixtures may be mounted at grade, on the flagpole to be illuminated, or on stanchions no more than twenty-four (24) inches above grade. Ground- or stanchion-mounted fixtures shall be located no more than fifteen (15) feet from the base of the flagpole. Wall-mounted fixtures located on adjacent buildings are prohibited.

5. Illumination Level. An application may be based, at the applicant's discretion, on either the maximum total light level on the flag, measured in initial footcandles and determined by the geometric relationship of the flag to the proposed lighting fixture or fixtures; or the total lumen power of each lamp used to illuminate the flag. Manufacturers' data for lamps and fixtures and the Lighting Plan submitted by the applicant must provide sufficient information to make a determination on one of the applicable criteria. Maximum total illumination levels shall not exceed the following standards:

(a) Maximum light level on the flag on properties having a principal

lot frontage on an arterial or collector road: one hundred

(100) initial footcandles.

(b) Maximum light level on the flag, all other lots: fifty (50) initial footcandles.

(c) Total initial lumen power of each lamp used to illuminate the flag on properties having a principal lot frontage on an arterial or collector road: 36,000 initial lumens

(d) Total initial lumen power of each lamp used to illuminate the flag, all other lots: 15,000 initial lumens.

6. Setbacks from Residential Properties. Any flagpole to be illuminated per the provisions of sub-sections 10.07.4 and 5 shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from all property lines of any adjacent parcel with a residential use.

7. Lamp Type. Lamps used shall be metal halide or another type having a Color Rendering Index (CRI) over sixty-five (65).

8. Glare Control. Fixtures shall be aimed directly at the flag(s) to be illuminated. No portion of the lamp(s) or reflective surfaces on the fixture(s) shall be visible from a roadway or from adjoining properties.

9. Lighting Design Plan. An applicant shall submit a Lighting Design Plan with the following information:

(a) The location of property boundaries, nearby roadways, the flagpole to be illuminated, and the lighting fixtures to be used.

(b) The proposed mounting type, location(s) and dimensions (ground, flagpole or stanchion).

(c) A statement of the illumination level measurement to be used (initial footcandles at the flag or lumen power of the lamps) and a diagram sufficient to determine lighting levels at the flag if initial footcandles are the measurement to be used to determine compliance.

(d) An illustration of the area that will be illuminated by the proposed fixtures.

(e) The manufacturer's specifications for the lighting fixture(s) to be used, including lamp type, beam spread, Color Rendering Index, wattage, and glare controls.

 

N. All Other Lighting. Illumination of areas or activities other than described above shall be prohibited.

 

O. Application Materials.  In addition to any special information specified above, applications for approval of exterior lighting shall include at least the following:

1. A site plan showing the area to be illuminated and the location of all fixtures and mounting heights.

2. A point by point analysis of anticipated illumination levels in the area to be illuminated based on use of the proposed fixtures, lamps, and mounting heights.

3. The maximum, minimum and average illumination levels shall be shown for each area illuminated.

4. Specifications of the fixtures to be used, including documentation of cut-off classification, horizontal and vertical light distribution patterns, and the lamp to be used in each.

5. If vertical surfaces are to be illuminated, a point by point distribution of vertical illumination levels shall be provided, along with an indication of the maximum illumination level to be generated.

 

P. Waiver of Lighting Standards. The Development Review Board shall have the authority to, when reasonable, modify these lighting standards provided the lighting otherwise meets the intent of the standards herein.

 

 

 

 

10.03 Outside Storage & Display

 

A. General Requirements. Outside storage of goods, materials, vehicles, and equipment shall be subject to the following provisions:

1. Any outside storage and/or display shall be appurtenant to the primary use of the property and shall be allowed only in nonresidential districts and upon approval of the Development Review Board in conjunction with a site plan, conditional use and/or PUD application.

2. The Development Review Board may deny requests for outside storage for uses that do not customarily have outside storage.

3. The Development Review Board may require that outside storage areas in connection with commercial or industrial uses be enclosed and/or screened.

4. Storage of scrap, salvage/junk material, junk motor vehicles, trash, refuse, automotive dismantling, salvage or recycling facilities, and the storage of more than one motor vehicle without registration and/or valid Vermont State Inspection stickers may be permitted only in connection with approved automotive repair use, automotive sales, salvage yard use, or contractor’s yard use.

5. Farm equipment normally on farm land and equipment involved in construction and which is kept on an active construction site shall be excluded from this section.

 

 

10.04 Landscaping, Screening, & Street Trees

 

A. Purpose. The Town of Colchester recognizes the importance of trees, vegetation, and well-planned green spaces and using these as a resource in promoting the health, safety, and welfare of town residents through improved drainage, water supply recharge, air quality, sun control, shade, and visual relief. Landscaping and screening shall be required for all uses subject to Development Review Board review. Street tree plantings shall be required for all streets in accordance with the Colchester Street Tree Master Plan. In evaluating landscaping and screening requirements, the Development Review Board shall promote the retention of existing trees while encouraging the use of a variety of plant species. At its discretion, the Development Review Board may refer to Recommended Trees for Vermont Communities: A Guide to Selecting and Purchasing Street, Park, and Landscape Trees, published by Vermont Urban and Community Forestry Program to guide landscaping and screening decisions.

 

B. Screening or buffering. The Development Review Board will require landscaping, fencing, land shaping and/or screening along property boundaries (lot lines) whenever it determines that a) two adjacent sites are dissimilar and should be screened or buffered from each other, or b) a property’s appearance should be improved, which property is covered excessively with pavement or structures or is otherwise insufficiently landscaped, or c) a commercial, industrial, and multi-family use abuts a residential district or institutional use.

1. All off-street parking areas, off-street loading areas, outdoor storage areas, refuse and recycling areas, and utility improvements such as transformer(s), external heating and cooling equipment shall be effectively screened.

2. Such screening shall be a permanently maintained landscape of evergreen or a mix of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs, and/or a solid fence.

3. The landscaping shall be designed to minimize erosion and stormwater runoff, and to protect neighboring residential properties from the view of uses and parking areas on the site. The landscaping shall be of such type, height, and spacing, as in the judgment of the Development Review Board, will effectively screen the activities on the lot from the view of persons standing on adjoining properties. The plan and specifications for such planting shall be filed with the approved plan for the use of the lot.

4. A solid wall or fence, of location, height, and design approved by the Development Review Board, may be substituted for the required planting.

5. Modifications. Where the existing topography and/or landscaping provides adequate screening or would render the normally required screening inadequate, the Development Review Board may modify the planting and/or buffer requirements by, respectively, decreasing or increasing the requirements.

6. Recreational vehicle parking areas shall be screened with evergreen trees and shrubs and such landscaping plan shall be part of the application.

7. Additional landscaping above and beyond the formula may be required for the purpose of adding a buffer strip along I-89 and 289 to properly screen development from the highway.

 

C. Front Yards of Non-Residential and Multi-Family Uses. In the case of non-residential and multi-family uses, the required front yard shall be suitably landscaped and maintained in good appearance.

 

D. Site Restoration. Grading or seeding shall be required to restore the condition of any portion of a site that is disturbed during construction. A plan shall be provided for the stockpiling and restoration of topsoil removed or disturbed during construction, and any soil compaction within pervious areas of the site shall be repaired in accordance with the Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation Stormwater Program’s guidelines.

 

E. Landscaping Plan. Landscaping plans shall be prepared by a landscape architect, master gardener, nursery professional, arborist, professional landscape designer, or other landscape professional. Such plans shall be included with the site plan and shall consist of the following:

1. A list of existing vegetation, with the location, type, and size of existing trees of six inches or greater in caliper.

2. The location of existing natural features, such as streams, wetlands, and rock outcroppings.

3. All proposed physical improvements, such as buildings, walls, parking areas, sidewalks, etc.

4. Proposed landscaping materials, including vegetation to remain, types of new plant materials, identified by common name and botanical name, sizes of all new plant materials by height and/or diameter at time of planting and at maturity, quantities of each of the planting materials, and treatment of the ground surface (paving, seeding, or groundcover).

5. A landscape phasing plan. Construction phasing shall be shown on the landscape plan with landscaping and construction activities correlated.

6. Street trees shall be depicted on the plans in accordance with the Colchester Street Tree Master Plan.

7. All plant materials shall conform to the specifications below:

PLANT MATERIAL

MINIMUM CALIPER
(AT PLANTING)

MINIMUM HEIGHT
(AT PLANTING)

RECOMMENDED ROOTABLE SOIL VOLUME1

MATURE OR MAINTAINED HEIGHT

Large Tree

2.5 inches for single-trunk trees (measured at 6 in above grade)

6 ft for multi-trunk trees

1,000 cubic ft

>50 ft

Medium Tree

600 cubic ft

30 to <50 ft

Small Tree

200 cubic ft

<30 ft

Large Shrub

–

30 inches

100 cubic ft

>6 ft

Medium Shrub

–

18 inches

40 cubic ft

3 to <6 ft

Small Shrub

–

12 inches

20 cubic ft

<3 ft

1 Soil must be within 3 feet of the ground surface to count towards minimum rootable soil volume. If the minimum soils volume cannot be achieved due to site conditions, the applicant shall select plant material that is appropriate to the available rootable soil volume. In planting arrangements that allow multiple plants to share rooting space, the minimum rootable soil volume per plant may be reduced by 25%.

8.      Plantings in the LS1 and LS2 Districts as well as the Shoreland Overlay District shall include a variety of primarily native plant materials informally arranged in naturalistic groupings within landscaped areas.

9.      Landscaped areas shall be used for green stormwater infrastructure practices to the maximum extent feasible given a site’s soil and slope conditions by:

(a) Directing stormwater from on-site impervious driveways, parking areas, sidewalks and walkways to landscaped areas or green stormwater infrastructure practices in order to promote on-site water retention and filtration;

(b) Identifying soils on the site that are well suited for infiltration with an infiltration rate of 0.5 inches per hour or greater, and using them to the maximum extent feasible to infiltrate stormwater;

(c) Routing stormwater runoff from impervious surfaces through appropriate green stormwater infrastructure practices based on soils, precipitation, flow, and the hydrologic and geologic conditions of the site;

(d) Mimicking pre-development drainage patterns to the greatest extent feasible, especially with regard to where stormwater leaves the site, unless those existing drainage patterns already contribute to stormwater runoff-related impacts; and

(e) Improving upon, rather than mimicking, pre-development drainage conditions if those conditions already contribute to stormwater runoff impacts.

 

F. Landscaping Budget Requirements. The Development Review

Board shall require minimum planting costs for all site plans: three percent of the construction or improvement cost.  In evaluating landscaping requirements, some credit may be granted for existing trees or for site improvements other than tree planting as long as the objectives of this section are not reduced. The landscaping budget shall be prepared by a landscape architect or professional landscape designer.  Prior to obtaining a building permit for the project, the applicant shall provide a suitable escrow, letter of credit, or similar form of surety to guarantee the performance and completion of all planting required pursuant to the Section for a period of no less than two years  from the date of landscape installation.

 

G. Inspection. Prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the Town shall inspect all landscaping and screening.  The Town shall identify all trees, shrubs, and other plants that are not in a healthy and vigorous condition or have been removed and provide a list of replacement requirements and a deadline for re-planting to the project owner.  If the project owner does not comply with the replacement and re-planting requirement by said deadline the Town may utilize the surety provided by the applicant to complete replacement and re-planting.  If all landscaping is in healthy and vigorous condition and planted as per the approved landscaping plan, the Town may reduce the surety to ten percent of the landscaping cost at the time of issuance of a certificate of occupancy.

 

 

10.05 Utility Cabinets and Similar Structures

 

A. General Requirements. The construction of a utility cabinet shall only be permitted according to the following regulations.

 

B. Specific Standards for Utility Cabinets and Similar Structures.

1. The facility shall serve the Town of Colchester and/or immediately adjacent communities.

2. If the parcel containing the facility is landlocked, there shall be a recorded easement or permission granting access to the utility or owner of the facility.

3. There shall be suitable fencing to protect the public and sufficient landscaping with evergreens of sufficient height and density to screen effectively the facility from surrounding property.

4. There shall be adequate off-street parking for maintenance, service, or other vehicles.

5. The location of the facility shall be shown on all relevant site plans.

6. The Development Review Board may require setbacks or attach other conditions in order to prevent any hazard to the public or noise nuisance to surrounding property.

7. A facility that would be a nuisance to surrounding properties due to smoke, gas, heat, odor, noise, or vibration shall not be permitted in any district.

 

 

 

 

10.06 Trash Containers

 

A. General Requirements.  All commercial, industrial, and multi-family dwelling unit trash containers shall be centrally located on a concrete pad and enclosed with an opaque screen that is the minimum height of the containers.  The location of the trash containers shall not be in a visually prominent area and shall generally be behind a building and not visible from the right-of-way. Trash containers shall be located so as to not interfere with circulation on the site. Where feasible the trash container screening shall also include a latching gate.

 

 

10.07 Numbering Systems

 

A. General Requirements. All properties shall comply with the Colchester Street Naming and Street Addressing Regulations within the Colchester Code of Ordinance and amended from time to time. 

 

B. Specific Requirements.  Multi-family residences and commercial or industrial suites shall contain appropriate directional signs, as defined in the Colchester Sign Ordinance, and numbering systems at major entrances.  All directional signage, street name signs, and unit numbers shall be installed prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.

 

 

10.08 Solar Collectors

 

A. General Requirements.  Solar collectors are encouraged where feasible to provide alternative energy.

 

B. Specific Requirements.  Solar collectors shall be permitted only where the following conditions can be met:

1. Roof-mounted solar collectors located on front and side building roofs visible from the public right-of-way shall not extend more than twelve (12) inches above the peak of the roof plane where it is mounted and further provided that no portion of any such solar collector shall extend more than 36 inches perpendicular to the point on the roof where it is mounted.

2. Roof-mounted solar collectors located on the rear side of the building roofs shall not extend more than twelve (12) inches above the peak of the roof plane where it is mounted and further provided that no portion of any such solar collector shall extend more than four (4) feet perpendicular to the point on the roof where it is mounted.

3. Ground-mounted solar collectors shall not exceed eight (8) ft. in total height and shall be located within the rear yard or side yard at least ten (10) feet inside the property line and shall be screened from adjacent properties to the extent feasible.

4. All lines serving a ground-mounted solar system shall be located underground.

 

 

10.09 Wind Turbines

 

A. General Requirements.  Alternative energy sources are encouraged where public well-being and safety are not out at risk and aesthetic concerns can be reasonably mitigated.

 

B. Specific Requirements.  All wind turbines shall meet the following standards:

1. The wind turbine shall have a maximum output rating of 15 kilowatts.

2. The wind turbine shall be set back from property lines and roads at least two times the height of the overall wind turbine as measured to the top of the blade in a vertical position.  Setbacks may be reduced to 1.5 times the height of the overall tower if written consent from adjacent property owners is provided.  In no case should the minimum setback for the wind turbine be less than the zoning district minimum required setback.

3.  Public access to the wind turbine shall be restricted through the use of a fence with locked gates, non-climbable towers or other suitable methods. 

4. Suitable warning signs containing a telephone number for emergency calls shall face all approaches to the system.  Individual signs shall be no larger than six (6) square feet.

5. The wind turbine shall be operated in such a manner that it does not exceed the sound level limits of the Performance Standards herein in Appendix C.

6. The following measures should be followed whenever feasible in order to minimize the visual impact of the project:

(a) Removal of existing vegetation should be minimized.

(b) Any accessory buildings should be painted or otherwise visually treated to blend with the surroundings.

(c) The turbine should be painted with non-reflective paint to blend with the surroundings.

7. All lines serving a wind turbine system shall be located underground.

 

 

10.10 Telecommunications Towers & Commercial Satellite Dishes

 

A. Authority.  Under authority granted in 24 V.S.A. § 2291(19) and 24 V.S.A. Chapter 59, the Colchester Development Review Board hereby adopts the following civil ordinance concerning telecommunications facilities.  Under this Ordinance, the Colchester Development Review Board shall have the power to regulate the construction, alteration, development, decommissioning or dismantling of wireless telecommunications facilities and ancillary improvements.  The Board may require that bond be posted or that other acceptable security be provided in order to finance future decommissioning or dismantling activities.

B. Purpose. The purposes of this Section are to advance the objectives of the Colchester Municipal Plan, to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the Town of Colchester, and to accommodate the communication needs of the community.  This regulation shall:

1. Preserve the character and appearance of the Town of Colchester while allowing adequate telecommunications services to be developed;

2. Protect the scenic, historic, environmental and natural resources of the town;

3. Provide standards and requirements for the operation, siting, design, appearance, construction, monitoring and removal of telecommunications facilities and towers;

4. Minimize tower and antenna proliferation by requiring the sharing of existing telecommunications facilities, towers and sites where possible and appropriate;

5. Facilitate the provision of telecommunications services to the community;

6. Minimize the adverse visual effects of telecommunications facilities and towers through careful design and siting standards;

7. Encourage the location of towers and antennas in non-residential areas and away from other sensitive areas such as those that have schools and child care facilities; and

8. Encourage the use of the latest telecommunications technologies with the least intrusive equipment available at the time.

 

C. Consistency with Federal Law.  In addition to other findings required by this Ordinance, the Board shall find that its decision regarding an application is intended to be consistent with federal law, particularly the Telecommunications Act of 1996.  This regulation:

1. Does not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services;

2. Does not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services; and

3. Does not regulate personal wireless services on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that the regulated services and facilities comply with Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations concerning such emissions.

 

D. Permits.  Application for a permit for a telecommunications tower, facility, or commercial satellite dish shall be reviewed by the Colchester Development Review Board through the site plan application process specified in Article 8.  Small Scale Facilities, as herein defined, shall be eligible for review as an administrative site plan.  No construction, alteration, addition, modification, or installation of any new telecommunications tower or facility site shall commence until the applicant has received all necessary permits.  This includes installation of antennas for any uses, change in the number of buildings or facilities, material change in technology used, or addition or change of any equipment resulting in greater visibility or structural wind-loading or additional height of the tower or profile change of the facility due to additional antennas not included in the original application.  Telecommunications towers or facilities may be permitted upon compliance with this regulation and upon proof of compliance with all other local, state or federal laws applicable to land use and development and to such towers or facilities.   

 

E. Small Scale Facilities

The placement of wireless telecommunications antennas, commercial satellite dishes, repeaters or microcells on existing buildings, structures, roofs, or walls, and not extending more than 10 feet from the same, or the installation of ground facilities less than 20 feet in height, may be approved by the Administrative Officer through the Administrative Site Plan Process, provided the antennas meet the applicable requirements of this Section, upon submission of:

1. A complete site plan application as specified in Article 8.

2. A report prepared by a qualified engineer [A mechanical or structural engineer will be qualified by virtue of licensing in the State of Vermont; RF engineers, however, are not licensed by most states, including Vermont.] indicating the structure’s suitability for the telecommunications facility, and that the proposed method of affixing the antenna or other device to the structure complies with standard engineering practices.  Complete details of all fixtures and couplings and the exact point(s) of attachment shall be indicated.

3. For a facility to be installed on an existing structure, a copy of the applicant’s executed contract with the owner of the existing structure.

4. No such device may be located closer than 50’ to an existing residence.

F. Application Requirements.  An application for a telecommunications tower or facility in the Town of Colchester shall include a completed site plan application as detailed in Article 8.  Telecommunication facilities that are not deemed to be Small Scale Facilities shall require the following information:

1. An applicant for a telecommunications tower or facility must be a telecommunications provider or must provide a copy of its executed contract to provide land or facilities to an existing telecommunications provider.

2. The name(s), address(es), fax/telephone numbers and e-mail address(es) of the persons to be contacted who are authorized to act in event of an emergency regarding the structure or safety of the tower or facility;

3. A vicinity map showing the entire vicinity within a 2500 foot radius of the tower or facility site, including the location of the telecommunications facility or tower, topography, public and private roads and driveways, buildings and structures, utilities, water bodies, wetlands, landscape features, historic sites and habitats for endangered species.  It shall indicate the property lines of the proposed tower site parcel and all easements or rights of way needed for access from a public way to the tower and/or other structures;

4. The location of the proposed structure on a USGS Topographic Map or Survey with 20-foot elevations or a GIS-generated map compatible with VCGI standards and encompassing the area within at least a two-mile radius of the proposed tower site;

5. Elevations and proposed site plans of the entire development showing all facades and indicating all exterior materials and colors of towers, buildings and associated facilities, as well as all proposed landscaping, utility wires, guy wires and screening. (All plans shall be drawn at a minimum scale of 1 inch = 50 feet);

6. In the case of a proposed site which is forested, the approximate average height of the existing vegetation within 200 feet of the tower base;

7. Construction sequence and time schedule for completion of each phase of the entire project;

8. Identify all drainage and subsurface drainage structures on the land to be affected.  These should include drainage culverts, ditches and how the applicant will mitigate drainage problems as a result of construction of the facility or towers;

9. Provide an emergency management plan that depicts how the applicant will mitigate unsafe situations such as pending failures as well as actual structural failure of the towers or their supports, problems with power lines and poles leading to the facility, terrorist threats and other acts; and how will the plan integrate with the Town of Colchester’s emergency plan;

10. Demonstrate the property and liability insurance coverage is sufficient to protect abutting property owners and other affected parties;

11. Demonstrate that any abandoned or unused tower or other portions of the telecommunication facility has been removed from the site, and

12. A report from a qualified and licensed engineer that:

(a) Describes the tower height, design and elevation;

(b) Documents the height above grade for all proposed mounting positions for antennas to be collocated on a telecommunications tower and the minimum separation distances between antennas;

(c) Describes the tower’s proposed capacity, including the number, height and types of antennas that the tower is proposed to accommodate;

(d) Documents the steps the applicant will take to avoid interference with any established public safety telecommunications;

(e) Demonstrates that existing telecommunications towers and other existing structures within 30 miles of the proposed site cannot reasonably be modified to provide adequate coverage and adequate capacity to the community;

(f) Describes the output frequency, number of channels and the power output per channel for each proposed antenna;

(g) Includes a written five-year plan for use of the proposed telecommunications facility, including reasons for seeking capacity in excess of immediate needs (if applicable), as well as plans for additional development and coverage within the Town;

(h) Demonstrates the proposed tower’s, facility’s and other structure’s compliance with the standards set forth in this regulation or other applicable standards;

(i) Provides proof that at the proposed site the applicant will be in compliance with all FCC regulations, standards and requirements, and includes a statement that the applicant commits to continue to maintain compliance with all FCC regulations, standards and requirements regarding both radio frequency interference (RFI) and radio frequency radiation (RFR).  The applicant shall also prove that the proposed facility will not interfere with Town emergency services equipment.  (The Development Review Board may hire independent engineers to perform evaluations of compliance with the FCC regulations, standards and requirements on an annual basis at unannounced times, at the expense of the applicant.);

(j) Includes such other information required by the Board or its consultants necessary to evaluate the application; and

(k) Includes each engineer’s stamp and registration number;

(l) Demonstrates that the applicant has analyzed the feasibility of using repeaters or micro-cells in conjunction with all facility sites listed in compliance with collocation requirements herein in Section 10.10F.

13. A letter of intent committing the tower or facility owner and his or her successors to permit shared use of the tower if the additional user(s) agree to meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use, including compliance with all applicable FCC regulations, standards and requirements and the provisions of this Ordinance and all other applicable laws;

14. In the case of an application for additional antennas or other equipment to be installed on a previously permitted tower or other structure, a copy of the executed contract with the owner of the existing structure;

15. To the extent required by the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and as administered by the FCC, a complete Environmental Assessment (EA) draft or final report describing the probable impacts of the proposed facility.

16. Each application shall be signed by the applicant(s) and the contributing engineer(s) under the pains and penalties of perjury.

17. Computer generated photo simulations of the proposed facility showing the facility from public rights-of-way and any adjacent property from which it may be visible.  Each photo shall be labeled with the line of sight, elevation, and the date taken imprinted on the photo.  The photos must show the color of the facility and the method of screening.

G. Collocation Requirements. An application for a new telecommunications tower or facility shall not be approved unless the Development Review Board finds that the antennas and other equipment planned for the proposed tower or facility cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or facility due to one of the following reasons:

1. The proposed antennas and other equipment would exceed the structural or spatial capacity of the existing or approved tower or facility, as documented by a qualified engineer licensed to practice in the State of Vermont, and the existing or approved tower or facility cannot be reinforced, modified or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent antennas and equipment at a reasonable cost to provide coverage and capacity comparable to that of the proposed facility;

2. The proposed antennas and equipment would cause interference materially impacting the usefulness of other existing or permitted equipment at the existing or approved tower or facility as documented by a qualified engineer licensed to practice in the State of Vermont and such interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost;

3. The proposed antennas and equipment, alone or together with existing facilities, equipment or antennas, would create RFI in violation of federal standards or requirements;

4. The proposed antennas and equipment, either alone or together with existing equipment and antennas would create RFR in violation of federal standards or requirements;

5. Existing or approved towers and other structures cannot accommodate the planned antennas and equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably or are too far from the area of needed coverage to function reasonably as documented by a qualified engineer licensed to practice in the State of Vermont;

6. Aesthetic considerations make it unreasonable to locate the planned antennas and equipment upon an existing or approved tower or building;

7. There is no existing or approved tower or other structure in the area for which coverage is sought; or

8. Other unforeseen specific reasons make it unreasonable to locate the planned antennas and equipment upon an existing or approved tower or building.

9. Towers shall be designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights where overall permitted height allows.  Towers shall be designed structurally, electrically and in all other respects to accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and additional antennas where overall permitted height allows.

 

H. Height and Setback Requirements. In order to protect public safety and to preserve the scenic character and appearance of the area, the height limit for towers, antennas and tower-related fixtures shall be not more than 20 feet above the average height of the tree line measured within 100 feet of the highest vertical element of the telecommunications facility.  Notwithstanding the above, additional height may be approved upon a finding by the Development Review Board that the additional height is necessary in order to provide adequate coverage in the Town of Colchester or to accomplish collocation of facilities and that the additional height will not cause an undue visual impact on the scenic character or appearance of the area.  In the event tower facilities are proposed in open areas, the height limit shall not exceed the height necessary to provide adequate coverage in the Town of Colchester or to accomplish collection of facilities and will not cause an undue visual impact on the scenic character or appearance of the area.   The minimum distance from any telecommunications tower or facility to any property line, dwelling or other occupied structure shall be no less than the height of the tower, including antennas or other vertical appurtenances.  In the event that the communications tower or equipment will be mounted on an existing structure such as a silo, church steeple or utility pole, the minimum distances from the base of that structure to any property line, dwelling or other occupied structure shall be no less than the height of the tower including antennas and other vertical appurtenances.

 

I. Lighting and Signage Requirements. Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not display strobe lights unless such lighting is required by FAA or other federal or state law.  If any lighting is required solely because of the height of a tower, the Development Review Board may review the plan to determine if the lighting requirement can be eliminated by a reduced height or a change in location of the tower.  No commercial signs or lettering shall be placed on the tower or its appurtenances. 

J. Design Requirements. All telecommunications towers, antennas and their support structures shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through the use of color camouflaging, architectural design, and other alternative design tower structures as well as by minimal disruption of existing vegetation.  The following standards shall apply to the design of telecommunication and commercial satellite facilities:

1. Materials used for the exterior of any structure shall be of a type, color and location so as to minimize glare and the impact on any scenic or historic areas, public vantage points or abutting properties.

2. Screening shall be required at the perimeter of the site.  This may be provided by existing natural foliage or by planted new foliage or other means approved by the Development Review Board.  A planted or natural vegetative screen shall be a minimum of 10 feet in depth with a minimum height of 6 feet and shall have the potential to grow to a height of at least 15 feet at maturity.  Existing on-site vegetation outside the immediate site for the wireless facility shall be preserved or improved.  Disturbance to existing topography shall be minimized unless the disturbance is demonstrated to result in less visual impact on the facility from surrounding properties and other vantage-points.

3. Where telecommunications facilities require construction of a new access road or improvement to existing access roads, to the extent practicable, roads shall follow the contour of the land.  Access roads, when consistent with the purposes of this Ordinance and when economically feasible, shall be constructed or improved within existing forest or forest fringe areas and not in open fields.  Utility or service lines shall be designed and located so as to minimize or prevent disruption of the scenic character and beauty of the area.

4. Protection of Scenic Ridges and Hillsides.  The Development Review Board, in consultation with the applicant and others, shall determine the likely visual impact of any proposed telecommunications facility or tower and may require balloon tests, photographs, simulations, and any other necessary, helpful and relevant information.  Based on the information presented, the Development Review Board may designate an alternative location for the facility or tower or may request a redesign in order to minimize the visual impact on the scenic character and beauty of the area.  In determining whether or not a facility or tower would have an undue adverse visual impact and when setting conditions in the permit, the Development Review Board shall consider:

(a) The period of time and frequency during which it would be viewed by persons traveling on public highways in the Town of Colchester;

(b) The degree to which it will be screened by existing vegetation, the topography of the land, and existing structures;

(c)Background features that will either obscure it or make it more conspicuous;

(d)The proportion of it which will be visible above the skyline or tree line;

(e)The number of residents of Colchester who will be affected by the alteration of the scenic character and beauty of the area;

(f)The sensitivity or unique value of the particular view affected by it; and

(g)Significant disruption of a view-shed that provides context to a historic or scenic resource in the Town of Colchester.

K. Continuing Obligations.  Upon receiving a permit, the applicant shall annually certify on January 15th in an affidavit that it is in compliance with all FCC standards and requirements regarding RFR and provide basis for his or her representations. In addition the applicant shall comply with the following requirements:

1. The telecommunications facility or tower owner shall maintain adequate insurance on the facility, tower and the entire site.

2. All facility and tower sites shall be properly fenced and identified by signage that indicates the presence of RFR and any other appropriate warnings required by the permit conditions.

 

L. Removal of Abandoned, Unused, Obsolete, Damaged, or Dangerous Towers or Other Portions of Facilities.  Abandoned or unused towers or other portions of telecommunications facilities shall be removed as follows:

1. The owner of a tower shall annually, on January 15th, file a declaration with the Development Review Board certifying the continuing safe operation of the entire tower and other portions of the facility.  Failure to file a declaration shall mean that it is no longer in use and the Development Review Board shall declare it abandoned.

2. Abandoned or unused towers and facilities shall be removed within 180 days of cessation of operations unless a time extension is approved by the Development Review Board. If the tower is not removed within 180 days of cessation of operations at a site, the municipality shall notify the owner and may remove the tower and all associated facilities.  Costs of removal shall be assessed against the property owner, tower owner and/or facility owner.

3. Unused portions of towers shall be removed within 180 days of the time that such portion is no longer used.  Replacement of portions of a tower previously removed shall require a new permit.

4. An owner who has failed to file an annual declaration with the Development Review Board by January 15 may, by February 15, file a declaration of use or intended use and may request the ability to continue use of the facility/tower.

 

 

10.11 Satellite Dishes Other than Commercial Satellite Dishes.

 

A. General Requirements.  This section shall be applicable to satellite dishes that do not qualify as Commercial Satellite Dishes.

 

B. Specific Standards.  All satellite dishes shall be attached to a primary structure.  No more than two satellite dishes shall be located on a structure without site plan approval by the Development Review Board.  Every effort shall be made to screen such dishes and locate such dishes off the primary façade of a structure.

 

 

10.12 Bus Shelters

 

A. General Requirements. The location and design of bus shelters shall require site plan approval. 

 

B. Specific Requirements. Such shelters may be constructed adjacent to or within street rights-of-way in any zoning district. The shelter shall be located to permit ample room for the bus to conveniently leave the traveled roadway to pick up or discharge passengers. The design shall be harmonious with adjacent properties.

 

 

10.13 Home Occupations and Home Businesses

A. Home Occupations. Customary home occupations are permitted as accessory uses in dwelling units provided that the home occupation does not adversely affect the residential character of the property or adjacent properties and the following conditions are met:

1. The use is conducted solely and entirely within the primary dwelling or in an accessory building, and the use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for living purposes.

2. The home occupation shall be owned by the principle occupant of the dwelling in which it is located. In no case may the homeowner or principle occupant rent out the business area of the dwelling.

3. No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the ground floor area of the dwelling, but not to exceed 500 square feet, or its equivalent elsewhere in the dwelling or in an accessory building shall be used by the home occupation.

4. There shall be no external display or advertising of goods or services or other external evidence of such use, except for a sign. Such sign shall conform to the Colchester Sign Ordinance. The content of the sign shall be the name and/or address of the home occupation and/or owner of the business.

5. The establishment of such occupation shall not require internal or external alterations or involve construction features not customarily found in dwelling units.

6. The appliances and equipment shall be operated in such a manner that they do not produce and emit beyond the boundaries of the premises on which the use is located, dust, glare, hazardous material, heat, light, noise, odor, radiation, radio or television interference, smoke, or vibration and are in no other manner obnoxious or detrimental to the immediate neighborhood as defined in the Performance Standards herein in Appendix C.

7. The use itself is conducted in such a manner and during such hours that it is in no way obnoxious, offensive, or detrimental to the immediate neighborhood.

8. In the case of a music or voice instructor, the office or studio shall be so equipped and used that the sounds there from shall not be heard beyond the boundaries of the premises on which the use is located.

9. There are not more than two (2) employees or helpers other than members of the household provided that parking spaces for such employees shall be located in side or rear yards.

10. The home occupation use shall not generate traffic greater than 12 vehicle trip ends per day.  Vehicle trip ends for the residential use shall not be included in counting trip ends for the home occupation use.

 

B. Home Businesses. An activity which exceeds the standards for a home occupation may be considered a home business. Home businesses shall be subject to the following criteria:

1. The Home Business shall be carried on by residents of the premises and not more than three (3) additional on-premise employees who are not residents, provided that parking spaces for such employees shall be provided off-street and shall be located in side or rear yards.

2. The Home Business shall be carried on wholly within a primary dwelling or in an accessory building and not have external storage of supplies and equipment visible from any adjacent highways or dwelling unit, with the exception of parking spaces specified in Section 10.13B(1).

3. A Home Business shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for living purposes. An activity which exceeds these requirements herein shall be prohibited. 

4. A Home Business may have one commercial vehicle exceeding the size requirements of 10.01M of the regulations herein provided that the owner of the home is also an owner of the business and the legal possessor of the vehicle.

 

 

10.14 Seasonal Dwelling Units

 

A. General Provisions. These provisions shall apply to all structures constructed as seasonal dwelling units.  Nothing herein shall prevent the continuation of seasonal use of a dwelling that was constructed as such.  No new seasonal dwelling units shall be permitted.

 

B. Seasonal Use.  A summer seasonal dwelling may be occupied from April 1st through October 31st and shall be vacated at all other times. A winter seasonal dwelling is occupied from November 1st through March 31st and shall be vacated at all other times.

 

C. Conversion.  A seasonal dwelling unit may be converted to a single family dwelling (including occupancy) if the Administrative Officer, through the Building Permit process, determines the conversion meets the following requirements:

1.     On-site Sewage Disposal.  The property shall have a septic system conforming to all current Town and State regulations.  The sewage requirements of Chapter Eight of the Colchester Code of Ordinances shall not be waived by the Development Review Board.

2.  Access.  The property shall have adequate access in accordance with the adopted Colchester Code of Ordinances Chapter Seven and any amendments thereto. The Building Inspector shall be the reviewing authority for adequate access.

3.  Potable Water.  The property shall have year-round access to potable water that meets all current Town and State regulations. 

4.  The proposed year-round residential use is a permitted or otherwise allowed in the District.

5.  Two off-street parking spaces are required per dwelling unit.

D. Improvements.  A seasonal dwelling unit may be rehabilitated or otherwise repaired through the building permit process so long as the footprint is maintained or reduced and a compliant septic integrity report is submitted in accordance with Chapter Eight of the Colchester Code of Ordinances.  The requirement for a septic integrity report may be waived by the Colchester Wastewater Official if in his or her determination the work will not impact the septic system and/or if substantial information on the septic system already exists.

E. Extension. A seasonal dwelling unit may be reconstructed or enlarged through the building permit process so long as the following conditions are met:

1. On-site Sewage Disposal.  The property shall have a septic system plan showing the existing septic area and an approvable replacement area.  There shall be no encroachments into the existing septic area or the replacement area.  A compliant septic integrity report shall be submitted in accordance with Chapter Eight of the Colchester Code of Ordinances.  The requirement for a replacement area or septic integrity report may be waived by the Colchester Wastewater Official if in his or her determination: 1) the work will not impact the septic system 2) the work will not impact the replacement area, 3) and/ or if substantial information on the septic system already exists.  No increases to flows shall be allowed.

2. Potable Water.  The property shall have access to potable water that meets all current Town and State regulations.

3. The residential use is a permitted or otherwise allowed in the District.

4. Two off-street parking spaces are required per dwelling unit.

            F. Seasonal Dwelling Units shall not be subject to the time limits established under Section 2.12A(3).

 

 10.15 Change of Occupancy

 

A. General Provisions.  For any change of occupancy, excluding residential units, a zoning permit shall be obtained prior to occupancy noting the use, number of employees, business, and designated contact for the business.

B. Multi-tenant Properties.  For properties with more than one non-residential-occupancy, a cumulative impact statement shall be provided for a change of occupancy.  The cumulative impact statement shall show the number of employees associate with the new occupancy, allocation of parking and vehicle trip ends amongst the occupancies, and anticipated water / wastewater flows for the occupancies as well as the uses, business names, and designated contacts for the occupancies.

ARTICLE 11: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

 

11.01 Applicability of Vermont Planning and Development Act.

11.02 Enforcement Officer

11.03 Zoning Permits, Water & Wastewater Permits, Sign Permits, and

          Subdivision Approvals

11.04 Certificates of Occupancy and Compliance

11.05 Expiration of Permits and Approvals

11.06 Fees

11.07 Offenses, Penalties

11.08 Revocations of Permits

11.09 Appeals

11.10 Records Maintenance

 

 

11.01 Applicability of Vermont Planning and Development Act.

 

The provisions of Chapter 117, Title 24 Vermont Statutes Annotated, known as the Vermont Planning and Development Act, shall apply to the administration and enforcement of these regulations, the effect of the adoption of these regulations, the appointment and powers of the Administrative Officer, the requirement for zoning permits, sign permits, water & wastewater permits, subdivision approvals, and certificates of occupancy/compliance, penalties and remedies, administration and finance, public notice, appeals and granting of variances and other related matters; provided, however, the commencement and prosecution of a violation of these Development Regulations by the issuance of a municipal civil complaint ticket shall be governed by Chapter 59 of Title 24 Vermont Statutes Annotated and Chapter 29 of Title 24 Vermont Statutes Annotated.

 

 

11.02 Administrative Officer; Enforcement Officer.

 

The Administrative Officer shall be the enforcement officer in the enforcement of these regulations. The Administrative Officer may request other town officers and employees to assist with the enforcement of these regulations, including the Planning and Zoning staff, Wastewater Official, Building Inspector, Police Officers, and/or Town Attorney. 

Additionally, under and pursuant to the authority granted by 24 V.S.A., Chapter 59 and 24 V.S.A. Chapter 117 to “municipal officials,” the Administrative Officer shall serve as the “municipal official” or “enforcement officer” for the Town of Colchester for the purpose of enforcing these Development Regulations, and shall possess all the authority granted such official in the enforcement of said regulations.  Town officers, upon being designated as deputy municipal officials by, and subject to the general supervision and overall direction of, the Administrative Officer, shall serve as municipal officials and shall possess all the authority of a municipal official in the enforcement of said regulations.

 

11.03 Zoning Permits, Sign Permits, Water & Wastewater Permits, and Subdivisions Approvals.

 

A. Zoning Permit Required. No land development, accessory apartment, daycare facility, nursing care home, non-residential change of occupancy, home business or occupation may be commenced without a zoning permit issued by the Administrative Officer. No zoning permit may be issued by the Administrative Officer except in conformance with these regulations and the provisions of the Vermont Planning and Development Act. Any applicant for a zoning permit shall provide the Administrative Officer with any and all information the Administrative Officer deems necessary to ascertain compliance with these Development Regulations in digital format in accordance with Appendix G herein unless waived by the Director of Planning & Zoning. The land owner and, where applicable, building owner of the property shall sign the permit application or a letter of agency shall be submitted with the application demonstrating that the applicant may sign on the behalf of the owner(s). Such permit shall not be effective until the time for appeal has expired, or such appeal has been adjudicated, in accordance with the with 24 V.S.A. Section 4465.

 

B. Water & Wastewater Permit Required. No construction of a potable water supply or drilling may be commenced without a water & wastewater permit issued by the Wastewater Official.    No water & wastewater permit may be issued by the Wastewater Official except in conformance with these regulations and the provisions of the Vermont Environmental Protection rules, otherwise known as the “Vermont Water Supply Rules” as amended from time to time. Any applicant for a water & wastewater permit shall provide the Wastewater Official with any and all information the Wastewater Official deems necessary to ascertain compliance with these regulations in digital format in accordance with Appendix G herein. The land owner and, where applicable, building owner of the property shall sign the permit application or a letter of agency shall be submitted with the application demonstrating that the applicant may sign on the behalf of the owner(s).  Such permit shall not be effective until the time for appeal has expired, or such appeal has been adjudicated, in accordance with 24 V.S.A. Section 4465.

 

C.  Sign Permit Required.  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter or relocate within the Town of Colchester any sign as defined in this Ordinance, without first obtaining a sign permit from the Administrative Officer in digital format in accordance with Appendix G herein. The land owner and, where applicable, building owner of the property shall sign the permit application or a letter of agency shall be submitted with the application demonstrating that the applicant may sign on the behalf of the owner(s).  Any sign not expressly permitted by, or exempted from, the provisions of this Ordinance is prohibited. Permanent sign permits shall not be effective until the time for appeal has expired, or such appeal has been adjudicated, in accordance with the with 24 V.S.A. Section 4465.

 

D. Subdivision Approval Required.  No subdivision may be commenced without final approval issued by the Development Review Board. Any applicant for subdivision shall provide the Administrative Officer with any and all information the Administrative Officer deems necessary to ascertain compliance with these Development Regulations in digital format in accordance with Appendix G herein unless waived by the Director of Planning & Zoning. The land owner and, where applicable, building owner of the property shall sign the application or a letter of agency shall be submitted with the application demonstrating that the applicant may sign on the behalf of the owner(s). Such approval shall not be effective until the time for appeal has expired, or such appeal has been adjudicated, in accordance with the with 24 V.S.A. Section 4465.

 

 

11.04 Certificates of Occupancy / Compliance.

 

It shall be unlawful to use, occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any land or structure or part thereof created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use until the Administrative Officer or designee issues a certificate of occupancy or compliance stating that such structure or land development conforms to all approved plans and specifications and the requirements of these regulations.

 

 

11.05 Expiration of Permits and Approvals.

 

A.        Zoning Permits, Sign Permits, and Water & Wastewater Permits.

 

Unless substantial construction has commenced and is continuing, a zoning permit, sign permits, or water & wastewater permit shall expire twelve (12) months from the date of issuance unless fifty (50) percent of the work to be done under it shall have been completed during such period.  Provided, however, if construction has not commenced or continued, the Administrative Officer may extend the permit for a specified period (not to exceed 6 months) upon finding of objective evidence of the intent and effort to pursue the project for which the permit was issued.

 

B.        Other Approvals.

 

Unless substantial construction has commenced and is continuing, an approval for conditional use, variance, or site plan shall expire one year from the date of issuance of final approval in accordance with Article Eight. 

 

Approval of subdivisions shall expire unless the plat is duly recorded in mylar form with the office of the Town Clerk within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of findings of fact and order approval after being signed by the Chair of the Development Review Board in the Title Block for Subdivision.

 

 

 

11.06 Fees.

 

The Selectboard shall establish, and may revise, by ordinance or resolution, reasonable fees to be charged with respect to the administration of this Regulation.

 

 

11.07 Violations; Prosecution; Penalties.

A violation of these regulations shall constitute a civil ordinance violation. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Offenses may be prosecuted through the issuance of a municipal civil complaint ticket or the commencement of an enforcement action as described below.

 

A.        Municipal Civil Complaint Ticket.

Pursuant to 24 V.S.A. Chapter 59 and 24 V.S.A. Chapter 29, any designated enforcement officer, as referenced in section 11.02 above, may commence prosecution for any zoning violation by serving two copies of a municipal civil complaint ticket either in person or by first class mail on the alleged offender, and thereafter promptly filing the original with the Judicial Bureau. The issuing officer shall follow the procedure set forth by the Judicial Bureau for municipal complaint tickets.  The first offense ticketed for a violation shall be punishable by a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00), the waiver fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00); a second offense ticketed for the same violation shall be punishable by a fine of four hundred dollars ($400.00), the waiver fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00); a third offense ticketed for the same violation shall be punishable by a fine of eight hundred dollars ($800.00), the waiver fee shall be four hundred dollars ($400.00).  Upon the fourth offense, the Town may request that the case be transferred from the Judicial Bureau to the Environmental Court, or any other court of competent jurisdiction.

 

B.        Enforcement Action under 24 V.S.A. Chapter 117.


An enforcement action may be brought under 24 V.S.A. Section 4451 for any violation of this ordinance. Pursuant to an enforcement action, any person who violates this ordinance shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200) for each offense. No action may be brought under this subsection unless the alleged offender has had at least seven (7) days' warning notice by certified mail. An action may be brought without the seven (7) day notice and opportunity to cure if the alleged offender repeats the violation of the by-law or ordinance after the seven (7) day notice period and within the next succeeding twelve (12) months. The seven (7) day warning notice shall state that a violation exists, that the alleged offender has an opportunity to cure the violation within the seven (7) days and that the alleged offender will not be entitled to an additional warning notice for a violation occurring after the seven (7) days. In default of payment of the fine, such person, the members of any partnership, or the principal officers of such corporation, shall each pay double the amount of such fine. Each day that a violation is continued shall constitute a separate offense. All fines collected for the violation of these regulations shall be paid over to the Town.

 

C.        Unsafe Signs.

 

Any sign that is unsafe or insecure, or is a menace to the public, or has been constructed, erected or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance, the owner of the property shall be duly notified per either subsection A or B above and provided such opportunity to cure the violation.  If the owner fails to cure the violation within the time set forth in the notice, the Administrative Officer may order said sign to be removed at the expense of the owner of the property upon which it is located.  The Administrative Officer may cause any sign which is an immediate peril to person or property, to be removed without notice.

 

 

11.08 Revocations of Permits.

 

Omission or misstatement of any material fact by applicant or agent stated on the application or at any hearing, which would have warranted refusing the permit, shall be grounds for the Administrative Officer or designee to revoke the permit at any time.

 

 

11.09 Appeals.

 

Appeals in the case of the issuance of a ticket under Section 11.07(A) above shall be governed by the provisions of 24 V.S.A. Chapter 29.  The provisions of Title 24 Vermont Statutes Annotated, Chapter 117, shall govern all other appeals.  All appeal applications shall be submitted in accordance with Appendix G herein.

 

 

11.10 Records Maintenance

 

The Colchester Department of Planning and Zoning shall be responsible for the maintenance of the public records and documents associated with the administration and enforcement of these regulations per 1 V.S.A. Sections 310 to 320 including but not limited to:

A.    All Findings of Fact and Order including but not limited to Variances, Conditional Uses, Site Plans, Subdivisions, Appeals of the Administrator’s Decisions, Certificates of Appropriateness as rendered by the Development Review Board;

B.    Zoning Violations;

C.    All permits issued under these regulations;

D.    Elevation Certificates with as-built elevations (consistent with the datum of the elevation on the current Flood Insurance Rate Maps) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new, substantially improved or flood proofed structures in the Flood Plain District;

E.     All flood proofing and other certifications required per Section 6.03 herein.

 

 

11.11 Removal of Signs

Any sign that no longer identifies a bona fide project, business, or activity soon to be conducted on the lot, shall be taken down and removed by the owner of the lot upon which such sign is located within ninety (90) days after the project, business, or activity ceases.  Upon failure to comply within the time specified, the Administrative Officer is hereby authorized to cause removal of such sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the lot.

ARTICLE 12: DEFINITIONS

 

12.01 Construction of Language, Intent, and Usage

12.02 Specific Definitions

 

 

12.01 Construction of Language, Intent, and Usage

 

A. In the construction of these regulations, the following provisions and rules shall be applied, except when the context clearly requires otherwise:

1.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future and words used in the future tense shall include the present.

2. Words in the singular number shall include the plural and words in the plural number shall include the singular number.

3. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this Regulation and any caption, preamble or illustration, the text shall control.

4. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter.

5. "Built" includes "erected," "constructed," "reconstructed," "altered," "enlarged," or "moved."

6. “Existing” means the conditions existing on the effective date of these regulations.

7. “For example” shall be considered as introducing typical or illustrative, rather than an entirely exclusive or inclusive designation of, permitted or prohibited uses, activities, conditions, establishments or structures.

8. "Includes" shall not limit a term to the specified examples, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character.

9. "May" and "should" are permissive.

10. Must" is mandatory and not optional or merely directory.

11. “Occupied" includes the words intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied, employed for, constructed for, altered for, converted for, rented for, leased for, maintained for, utilized for, or occupied for.

12. "Original" means the conditions existing on the effective date of these regulations.

13. "Person" includes an individual, firm, association, corporation, partnership, trust, company or other organization, governmental body or agency, and any other legal entity.

14. "Premises" shall include land and structures thereon.

15. “Shall" is mandatory and not optional or merely directory.

16. “Such as” shall be considered as introducing typical or illustrative, rather than an entirely exclusive or inclusive designation of, permitted or prohibited uses, activities, conditions, establishments or structures.

17. "Town" is the Town of Colchester, Vermont.

18. "Used" includes the words intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied, employed for, constructed for, altered for, converted for, rented for, leased for, maintained for, utilized for, or occupied for.

 

B. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," or "either...or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows:

1. "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions,

provisions or events shall apply.

2. "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions,

or events may apply singly or in any combination.

3. "Either...or" indicates that the connected item, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly but not in combination.

 

C. References made to officials and official bodies shall mean officials and official bodies of the Town of Colchester, unless the natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise.

 

D. The word "regulation," "these regulations," "this ordinance," or “this bylaw” means the "Town of Colchester Development Regulations."

 

E. Any word or phrase which is defined in this section, or elsewhere in these regulations, shall have the meaning as so defined whenever the word or phrase is used in these regulations, unless such definition is expressly limited in its meaning or scope.

 

F. Any word or phrase that is not defined in this section, or elsewhere in these regulations, shall have its plain and commonly accepted meaning.

 

G. Definitions contained in Chapter 117, Vermont Statutes Annotated, shall be applicable throughout these regulations.

 

 

12.02 Specific Definitions

 

ACCESSORY APARTMENT:  A residential apartment authorized by Title 24 VSA Section 4412(1) (E) constituting a second unit on a parcel having the external appearance of a single-family residence.

 

ACCESSORY BUILDING: A building, the use of which is incidental to the principal use of the premise. Freight containers shall not constitute an accessory building.

 

ACCESSORY ON-FARM BUSINESS: Shall be defined as in 24 V.S.A. Section 4412.

 

ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure, the use of which is incidental to the principal use of the premise.

 

ACTION SIGN: shall mean a sign or any portion thereof that moves, such as, rotating, revolving, moving up or down or any other type of action involving a change of position of the sign body or segment thereof, whether caused by mechanical or any other means.

 

ADDITION:  An extension (enlargement) or increase in the area by extending on a side or by increasing in height the size of a building or structure.

 

ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER: Zoning Administrator for the Town of Colchester.

 

ADJACENT: Either abutting or directly across the street.

 

ADULT ENTERTAINMENT: An establishment (such as a nightclub, bar, restaurant, supper club, lounge, live or movie theater, cabaret, bookstore, or other) in which a person or persons appear in a state of nudity in the performance of their duties or material is available depicting person or persons in a state of nudity as defined herein.

 

AGRICULTURAL OPERATIONS: Accepted agricultural practices, including the construction of farm structures, as defined by the Vermont Secretary of Agriculture, Food and Markets or the Commissioner of Forests, Parks and Recreation under 10 V.S.A. Sections 1021(f) and 1259(f) and 6 V.S.A Section 4810. Agricultural Operations shall include necessary accessory uses such as packing, treating, and storing the produce. The operation of any such accessory use shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural activity.  Agricultural Operations shall exclude Sivicultural Operations (see definition herein)

 

ALLEY:  Any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property, and not intended for general traffic circulation.

 

ALTERATION:  Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members of an existing structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, partition walls, or any enlargement to or diminution of a structure,.  An alteration shall also be any change, rearrangement, or reconfiguration, of the roof or exterior walls. An alteration also shall be the moving of a building or structure from one location to another.

 

ANIMAL SHELTER: An establishment where animals are provided with shelter prior to placement with a new owner or prior to euthanasia, typically operated by a non-profit organization. Such establishment may allow sales or placement of the animals under care, and may conduct on-site euthanasia but shall not be allowed to permanently dispose of euthanized animals on-site. Such establishment may have an educational component as an accessory use.  Outside amenities such as dog runs are customary with this use.

 

ANIMATED SIGN: shall mean any sign lighted on an intermittent or flashing circuit or the movement of any light used in connection with any sign, such as, a blinking, traveling, flaring or changing degree of intensity.

 

ARCHIVAL STORAGE:  The indoor storage of records or documents in a particular order or filing system.  Appointments are typically needed for retrieval.

 

ARTIST PRODUCTION STUDIO: An establishment  for the application, teaching or performance of fine and /or visual arts such as, but not limited to, vocal or instrumental music, dance, or the creation of original handmade art or craft items.  Accessory retail sales are customary.  Artist production studio also includes graphic designers, desktop publishing, and recording studios but specifically excludes music halls, movie theaters, and theaters.

 

ATHLETIC FACILITY: An establishment for the conduct of sports and other recreational activities wholly within an enclosed building for the benefit of persons not residing on the lot on which the facility is located.  Accessory uses or structures may include snack bars, locker rooms, and pro shops for the patrons of the primary use. Examples include but are not limited to public or private health clubs, tennis or other racquet courts, swimming pools, health or fitness centers, indoor play areas, training studios for group recreation activities such as martial arts, gymnastics, and dance, bowling alleys, shooting ranges, skating rinks, rock climbing walls, and billiard halls.

 

AUTOMOBILE: A car, truck, bus, plane, scooters, mopeds, motorcycle, or vehicle other than defined as equipment, marine or recreational vehicles herein.  Wheelchairs and bicycles are not automobiles.

 

AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE & REPAIR: An establishment offering automotive maintenance and repair services.  All work is not customarily conducted outside a fully enclosed building. 

 

AUTOMOTIVE BODY WORK: An establishment providing the painting, fiberglass work, undercoating of automobiles, spray-bed-liners, or collision service such as body, frame, or fender straightening for automobiles.  All work is not customarily conducted outside a fully enclosed building. 

 

AUTOMOBILE SALES: An establishment engaged in selling or leasing of two or more automobiles where automobiles may be stored or displayed outside a fully enclosed structure. 

 

AUTOMOTIVE ACCESSORY SALES: An establishment engaged in selling accessories for automobiles such as tires, sunroofs, stereo equipment, and decorative add-ons.  Installation of automotive accessories may include applying of decals but shall not include painting, fiberglass work, spray-on bed-liners or other bodywork.  This use does not have outside storage or outside installation. 

 

AWNING: A roof-like cover that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the elements.  Construction of awnings shall be considered land development as defined herein.

 

BANK: A depository institution in which the majority of business conducted on-premise is related to walk-in customers (e.g., banks, credit unions, savings and loans).  Walk-up automated teller machines may be provided within or outside the building.  No drive-up facilities are allowed.

 

BANK, DRIVE-UP: A depository institution in which the majority of business conducted on premise is related to walk-in or drive-up customers (e.g., banks, credit unions, savings and loans).  Walk-up or drive-up automated teller machines may be provided within or outside the building.  Drive-up facilities are customary.

 

BANNERS: shall  mean signs affixed to poles, wires or ropes, such as banners, pennants, streamers, wind operated propellers, string lighting or other similar advertising media, but not to include displayed flags of town, state or country or Prisoners of War flag attached to a building or pole.

 

BAR:  An establishment for the sale or dispensing of alcohol by the drink for on-site consumption, where food may be available for consumption on the premises as accessory to the principal use, and where alcoholic beverages are available after 11:00 p.m.  To differentiate a bar from a restaurant, bars are also classified as any establishment selling or dispensing alcohol after 11:00 p.m.  A bar may have live music, karaoke, dancing, or recreational amenities.

 

BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

 

BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The height of the base flood, usually in feet, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929, the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, or other datum referenced in the Flood Insurance Study report, or average depth of the base flood, usually in feet, above the ground surface.

 

BASEMENT:  A story in a building, the structural ceiling level of which is four (4) feet or more above the average level of finished grade where such grade abuts that exterior wall of such building which fronts on any street, and the floor level of which is below finished grade at any point on the periphery of the building.  (See diagram, Appendix B)

 

BASIC AMENITIES (for determining a seasonal dwelling unit) – Shall consist of a sewage system and water supply in full conformance with the Regulations for a year-round system, toilet, shower or bathtub, wall and ceiling insulation, year-round heating source, refrigerator and stove.

 

BED AND BREAKFAST: A dwelling unit, or portion thereof, with five or fewer guestrooms, where short-term lodging rooms and meals are provided for overnight guests.  The operator of the bed and breakfast shall live on the premises.  For the purposes of this definition, short-term shall mean up to one (1) week.

 

BEDROOM:  Any room with a window and a closet, and which is physically separated from other rooms.

 

BERTH:  A slip, mooring or space to accommodate a boat or vessel.

 

BILLBOARD: shall mean any structure bearing a sign which is not related to any business conducted on the property where the billboard is located.

 

BOARDING HOUSE:  An establishment, other than a hotel, inn, motel, tourist court or lodging house, where not more than two (2) rooms are let and where meals may be regularly served by pre-arrangement for compensations.  A boarding house is not open to transient guests, in contrast to hotels, restaurants and tourist homes, which are open to transients. The facility shall be licensed and operated in accordance with applicable law.

 

BUILDING:  A structure designed to be used as a place of occupancy, storage or shelter.

 

BUILDING AREA: The portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been provided.

 

BUILDING COVERAGE: The part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings or structures including accessory buildings.

 

BUILDING ENVELOPE: The area delineated on an approved final plat plan of a project as meeting the approved minimum setbacks from lot lines, natural features, and any other restricted areas such as planned unit development buffers.  All principal buildings and structures, including septic systems, shall occur within the building envelope.

 

BUILDING FOOTPRINT: The area delineated on an approved final plat plan of a project as where a specific structure shall be placed so as to be in conformance with minimum setbacks from lot lines, natural features, and any other restricted areas such as planned unit development buffers.

 

BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance of a building measured from the average preconstruction grade level at the base of the building to the highest point of the roof. (See Figure II in Appendix B: General Provisions Diagrams)

 

BUILDING LINE: A line formed by the face of a building. (See diagram, Appendix B)

 

BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: The primary building on a lot or the building that houses the principal use.

 

BUSINESS SERVICE: Establishments primarily engaged in rendering services to businesses on a fee or contract basis.  Examples include but are not limited to advertising and mailing, building maintenance, employment service, management and consulting service, protective service, commercial research, photocopy facilities in which majority of business conducted on premise is related to walk-in customers, and personal supply service.

 

BUS STATION: Establishments engaged primarily in furnishing local, statewide and interstate bus service, passenger service, charter service, and terminal.  Roadside bus stops shall be excluded from this use.  A bus station customarily has an associated structure with accessory retail.

 

CAMPGROUND:  Any lot occupied for vacation or recreational purposes by more than three (3) automobile trailers, campers, recreational vehicles, tent sites or temporary cabins.  A campground includes non-commercial (no charge, no service) and commercial operations.  A mobile home used as a residence is considered to be a dwelling and this definition is not applicable. 

 

CAMPGROUND, PRIMITIVE:  Any lot occupied by more than three (3) tent sites (for a brief period) for vacation or recreational purposes.  Bathhouses or outhouses are customary at a primitive campground whereas laundry facilities and retail uses are not customary.  A primitive campground includes non-commercial (no charge, no service) and commercial operations. 

 

CANOPY: shall mean structures comprised of a fabric and frame attached to a building or a freestanding fabric (or other similar material) and frame that is attached to a building, which structures are used for seasonal and/or advertising purposes, and may or may not contain graphics or sign information for a particular establishment.

 

CAR WASH: An establishment for washing automobiles, whether by automatic device or self-service.

 

CELLAR:  Any space in a building, the structural ceiling level of which is less than four (4) feet above the average finished grade where such grade abuts that exterior wall of such building which fronts on any street.  A cellar should not be considered in determining the permissible number of stories. (See diagram, Appendix B)

 

CEMETERY:  A lot or establishment for the interring of the dead.

 

CIVIL DEFENSE OPERATION: A lot or establishment utilized by the Federal government for, or in conjunction with, defensive or offensive military operations.  The military, as referred to herein, shall include all Federal branches of the military and the Coast Guard.  Dormitories, warehouses, cafeterias, and outdoor storage are customary accessory uses.

 

COLISEUM: A structure designed to seat or accommodate more than 1,000 people for spectator sports, exhibitions, and cultural events.

 

COMMERCIAL GREENHOUSE (S): An establishment (retail and/or wholesale) comprised of enclosed glass or plastic structure(s) and sales outlet for the cultivation and sale of tender plants (such as flowers and vegetables).  Commercial greenhouses with on-site sales shall have frontage along and primary access from a public road.  Commercial greenhouse operations shall require a minimum lot size of five (5) acres.

 

COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: A vehicle used for business purposes including but not limited to a vehicle which carries goods, equipment or passengers for hire.  Vehicles, which display advertising (other than identification of the vehicle’s manufacturer, make or dealer), shall be considered commercial vehicles.

 

COMMUNITY CENTER:  A government owned establishment or lot used for recreational, social, educational, and cultural activities that is open, partially or fully, to the public, including senior centers and teen-centers, schools and cultural facilities.

 

COMMUNITY SEPTIC: For the purposes of determining density and minimum lot size per Table A-2 herein, a community septic system shall be defined as a septic system that serves more than one dwelling unit.

 

CONDITIONAL USE: A use that is allowed in a particular district only after review and approval by the Development Review Board per 24 V.S.A. Sections 4414(3) and 4464 under Article Eight herein and subject to specific standards of the particular district.

 

CONGREGATE HOUSING:  Detached or multi-family housing that provides facilities and services specifically designed to meet the physical or social needs of older persons.  Significant facilities and services may include, but are not limited to, social and recreational programs, continuing education, information and counseling, recreational, homemaker, outside maintenance and referral services, emergency and preventative health care programs, elderly dining facilities and transportation to social services.  Such housing shall be in an accessible physical environment.  At least 80 percent of all occupied units must be occupied by persons aged 55 or older (the 80% requirement applies to occupants, not owners): and no person under 19 years of age shall reside in any unit for more than ninety (90) days in any calendar year, except that in the event of a person(s) under 19 years of age who is (are) disabled and is (are) dependent upon the qualified occupant (at least 55 years old), said dependent person shall be permitted to reside in the unit on a permanent basis.

 

CONSTRUCTION SIGN: shall mean any sign erected on a project site prior to or during a construction project.

 

CONTRACTOR’S YARD: An establishment engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users; to other wholesalers; or where persons such as agents or brokers, buy merchandise for or sell merchandise to such individual, users, or companies. A contractor’s yard is typically a wholesale trade operation, but may also have retail trade or have some portion allocated to retail trade. Typical uses include lumber yards, mill work yards, and stone or masonry yards.  Outside storage is customary.  This is a use that customarily requires periphery screening.

 

CONTRACTOR’S YARD, LANDSCAPE: An establishment that is engaged in rendering landscaping services to individuals on a fee or contract basis and/or that sells landscape materials such as but not limited to mulch, fencing, and stone. A landscape contractor’s yard is typically a wholesale trade operation, but may also have retail trade or have some portion allocated to retail trade. Outside storage is customary.  This is a use that customarily requires periphery screening.

 

CONVENIENCE STORE: A retail store designed and stocked primarily to sell food, beverages, and other groceries to customers containing less than 3,000 square feet of Floor Area, Gross.  A convenience store may include gasoline sales as provided in Appendix Table A-1, the table of permissible uses herein.

 

CORRECTIONAL FACILITY: A place of confinement for persons held in the penal custody of a municipality, state, or federal entity.  A correctional facility may also provide facilities for the treatment and rehabilitation of persons convicted of criminal acts.  Facilities that include treatment and rehabilitation services customarily include dormitories, recreational amenities, educational facilities, cultural amenities, manufacturing and processing, accessory office space, cafeterias, and clinics.

 

CREMATORIUM: An establishment where waste or human remains are burned in a furnace.  All crematoriums shall follow State of Vermont protocol, licensing and all other applicable regulations.

 

CULTURAL FACILITY:  An establishment that documents the social and religious structures and intellectual and artistic manifestations that characterize a society including libraries, museums, art galleries, and botanical and zoological gardens of a natural, historic, educational, or cultural interest. This use customarily includes associated educational and instructional activities and accessory retail space.

 

CUT-OUT LETTERS: shall mean letters, numbers, emblems and symbols which are detached or separately molded from the material from which they were made.

 

DAY CARE FACILITY, HOME-BASED: A state registered or licensed family child care home serving six (6) or fewer children as referenced in 24 V.S.A. Section 4412(5) as amended from time to time.  A home-based day care facility shall be considered to constitute a permitted single-family residential use of the property.

 

DAY CARE FACILITY, INTERMEDIATE: A state registered or licensed family child care home serving no more than six (6) children full-time and four part-time children  as referenced in 24 V.S.A. Section 4412(5) as amended from time to time.  An intermediate day care facility shall be subject to site plan approval.

 

DAY CARE FACILITY, LARGE: An establishment operated as a business or service on a regular or continual basis, whether for compensation or not, to provide care, protection, supervision and/or education for children under the age of 16 outside their homes for periods of fewer than 24 hours a day by a person other than a child's own parent, guardian or relative.  A day care facility that is not registered or licensed by the state or serves seven (7) or more children full-time or more than ten (10) children combined shall constitute a large day care facility.  A large day care facility excludes home-based and intermediate day care facilities.  This definition encompasses facilities generally known as child care center, day care center, pre-school, nursery school, and similar programs and facilities for infants and children, but does not include schools as defined herein.  All centers shall be licensed and operated in accordance with applicable law.

 

DEVELOPMENT: Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials and all other activities as defined in 44 CFR 59.1 and in the definition of Land Development as defined herein.  This definition shall only pertain to Section 6.03, Flood Plain District, herein.

 

DEVELOPMENT REVIEW BOARD (DRB):  An appropriate municipal panel as authorized under the Vermont Municipal and Regional Planning and Development Act, Title 24 V.S.A. Section 4460.

 

DOCK:  A wharf, pier, or other structure that allows passage from the shore, whether floating or not, including all “els”, “T”s or posts which may be a part thereof whether fixed or adjacent to the principal dock structure.

 

DIRECTIONAL SIGN: shall mean a sign not exceeding three (3) square feet and with lettering not exceeding six (6) inches in height, designed to direct and inform the public as to the location of exits, entrances, service areas, loading and unloading areas, or similar wording of an informational nature. Logos, business names, and commercial messages shall be prohibited on directional signs.

 

DIRECTORY SIGN: shall mean a freestanding sign erected at an entrance to one property or multiple properties served by a common curb-cut and listing those businesses, organizations or entities at that location.

 

DISTRIBUTION FACILITY: An establishment engaged in the receipt, storage, and distribution of goods, products, cargo, and materials, including transshipment by boat, rail, air, or motor vehicle.  A distribution facility may include a truck terminal but shall not include truck repair.

 

DISTRICT:  A part, zone, or geographic area within the municipality within which certain zoning or development regulations apply.  These districts shall include and be limited to those listed in Section 2.01 herein.

 

DORMITORY:  A residential building used as group living quarters for a school, orphanage, convent, monastery or other similar institutional use listed under Section Five of the Table of Uses herein.  A dormitory shall not exceed 14,000 gross square footage in size.

 

DRIVE-UP:  An establishment which by design, physical facilities, service, or packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive services or goods while remaining in their vehicles.  The drive-up use may be the principal or accessory use on a lot.

 

DRYCLEANER: See Laundromat.

 

DWELLING, DUPLEX: A detached building containing two (2) dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than two (2) families.

 

DWELLING, MOBILE HOME: A detached dwelling unit designed for transportation on streets or highways, on its own wheels or on flatbed or other trailers, and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or other temporary or permanent foundations, connections to utilities and the like. A mobile home is designed for long-term occupancy and containing sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or shower bath, and kitchen facilities with plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems.  A travel trailer is not considered as a mobile home. 

 

DWELLING, MODULAR: A dwelling unit constructed in accordance with the codes and standards set forth in Chapter Four of the Colchester Code of Ordinances for site built homes, and composed of components substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and transported to the building site for final assembly on a permanent foundation.  This definition shall include manufactured homes.

 

DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A building, designed for or occupied by three (3) or more families, with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided.

 

DWELLING, SEASONAL:  A dwelling unit that is not approved for year round occupancy or that lacks one or more of the basic amenities or utilities required for year-round occupancy. A summer seasonal dwelling is occupied from April 1st through October 31st. A winter seasonal dwelling is occupied from November 1st through March 31st.

 

DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY: A detached dwelling unit designed for and occupied by one (1) family.

 

DWELLING, TEMPORARY EMERGENCY, CONSTRUCTION, OR REPAIR: A residence (which may be a mobile home) that is: (i) located on the same lot as a residence made uninhabitable by fire, flood or other natural disaster and occupied by the persons displaced by such disaster, or (ii) located on the same lot as a residence that is under construction or undergoing substantial repairs or reconstruction and occupied by the persons intending to live in such permanent residence when the work is completed, or (iii) persons having construction or security responsibilities over such construction site.

 

DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single household.

 

DWELLING, YEAR-ROUND: A dwelling unit continuously occupied from January 1st through December 31st.

 

EASEMENT: The authorization of a property owner for the use by another, and for a specific purpose, of any designated part of his/her property.

 

EQUIPMENT, LARGE: Construction equipment including cranes, bucket-loaders, bulldozers, agricultural equipment, recreational vehicles and other equipment intended to be operated under its own power.  Large equipment excludes automobiles and marine vehicles.

 

EQUIPMENT, SMALL: Lawnmowers, utility trailers, hand tools, all terrain vehicles, golf carts, snowmobiles, lawn maintenance machines, snow maintenance machines, audio-visual equipment, and other similar equipment.  Small equipment excludes automobiles and marine vehicles and associated accessories.

 

ESSENTIAL SERVICES, COMMUNITY: The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance of structures, generating or processing plants, gas plants, bus stops, transportation infrastructure, water tanks, gas lines, distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduit cables, fire alarm boxes, pumping stations, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, street signs, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate services by such public utilities or local, state, or federal governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare intended to service more than 25% of Colchester’s population or acreage or a population or acreage outside of the Town of Colchester.

 

ESSENTIAL SERVICES, NEIGHBORHOOD: The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance of structures, generating or processing plants, bus stops, transportation infrastructure, distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, gas lines, sewers, pumping stations, pipes, conduit cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, street signs, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate services by such public utilities or local, state, or federal governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare of a specific location.

 

ESTABLISHMENT: A business, firm, club, institution, or residence, including its members, occupants, possessions, or employees.

 

EVENT FACILITY: A facility that primarily functions to host business or social gatherings that typically consists of one or more multi-purpose meeting rooms, kitchen facilities and/or recreational facilities that are available for use by various private groups for conferences, meetings, parties, weddings, receptions, reunions and similar group functions.

 

EXCAVATION:  Any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and ground care.

 

EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations adopted by Colchester.  This definition shall only pertain to Section 6.03, Flood Plain District, herein. This definition shall also include Mobile Home Park as defined herein.

 

EXPANSION TO AN EXISITNG MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the constructions of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).  This definition shall only pertain to Section 6.03, Flood Plain District, herein.   This definition shall also include Land Development as defined herein.

 

EXTENSION:  An increase in the amount of floor area or in the amount of building coverage or lot coverage.

 

FAMILY: See household.

 

FCC: Federal Communications Commission.  The federal government agency responsible for regulating telecommunications in the United States.

 

FENCE:  Any enclosing structure, other than part of a building, of sufficient strength and dimensions to prevent straying from within or intrusion from without, except enclosures of tennis courts.

 

FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT - The final drawings on which the subdivision is presented to the Board for approval and which, if approved, shall be filed for record with the Town Clerk.

 

FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: An establishment in which financial, pecuniary, fiscal, or monetary services are made available to the public, including but not limited to non-depository institutions (e.g., credit agencies, loan brokers), holding companies (but not predominantly operating companies), depository institutions where the majority of business conducted on premise is not related to walk-in or drive-up customers (e.g., banks, credit unions, savings and loans), other investment companies, brokers and dealers in securities and commodities contracts, and security and commodity exchanges.

 

FIRING RANGE, INDOOR: A facility providing a place for the discharge of various types of firearms or the practice of archery within a fully enclosed building. An indoor firing range is not considered to be: 1) target practice by individuals on property owned the individuals; 2) sighting of weapons for purposes of hunting; 3) or the taking of animals as defined by 10 V.S.A. Chapter 101, Section 4001.  All firing ranges shall comply with the provisions of Colchester Code of Ordinances Chapter Nine. All firing ranges should generally be constructed in accordance with Section One Chapter One of the National Rifle Association Range Source Book.

 

FIRING RANGE, OUTDOOR: A facility providing a place for the discharge of various types of firearms or the practice of archery outside a fully enclosed structure. An outdoor firing range is not considered to be: 1) target practice by individuals on property owned the individuals; 2) sighting of weapons for purposes of hunting; or 3) the taking of animals as defined by 10 V.S.A. Chapter 101, Section 4001. All firing ranges shall comply with the provisions of Colchester Code of Ordinances Chapter Nine. All firing ranges should generally be constructed in accordance with Section One Chapter One of the National Rifle Association Range Source Book.

 

FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

 

FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and /or flood related erosion hazards.

 

FLOOD PLAIN: That land which would be subject to flooding by the 100 year flood or that flood which would have a 1% chance of occurring each year – Zone A on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map.

 

FLOOD PROOFING:  Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.

 

FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot at any point.

 

FLOODWAY, REGULATORY IN THE TOWN OF COLCHESTER: See Floodway.

 

FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The gross area of all floors of all principal and accessory buildings on a lot, measured from the exterior face of the exterior walls, or in the case of a common wall separating two buildings, from the center line of such common walls. Gross floor area shall include such features as porches, balconies, breezeways, walkways, and raised platforms.

 

FOOTPRINT LOT: A lot created through the Planned Unit Development subdivision permit process that is generally designed to be contemporaneous with the footprint of a building or a portion of a building.  A footprint lot is a form of ownership and conveyance but shall not be recognized for the purposes of zoning included but not limited to lot coverage maximums, setbacks, frontage, etc.

 

FRONTAGE:  That boundary of a lot which abuts on a public street or way.  The Interstate and Circumferential Highway rights-of-way and public waters shall not be considered frontage.

 

FLORESCENT COLORS: shall mean colors that reflect not only their own color, but also convert the shorter wave lengths into radiant energy causing them to appear 3 to 4 times as bright as ordinary color.  These colors do not reflect light toward its source in the intense manner that reflectorized materials do, but rather in an amount similar to a white painted surface.

 

FREE-STANDING SIGN: shall mean a sign detached from any building.

 

FUNERAL HOME: An establishment for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and rituals connected therewith before burial or cremation. 

 

GARAGE, AUTOMOBILE PARKING: This use may be a structured parking garage or a parking lot that is publicly or privately operated.  Parking shall be open to the general public for parking with or without an associated fee.  Parking may not necessarily be located on a lot on which there is another principal use to which the parking is related.

 

GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory structure for parking or storage of not more than that number of vehicles as may be required in connection with the permitted use of the principal building or structure.

 

GARAGE, PUBLIC: A structure owned or operated by a local or state government used primarily for the parking, storing, and servicing of vehicles.  Vehicle servicing within a fully enclosed building and gasoline storage and dispensing are customary.  Storage of sand, salt, and materials employed in municipal or state maintenance of infrastructure and municipal services is customary. 

 

GASOLINE SALES: An establishment engaged in selling or dispensing motor fuels directly to users of motor vehicles.  This use does not customarily have outside storage. 

 

GREEN STORMWATER INFRASTRUCTURE: Stormwater management systems and practices that restore and maintain natural hydrologic processes in order to reduce the volume and water quality impacts of the built environment while providing multiple societal benefits.

 

GREENING: Retrofitting previously developed sites to improve their environmental and aesthetic performance by introducing green space, infrastructure and buildings through measures such as providing generous landscaped areas with good quality soil, planting trees, managing stormwater on-site, reducing the urban heat island effect, enhancing pedestrian and bicycle circulation, and using sustainable materials and technologies.

 

GROOMING FACILITY: An establishment in which more than four (4) dogs, cats, or other domesticated animals are groomed, washed, or otherwise cleaned for a fee or compensation a day.

 

HALFWAY HOUSE: An establishment intended to provide for transitional group living arrangements for persons discharged from hospitals, prison mental institutions or other similar facilities, or in lieu of hospitalization or imprisonment, characterized by the presence of live-in staff, emphasizing the development of skills necessary for more independent living and

shall be licensed and operated in accordance with applicable law.  Halfway homes shall have a clearly stated maximum occupancy. 

 

HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or combination of substances of a solid, liquid, gaseous or semi-solid from which may be explosive, flammable, toxic, acidic, corrosive, caustic, pathogenic or radioactive and are present in sufficient quantity or combination thereof or are being handled, stored, manufactured, processed, transported or disposed of in such a manner that it can be reasonably assumed such conditions constitute a peril to buildings, structures, or the general public.

 

HIGHWAY, ARTERIAL: Major thoroughfares that carry traffic between communities; to include Routes 2A, 2, 7, 15 and I-89, Circumferential Highway (Vermont Route 289).

 

HIGHWAY, COLLECTOR: Roads or streets that carry the major internal traffic of the community and which link trip origin and arterial highways. These highways include all those listed in Section 2.05 herein.

 

HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is: (a) listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: (i) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (ii) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

 

HOME BUSINESS: An occupation carried on within a dwelling unit which is incidental and secondary to the primary use of the building for dwelling purposes which does not change the character of the neighborhood, in which it may employ up to three (3) on-premises employees who are not residents of the dwelling.  At least one person involved in the business shall be a resident of the dwelling. Automotive repair and automotive accessory installation shall not be considered home business uses.

 

HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation carried on within a dwelling unit which is incidental and secondary to the primary use of the building for dwelling purposes, is not visible or noticeable in any manner or form from outside the walls of the dwellings, and which does not change the character thereof which it may employ up to two (2) on-premises employees who are not residents of the dwelling. At least one person involved in the business shall be a resident of the dwelling.  Automotive repair and automotive accessory installation are not home occupations.

 

HOSPICE CARE HOME: An establishment that provides skilled symptom management and supportive nursing care by licensed medical staff for terminally ill patients with the expected prognosis of six months or less.

 

HOSPITAL: A licensed institution providing primary health care services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity, and other physical or mental conditions requiring medical treatment, and including as an integral part of the institution related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities, and training facilities. Hospitals customarily include the retail sale of pharmaceuticals and medical supplies an accessory use.

 

HOTEL: An establishment in which (a) living or sleeping accommodations are primarily for transient occupancy on a daily basis for compensation available to the general public, and (b) one or more common entrances serve all such living or sleeping units.   Hotel services may include twenty-four hour desk service, housekeeping, telephone, or bellhop service, or the furnishing or laundering of linens. Permitted accessory uses include restaurants or other public dining facility, bars or lounges, public banquet halls, ballrooms, meeting rooms, pools, and recreational facilities customary to such use.

 

HOTEL, EXTENDED STAY: A residential hotel containing small furnished apartment type units rented on a short term basis usually each with a kitchen, bath, living space and separate bedroom/sleeping space.  Hotel services may include a common area, business support facilities, guest only breakfast facilities, lobby, or recreation space and amenities.  Hotel services shall exclude public restaurant(s), cocktail lounge(s), or banquet meeting rooms containing more than fifty (50) seats. No more than fifteen percent (15%) of the units shall contain more than one bedroom. Units must be available on a daily, weekly and monthly basis and shall not be rented to the same occupant for more than one hundred eighty (180) days in any three hundred sixty-five (365) day period.

 

HOUSEHOLD:  A group of individuals not necessarily related by blood, marriage, adoption, or guardianship living together in a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit under a common housekeeping management plan based on an intentionally structured relationship providing organization and stability.  A household has common access to and use of all living and eating areas and all areas and facilities for the preparation and serving of food within the dwelling unit.

 

IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: A surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of materials so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.  It includes surfaces such as compacted sand, lime rock, gravel, or clay, as well as most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots, and other similar structures.

 

INCIDENTAL SIGN: shall mean a sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as "no parking", "loading only", "telephone", or other similar directives.  Incidental signs do not contain commercial messages. Traffic warning signs such as "Stop" or "Right Turn Only" or entrance signs such as "enter" or "exit" shall not be considered incidental.

 

INN: An establishment containing no more than 60 rooms for living or sleeping accommodations primarily for transient occupancy for compensation available to the general public.  For establishments greater than nine separate accommodations, no more than 40% of the rooms may contain small furnished apartment type units rented on a short term basis usually each with a kitchen, bath, living space and separate bedroom.  Units must be available on a daily, weekly and monthly basis and shall not be rented to the same occupant for more than one hundred eighty (180) days in any three hundred sixty-five (365) day period. Inn services may include twenty-four hour desk service, housekeeping, telephone, or bellhop service, or the furnishing or laundering of linens. Permitted accessory uses include restaurants or other public dining facility, bars or lounges, meeting rooms, pools, and recreational facilities customary to such use.

 

JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE:  A discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, inoperable, unregistered, or ruined automobile, equipment, marine vehicle, or recreational vehicle or parts thereof.

 

KENNEL: An establishment used for the breeding, training, sale, or boarding of more than four (4) dogs, cats, or other small domestic animals belonging to a person or persons other than the owner of the lot.  Kennel use includes pet daycare but does not include a veterinary clinic or animal shelter or sale of general merchandise.  Kennels customarily have outside amenities such as dog runs.  A kennel shall follow State of Vermont protocol, licensing and all other applicable regulations. 

 

LAND DEVELOPMENT: The division of a lot into two or more lots, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building, sign, or other structure; any of any mining, excavation, or landfill, and any change in the use of any building or structure, or land, or extension of the use of land.  This includes the definition of Development herein.

 

LANDFILL, RECLAMATION: A lot previously used for disposal and depositing of refuse and earth or other suitable cover material.  The lot may be adapted for alternative uses in accordance with all applicable Federal, State, or Municipal rules and regulations.

 

LANDFILL, SANITARY: A lot for solid waste disposal in which the solid waste is spread in thin layers, compacted to reduce its volume, and covered with earth at the end of each working day.  The site shall be operated in accordance with all applicable Federal, State, or Municipal rules and regulations.

 

LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR’S YARD: See CONTRACTOR’S YARD, LANDSCAPE

 

LAUNDROMAT: An establishment providing washing, drying, or dry-cleaning machines for the cleaning of clothing, linens, or fabric on the premises.

 

LEGISLATIVE BODY - Means the Selectboard of the Town of Colchester.

 

LIGHTING FIXTURE: A lighting fixture is an assemblage of ballast, lamp receptacles, wiring, reflectors, refractors, prisms, lenses, etc., all contained within a single housing or casing, and designed to be mounted as a single unit. A fixture may be designed to accept one or more lamps. One or more fixtures may be mounted to a single support.

 

LOT: The plot, piece, parcel of land or assemblage of recorded contiguous parcels of land, the latter all in common ownership and designated as a single parcel, established and recorded by plat, subdivision, or otherwise permitted by law of a size sufficiently large to lawfully construct a principal building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or of a size sufficiently large to lawfully be utilized for a principal use and uses accessory or incidental to the operation thereof, together with such open spaces as required by these regulations herein. Lot boundaries are (A) established by a deed or deeds recorded in the land records of the Town of Colchester; or (B) shown on a plat approved by the Colchester Development Review Board pursuant to Colchester Subdivision Regulations, provided such approval has not expired.  The definition of the term “lot” shall not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way or areas of land appended to a lot by leasehold, license, or otherwise, except by boundary line adjustments approved by the Town.

 

LOT AREA: A total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot.

 

LOT, CORNER: A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets or abutting a curved street in such a way that the front building line meets either side lot line at interior angle of less than 135 degrees.  The point of intersection of the street lot lines is the corner. A corner lot shall be deemed to have two front yards and two side yards and no rear yard.

 

LOT COVERAGE: The part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings or structures, including accessory buildings, structures, driveway, vehicle travel lanes, sidewalks, designated storage areas including storage areas for boats, trailers, other vehicles and off-street parking areas, and all impervious areas.  Green stormwater infrastructure, as defined herein, shall not be considered lot coverage.

 

LOT DEPTH: The distance measured from the front lot line to the rear lot line. Where the front and rear lot lines are not parallel, the lot depth shall be measured by drawing lines from the front to rear lot lines at right angles to the front lot line, every ten feet and averaging the length of these lines.

Lot Lines: The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.

Front Lot Line: The line separating said lot from the street, public road, public way or required setback of the Shoreland District.

Rear Lot Line: The lot line opposite the front lot line.  In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line not less than ten (10) ft. long lying farthest from the front line and wholly within the lot.

Side Lot Line: Any lot lines other than the front lot lines or rear lot lines.

 

LOT, INTERIOR: Any lot other than a corner lot with frontage only on one street, public road, or public way.

 

LOT OF RECORD: A parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a duly recorded plat on file with the Town Clerk.

 

LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement.  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; Provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.

 

LUMBER YARD: See contractor’s yard.

 

LUMINESCENT: shall mean any lighting of a sign, produced by the action of electricity in an enclosed gas, such as neon and argon.

 

LUMINOUS MATERIAL: shall mean a material that stores light and glows in the dark.   The glow can be described as a weak soft light.

 

MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.  This definition shall only pertain to Section 6.03, Flood Plain District, herein.   This definition does not include Recreational Vehicle as herein defined.  This definition shall also include Dwelling, Mobile Home; and Dwelling, Modular.

 

MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.  This definition shall only pertain to Section 6.03, Flood Plain District, herein.   This definition shall also include Mobile Home Park as defined herein.

 

MANUFACTURING: Establishments engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products including the assembling of component parts, the manufacture of products, and the blending of materials.  Storage inside a fully enclosed building and shipment processes related to the manufacturing use are customary. 

 

MANUFACTURING, SMALL-SCALE: the custom manufacturing of certain products in limited quantities for distribution primarily to a local or regional market; including but not limited to: confections and other custom made food and beverage items, furniture, candles, and similar products, utilizing a space no larger than 5,000 square feet and provided all manufacturing activities are contained entirely within a building and noise, odor, smoke, heat, glare, and vibration resulting from the manufacturing activity are confined entirely within the building. This use does not include automotive or small engine repair, slaughterhouses, or similar activities. Retail sales items manufactured on-site and a short order restaurant may be accessory uses.

 

MARINA:  Any shoreline property used to provide one (1) or more of the following:

a) Access to public waters for docking or mooring of five (5) or more boats with or without other services; or,

b) A small-craft harbor complex providing access to public water characterized by such activities as boat manufacture, construction or repairs, sales, rentals, chartering, derricks, docks, wharves, moorings, marine railways, boat storage and other marine-type facilities and commercial services which may include the sale of food or other services clearly incidental to the operation of the marine based activities.

A Marina shall require 150 feet of shoreline frontage.  Any Marina that accommodates boats with sleeping facilities shall also provide for on-shore based facilities for pumping and / or disposal of wastes.  A Marina shall not interfere with or prevent use of adjacent shoreland property or its access to and from the water.  A Marina shall be compatible with adjacent land uses and shall not be a source of nuisance by reason of noise or fumes.  A marina includes the accessory uses defined under the following categories of Appendix A of the Development Regulations: 2.130 Retail Sales; 2.140 Retail Food Establishment; 2.300 Marine Sales; 2.640 Marine Rental; 5.500 Social Clubs; and 9.250 Marine Storage Outside; and 9.260 Marine Storage Inside.

 

 

MARINE ASSOCIATION, RESIDENTIAL: Any commonly held shoreline property which is a common element of or an appurtenance to a residential development on the same or adjacent property that:

(a) provides access to public water for docking or mooring of five (5) or more boats; and

(b) is strictly limited to use by the owner of residences in the associated residential development and the immediate family of the owners according to and limited by recorded covenants in the land records; and

(c) which does not provide or allow such services incidental to the operation of commercial marinas as characterized by such activities as boat manufacture, construction or repairs, sales, rentals, chartering, derricks, marine railways, and other marine-type facilities and commercial services which may include the sale of food or other services clearly incidental to the operation of the marine based activities.

A Residential Marine Association shall require 150 feet of shoreline frontage.  Any association that accommodates boats with sleeping facilities shall also provide for on or off-shore based facilities for pumping and / or disposal of wastes.  A Residential Marine Association shall not interfere with or prevent use of adjacent shoreland property or its access to and from the water.  A Residential Marine Association shall be compatible with adjacent land uses and shall not be a source of nuisance by reason of noise or fumes.

 

MARINE SALES:  An establishment engaged in selling, renting or leasing of boats and watercraft.  Boats and watercraft may be stored on the site that is for sale, rent, or lease.  This use customarily has outside storage but does not include the winter storage of boats and watercraft that are not for sale, rent, or lease.  This use includes accessory retail sales of marine equipment.

 

MEAN WATERMARK: The terms “mean water mark”, “mean water level”, and “normal mean water mark” is considered to be one and the same. For Lake Champlain the mean watermark has been established as 95.5 ft above mean sea level.  For Colchester Pond the mean watermark has been established as the elevation of the spillway for a mean water level of 383.0 ft. above mean sea level. For the Winooski River and Lamoille River the mean water mark shall be as determined by the property owner and the Town’s

Administrative Officer based on data published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers “Flood Plain Information”.

 

MEMORIAL SIGN: shall mean a monument, tablet, plaque or similar structure memorializing a person, event, building or site.

 

MENTAL HEALTH FACILITY: An establishment that has the primary focus of providing licensed, skilled, full-time care and related services for patients with mental health problems. The facility may provide extended and/or intermediate care for those who by reason of mental condition need acute, chronic, or convalescent care. Patients include both at will and not at will admissions.

 

MINI-STORAGE:  A structure containing separate, individual, and private storage spaces of varying sizes leased or rented on individual leases for varying periods of time.  Mini-Storage shall not include outside storage or archival storage.  Only the storage of goods, materials, and merchandise is allowed within mini-storage structures.  Perimeter fencing is customary. 

 

MINING OPERATIONS:  The excavation or extraction of sand, gravel, clay, slate, marble, granite, other stone material or rock, or any other earth product for commercial purposes.  Mining operations shall include borrow pits and quarrying operations.  On-site sales are customary.  Structures are not customary.

 

MOBILE FOOD UNIT: A short-order restaurant establishment that is open for business usually seasonally and capable of being driven or towed off-site without much difficulty. Food is customarily consumed off premise. Outdoor seating, when permitted in accordance with the regulations herein, may consist of benches and chairs that are not permanently affixed to the ground Mobile food units are customarily operated between 10AM and 9PM and are usually removed from the premise between November 1st and March 31st. Restrooms are not customarily provided in conjunction with the mobile food unit use. All accessory items, such as dumpsters, are customarily removed from the premise when the mobile food unit is removed.

 

MOBILE HOME PARK: A lot upon which two (2) or more mobile homes are parked and occupied for living purposes.  All mobile home parks shall be reviewed as Planned Residential Developments as per Article Nine.  All mobile home parks shall also be reviewed, evaluated, and subject to the requirements of Title 10 of Vermont State Statues, Chapter 15 entitle “Mobile Home Parks” as modified from time to time.

 

MOBILE HOME SALES: An establishment engaged in selling, renting or leasing of mobile homes.  Mobile homes may be stored on the site without fixed foundations.  Mobile homes stored on site shall not be occupied.  Mobile homes sales include accessory office space and customarily includes outside storage.

 

MOTEL: An establishment which (A) contains six or more rooms containing living and sleeping accommodations used primarily for transient occupancy to the general public on a daily basis for compensation, with the exception of the manager's or caretaker's unit, and (B) has convenient access to parking spaces for the use of the unit's occupants by way of separate entrances or groups of separate entrances, outside the main building, into the individual units.

 

MOVIE THEATER: An establishment that shows picture films to the general public.

 

MUNICIPAL OR PUBLIC FACILITIES: These facilities are generally public facilities owned by the Town of Colchester, the State of Vermont, the United States Government, Colchester Fire Districts, or utility companies such as the Champlain Water District, Green Mountain Power and VELCO. Specifically excluded from municipal facilities are: replaced infrastructure; parks and natural areas; cemeteries; public garages; town halls; community centers; police and fire stations; rescue squads and ambulance services; extensions of sidewalks and paths, storm drainage or stormwater facilities; extensions of utilities to a single residential or commercial unit; temporary structures; and facilities required in response to emergency situations ; the Town may only regulate such facilities to the extent permitted by 24 V.S.A. § 4413 as may be amended from time to time.

 

MUNICIPALITY - Town of Colchester.

 

NAME PLATE SIGN: shall mean any sign not more than one (1) square foot in area used to identify the owner or owners of a private residence.

 

NATIONAL GUARD CENTER:  An establishment or lot utilized by the State government for, or in conjunction with, defensive or offensive military operations.  The military, as referred to herein, shall include all branches of the National Guard and all branches of the Federal military reserves.  Dormitories, warehouses, cafeterias, or outdoor storage are customary accessory uses.

 

NEW CONSTRUCTION: structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulation adopted by the Town and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. This definition shall only pertain to Section 6.03, Flood Plain District, herein.

 

NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR NEW MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision for which the construction is completed after the effective date of the floodplain management regulations as herein adopted in Section 6.03.  This definition shall only pertain to Section 6.03, Flood Plain District, herein. This definition shall also include Land Development as defined herein.

 

NIGHT CLUB: A bar or restaurant that charges for admission for entertainment.

 

NON-CONFORMING LOT: A lot or parcel that does not conform to the present bylaws covering dimensional requirements but were in conformance with all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations prior to the enactment of the present bylaws; including a lot or parcel improperly authorized as a result of error by the Administrative Officer.

 

NON-CONFORMING SIGN: shall mean a sign which does not comply with this Ordinance as amended, but did comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations prior to the enactment of the sign ordinance, or if applicable, an amendment of said Ordinance.

 

NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE: A structure or a part of a structure that does not conform to the present bylaws but was in conformance with all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations prior to the enactment of the present bylaws; including a structure improperly authorized as a result of error by the administrative officer.

 

NON-CONFORMING USE: A use of land that does not conform to the present bylaws but did conform to all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations prior to the enactment of the present bylaws; including a use improperly authorized as a result of error by the Administrative Officer.

 

NUDITY: Full or partial revelation of a person’s breast or genitals.  Partial revelation shall be as so as to be distinguishable to the eye.

 

NURSING CARE HOME: An establishment providing skilled nursing care and medical supervision at a lower level than that available in a hospital to not more than five persons.

 

NURSING CARE INSTITUTION: An establishment that provides licensed, skilled, full-time nursing care and related services for patients who require medical, nursing, and/or rehabilitative services. The institution shall provide extended and/or intermediate care for those who by reason of advanced age, illness, infirmity, or mental impairments need acute, chronic, or convalescent care. Such institution shall also be known as a nursing home, convalescent facility, or long-term care facility.

 

OFFICIAL MAP: The legally adopted Official Map of the Town of Colchester pursuant to section 4421 Title 24 VSA Chapter 117, as amended.

 

OFFICE, GENERAL: An establishment for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry, or government, or like activity, that may include ancillary services for employees and visitors such as a restaurant or coffee shop, and newspaper/candy stand as permitted by these Regulations. This may also be known as a professional building. Building occupancy may be limited to one tenant or more tenants and/or the building’s owner.

 

OFFICE, MEDICAL: An establishment where human patients are examined and treated by doctors, dentists or other medical professionals but not hospitalized overnight. Medical office may include as an ancillary use the assembly, fitting, testing and sale of products directly related to the medical service provided in the same establishment.

 

OFFICE, MEDICAL CLINIC: An ambulatory care facility where human patients are examined and treated customarily on a walk-in, out-patient basis, but where no overnight hospitalization is provided.

 

OPEN SPACE: Any area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated, or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners, occupants, and their guests of land adjoining or neighboring such open space.  Open space includes informal recreational uses, habitat preservation, scenic vista or landscape protection.

 

ORPHANAGE: An establishment licensed by the State of Vermont to serve as an orphanage for children or young adults.

 

PARAPET WALL: means a low wall along the edge of a roof, and being a portion of the wall which extends above the line of the roof, with the exterior to the extension forming a continuous plane with the wall below.

 

PERSONAL SERVICES: An establishment providing services involving the care of a person or his or her apparel, such as barber, hairdresser, beauty or nail salon, shoe shine or repair, day spa, photographic studio, or seamstress. Personal service shall not include establishments providing tattoo, body piercing services or medical.

 

PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: A planned unit development exclusively for residential use.

 

PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: An area of land controlled by one or more landowners to be developed as a single entity, the plan for which may propose any combination of density or intensity increases, or the mixing of land uses, and which need not correspond to bylaw requirements that are otherwise applicable to the area in which it is located with respect to lot size, bulk, or type of dwelling or building, use, density, intensity, lot coverage, parking, required common open space, or other standards.

 

PLATE LINE: shall mean the point at which any part of the roof structure first touches, or bears upon, an external wall.

 

POOLHOUSE: A poolhouse is accessory to a pool.  It is located within 15 feet of the pool therefore not subject to the setback from a primary building within Section 2.09A(4) herein. A poolhouse shall be sized to accommodate mechanical equipment and accessory storage for a pool. 

 

POST OFFICE: An establishment providing the services of the United States Postal Service to the general public through retail services.  A post-office as defined herein shall exclude distribution facilities and similar facilities that do not primarily serve walk-in customers through retail services.

 

PLAT: A plan prepared by a licensed surveyor complying with the requirements of the Vermont Statutes Annotated, as presently enacted or as hereinafter from time-to-time amended.  Plats in mylar form shall have overall dimensions of 18” by 24” with two inches (2") outside of the borderlines on the left side for binding and a one-inch (1") margin outside the border along the remaining sides.

 

PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT: The preliminary drawings for a major subdivision indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Board for its consideration.

 

PRINTING SHOP: An establishment rendering the services of photocopying, reproduction, or binding of printed materials to business services on a fee or contract basis in which the majority of business conducted on premise is not related to walk-in customers. Accessory retail for walk-in customers is not customary.

 

PRIVATE ROAD: Any road which is not a duly accepted public road.

 

PROFESSIONAL OCCUPATIONS: Any recognized professional licenses by the State of Vermont, including but not limited to doctor, dentist, lawyer, engineer, certified public accountant, real estate appraiser, architect, chiropractor and similar professions excluding veterinarians and personal services such as barbers, hairdressers and the like.

 

PROMOTIONAL SIGN: shall mean any freestanding sign designed in such a fashion as to permit a change of the information thereon so that such sign conveys to the public updated information concerning sales, prices, new products, etc.

 

PROJECTING SIGN: means any wall sign attached to a building or other structure and extending in whole or in part more than nine (9) inches from any portion of the structure’s façade. This definition also includes perpendicular signs.

 

PUBLIC HEARING - Any meeting held by the Development Review Board, Planning Commission, or the Colchester legislative body with public notice.

 

PUBLIC NOTICE - Means the form of notice prescribed by 24 V.S.A. 4303(21).

 

PUBLIC UTILITY:     Any person, entity, firm or corporation, municipal department, board or commission, duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under Federal, State or Municipal Regulations to the public, gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communications, telegraph, or water.

 

PUBLIC WATER: Lake Champlain, Lamoille River, Winooski River and Colchester Pond.

 

RACE TRACK: A course for racing machines including but not limited to automobiles and motorcycles.

 

READER BOARD: means a sign designed for messages or as a directory, to be viewed primarily by pedestrians, and not used primarily for the purpose of advertising commercial goods, products or services.

 

RECREATIONAL AMENITY, ACTIVE: means a structured recreation opportunity that involves facilities such as courts, fields, playground, or other structures for organized sports such as but not limited to soccer, baseball, lacrosse, basketball, pickleball, tennis, or volleyball fields / courts.

 

RECREATIONAL AMENITY, INFORMAL: means non-motorized outdoor recreation that is characterized by minimal infrastructure or services and results in minimal environmental impact.  Informal recreational amenities include but are not limited to walking paths, mountain bike trails, horseback riding trails, picnic areas, wildlife viewing areas, or community gardens.

 

RECREATIONAL FACILITY, PRIVATE: A privately owned establishment for the conduct of sports and leisure-activities primarily outside enclosed buildings including but not limited to golf courses and associated club houses, country clubs, paint-ball, tennis courts, basketball courts, skating rinks, and other similar uses for fee or through membership.  This use excludes marinas, horseback riding stables and arenas, racetracks, outdoor markets, drive-in theaters, and recreational facilities constructed as a requirement of planned residential developments.

 

RECREATIONAL FACILITY, PUBLIC: A lot or establishment owned by a municipality, state or federal government designed and equipped for the conduct of sports and leisure-activities primarily outside enclosed buildings either for free or for fee.  This facility includes golf courses and associated club houses, country clubs, paint-ball, tennis courts, basketball courts, skating rinks, and other similar uses.  This use excludes marinas, horseback riding stables and arenas, racetracks, outdoor markets, and drive-in theaters.  This use excludes recreational facilities constructed as a requirement of planned residential developments or a school.

 

RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle without permanent foundation, which can be towed, hauled or driven and primarily designed as temporary living accommodation for recreational, camping and travel use and including but not limited to travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers and self-propelled motor homes. This definition shall include all such recreational vehicles as defined by 44 CFR 59.1.

 

REFLECTORIZED: shall mean any material that reflects light back toward its source in an intensity many times greater than would be reflected by a white painted surface.  These materials include but are not limited to: reflective sheeting, glass beads and glass or plastic reflectors.

 

RELIGIOUS USE: An establishment where worship services, ceremonies, rituals, and education activities related to a particular system of beliefs are held.  A religious building may have an associated residence and accessory office space.  This use does not include school uses.

 

RENTAL FACILITY: An establishment engaged in renting or leasing of merchandise stored on the premise.  General merchandise rental is customarily the rental of retail goods such as videos, DVDs, furniture, and sporting equipment.  General merchandise rental customarily does not have outside storage.  Equipment rental is the rental of small and large equipment where outside storage is customary.  Automotive rental is the rental of automobiles where outside storage is customary. 

 

RESIDENTIAL CARE HOME: An establishment operated under state licensing or registration, serving not more than eight (8) persons who have a handicap or disability as defined in 9 V.S.A Section 4501. A residential care home shall not be located within 1,000 feet of another residential care home. This establishment is typically located in a single-family dwelling, which provides for profit or otherwise, room, board and personal care (exclusive of nursing care) residents unrelated to the principal resident (operator) of the premises.

 

RESIDUAL LAND: A lot or lots, or portion(s) thereof, that is not designated for development, but that contributes to the total land area used for the purpose of meeting the density requirements of a particular Zoning District.

 

RESTAURANT, SHORT-ORDER: An establishment offering the sale of a limited line of specialized, pre-prepared or rapidly prepared foods or beverages directly to the customer in a ready-to consume form and whose operation is characterized by (A) service of food or beverage principally in containers or in paper, plastic or other disposable containers or wrappers, (B) availability of food or beverages for consumption immediately or within a brief period after ordering, or (C) insufficient seating facilities within the restaurant building for the total volume of food sold. Short-order restaurants may also include catering, food delivery services and shall include bakeries and delicatessens. Short-order restaurants customarily have carry-out and delivery service. This establishment may sell alcohol by the drink for consumption on premise until 11PM (see Bar).

 

RESTAURANT, STANDARD: An establishment offering the sale of foods or beverages for consumption within the restaurant building and whose operation is characterized by service by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter at which food or beverage is to be consumed. Standard restaurants shall have no substantial carry-out, no substantial delivery service, and no drive-up service. This establishment may sell alcohol by the drink for consumption on premise until 11PM (see Bar).

 

RESTORATION: The replication or reconstruction of a structure’s original architectural features.

 

RETAIL SALES: An establishment engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public at retail and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. Typically such an establishment (A) is a place of business and is engaged in activity to attract the general public to buy, (B) buys and receives as well as sells merchandise, (C) may process or manufacture some of the products for sale, such as a jeweler or baker, but such production or manufacture is incidental and subordinate to the selling activities, and (D) sells to customers for their own personal, household, or business use. Such an establishment may have a retail food establishment as an accessory use located entirely within the principal structure and with no dedicated exterior entrance of its own.

 

RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment which by design of physical facilities or by service and packaging procedures permits or encourages the purchase of prepared foods intended primarily to be prepared and consumed off the premises. A short-order restaurant with up to eight (8) seats may be an accessory use.

 

ROAD-SIDE STAND: A retail establishment accessory to an agricultural or horticultural operation for the sale of produce grown on the premise. 

 

ROOF SIGN: shall mean any sign or portion thereof, erected in any way upon a structure which extends above any portion of the roof of the structure.

 

SALVAGE YARDS: An open area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. A “Salvage Yard” includes automobile wrecking yards and includes any area of more than 200-sq. ft. for storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, but does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings.  Salvage yards include junkyards and automobile graveyards.  This is a use that customarily requires periphery screening.

 

SCHOOL, COLLEGE: An establishment for college or university education or instruction in a branch of knowledge. The school may be public, private, or parochial. A college is a school that meets the state standards and requirements for colleges and universities.  A college customarily has dormitories and associated athletic fields.

 

SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY & SECONDARY: An establishment for elementary or secondary education or instruction in a branch of knowledge. The school may be public, private, or parochial. Elementary schools are any schools that meet state standards and requirements for elementary education.  Secondary schools are any schools that meet state standards and requirements for secondary education. Such use shall not include vocational or trade school; these are termed trade schools.

 

SCHOOL, TRADE: An establishment primarily engaged in providing instruction however excluding colleges, primary and secondary schools. Such instruction may be in any branch of knowledge and may include business schools, trade schools, vocational schools, drivers’ education, and schools of dance, gymnastics, martial arts, and similar pursuits.

 

SCOREBOARD: shall mean a sign that is primarily intended to display the score of a game or match located in, on or near an athletic field or court so as to be visible to spectators and participants, and shall not be interpreted to include signs displayed on, affixed to or supported by a scoreboard that are not oriented towards the field or court.

 

SEMI-CUTOFF FIXTURE: An exterior light fixtures with an intensity at 80 degrees from nadir that does not exceed 200 candela per 1000 lamp lumens, nor at 90 degrees from nadir does intensity exceed 50 candela per 1000 lamp lumens.

 

SETBACK: The distance required to meet the front, side or rear yard open space provisions of this Regulation.

 

SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, CROSS-DISTRICT: A sewage disposal system located in a zoning district, which serves a use, located in a different zoning district. 

 

SHOPPING CENTER (WITHOUT DRIVE-UP): A lot or lots containing a group of two (2) or more general merchandise, retail establishments, standard restaurant, short-order restaurant no drive-up, a retail food establishment, general office, or general services uses of any size having a unified design of buildings, coordinated parking and service areas, and development plan in accordance with the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, and where customer and employee parking are provided on-site. The shopping center shall be planned, constructed, and developed and/or managed as a unified entity.

 

SHOPPING CENTER WITH DRIVE-UP: A lot or lots of 1.5 acres or more containing a group of two (2) or more general merchandise, retail establishments, standard restaurant, short-order restaurant, a retail food establishment, general office, or general services uses of any size having a unified design of buildings, coordinated parking and service areas, and development plan in accordance with the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, and where customer and employee parking are provided on-site. The shopping center shall be planned, constructed, and developed and/or managed as a unified entity. The shopping center may have one drive-up facility per center for retail, restaurant, or general services.

 

SHORELAND: A strip of land around Lake Champlain and Colchester Pond and adjacent to the Winooski and Lamoille Rivers extending inland to a line 500 ft. from and running parallel to the normal mean water mark herein called the shoreline.

 

SHORELINE: The line marked as the line by the mean water level with those lands adjacent to Lake Champlain, Colchester Pond, and the Winooski and Lamoille Rivers. Measurements required to be made from the shoreline shall be made from the mean watermark.

 

SIGN: shall mean and include every sign, billboard, bulletin-board, freestanding sign, wall sign, window sign, roof sign, illuminated sign and projecting sign, and shall include any letter, word, number, model, mural decoration, banner, flag, pennant, clock, thermometer, insignia, light or combination of lights or other visual display, used or placed as an announcement or declaration to identify, advertise or promote the interest of any person when the same is placed where it may be viewed by the general public from outside the structure on which the sign is placed.

 

SIGNABLE WALL AREA: shall mean the area of wall on the front or principal facade of the building.  In the case of multiple occupancy buildings, only the front of the particular section of building occupied by the applicant shall be considered in determining signable wall area. 

 

SILVICULTURAL OPERATIONS: The development and/or maintenance of a forest or wooded preserve, including the harvesting of trees. This definition is for the harvesting of more than 100 trees 3 inches or greater in diameter as measured 4.5 feet above the ground and/or effecting more than one (1) acre in any one (1) year period.  Excluded from silvicultural operations is site development approved as part of a site plan or subdivision.

 

SKETCH PLAN - An informal sketch of the proposed subdivision, the purpose of which is to enable the sub-divider to save time and expense in reaching general agreement with the Development Review Board as to the form of subdivision and objectives and requirements of these Regulations.

 

SLAUGHTER HOUSE: An establishment where animals are butchered.

 

SOCIAL CLUB: An establishment for the gathering or meeting of a group of people organized for a common purpose to pursue common goals, interests, or activities, usually for social, recreational, or educational purposes. Such association or organization is usually characterized by certain formal membership qualifications, payment of fees or dues, regular meetings, and a constitution and /or by-laws. Such associations or organizations may also be known as clubs, civic, social, fraternal organizations, trade associations, professional organizations, unions, political organizations, and religious organizations, and may include such groups as local civic clubs and associations or local chapters of national associations, and fraternal organizations. The building or facility may have accessory uses such as recreational facilities or banquet facilities but not including the sale of goods and services to the public on the premises on a regular basis or commercial outdoor recreational or entertainment activities. Associations or organizations shall not include establishments operated for pecuniary gain, such as tennis or health clubs.

 

SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA: The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated a Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/AI-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO or V1-30, VE, or V. For purposes of these regulations, the term “special flood hazard area” is synonymous in meaning with the phrase “area of special flood hazard”.

 

STABLE, HORSE: An establishment offering boarding, breeding, and other related services for five or more horses.  This use customarily includes barns, arenas, trails, paddocks, courses, and accessory storage.

 

STADIUM: See Coliseum.

 

START OF CONSTRUCTION: for purposes of floodplain management determines the effective map or bylaw that regulated development in the Special Flood Hazard Area. The “start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.  Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footing, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, regardless whether that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. This definition shall only pertain to Section 6.03, Flood Plain District, herein.

 

STORY: That part of any building, exclusive of cellars but inclusive of basements, comprised between the level of one (1) finished floor and the level of the next higher finished floor, or; if there be no higher finished floor, then the part of the building comprised between the level of the highest finished floor and the top of the roof beams. (See Appendix B Diagram).

 

STORY HALF: Any space partially within the roof framing where the clear height of not more than 50% of such space between the top of the floor beams and the structural ceiling level is seven (7) ft. six (6) inches or more. (See Appendix B Diagram).

 

STREET: Any road, highway, avenue, street, parkway, lane or other way between right of way lines, commonly used by the public for vehicular traffic.

 

STREET, MINOR: Those private and public streets not included as Arterial or Collector Highways.

 

STRUCTURE: Any construction, erection, assemblage or other combination of materials upon the land, including but not limited to, buildings, mobile homes, swimming pools, tennis courts, antennas, satellite dishes not exceeding 3 feet in diameter, gas/liquid storage tanks, utility sheds, trailers, billboards, signs, walls or fences over four feet in height, or fences and walls opaque in nature. A structure may be erected for use, occupancy, or ornamentation, and the use of which requires permanent or temporary location on, above, or below the surface of the ground. By definition, all buildings are structures, but not all structures are buildings. All patios, driveways, sidewalks, and parking lots shall be considered structures and require permits.

 

STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY: A structure without any foundations or footings and that is removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased. Tents larger than 150 square feet are specifically included within this definition. All temporary structures to remain over ten (10) consecutive days shall require a building permit as well as any other applicable permits.

 

STUDIO, RADIO & TELEVISION: A broadcasting facility for radio and / or television with accessory office space.  A studio does not include towers, antennas, and dishes associated with transmitting station signals.

 

SUBDIVIDER: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association, who shall layout for the purpose of sale or development any subdivision or part thereof as defined herein. The term shall include an applicant for subdivision approval.

 

SUBDIVISION:

(a)  Division of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, residential, commercial or industrial building sites, or other divisions including without limitation, condominiums and cooperatives for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease, contract, legacy or building development.

(b) Division of land and/or any development of a parcel of land involving the installation, extension, relocation or modification of municipal facilities such as streets, sewer or water mains, public utility transmission lines.

(c) The term Subdivision includes amended subdivision, re-subdivision, and as appropriate in these regulations shall refer to the process of subdividing land or to the land sub-divider.

(d)  Any development of a parcel of land such as a multi-family project, planned residential development or planned unit development.

(e) The following are specifically not included within this definition:

(1) Any adjustment of boundary lines between existing lots.

(2) A duplex unit to be constructed on a single lot and not as part of a subdivision as above defined.

(3) The conversion of a building on a tract of land from single ownership to multiple ownership without any change to the physical structure of the building.

 

SUBDIVISION, MAJOR: Any residential subdivision containing five (5) or more lots or units, any non-residential subdivision, or any subdivision requiring any installation of new streets, or the extension of municipal facilities.

 

SUBDIVISION, MINOR: Any residential subdivision containing less than five (5) lots or units which does not require a new public street or the extension of municipal facilities.

 

SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged conditions would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. This definition shall only pertain to Section 6.03, Flood Plain District, herein.

 

SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration or other improvement of a structure, during any 5 year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specification which have been identified by the state or local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe conditions, or any alteration of a “historic structure” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure”. This definition shall only pertain to Section 6.03, Flood Plain District, herein.

 

SUPERMARKET OR GROCERY STORE: See retail food establishment.

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS ADEQUATE CAPACITY: Capacity is considered to be “adequate” if the grade of service is p.05 or better for a least 50% of the days in a preceding month, prior to the date of application, as measured using direct traffic measurement of the telecommunications facility in question, where the call blocking is due to frequency contention at the antenna(s).

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS ADEQUATE COVERAGE: Coverage is “adequate” within that area surrounding a base station where the predicted or measured median field strength of the transmitted signal is such that the majority of the time, transceivers properly installed and operated will be able to communicate with the base station without objectionable noise (or excessive bit-error-rate for digital) and without calls being dropped. In the case of cellular communications in a rural environment, this would be signal strength of at least ‑90dBm. It is acceptable for there to be holes within the area of adequate coverage as long as the signal regains its strength further away from the base station. The outer boundary of the area of adequate coverage, however, is that location past which the signal does not regain.

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS ALTERNATIVE DESIGN TOWER STRUCTURE: Artificial trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles, silos and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.  (See also: Telecommunication Stealth Facility.)

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA: A device which is attached to a tower or other structure for transmitting and receiving electromagnetic waves.

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the base of the antenna support structure at the average preconstruction grade to the highest point of the structure. If the support structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the highest and lowest grades shall be used in calculating the antenna height.

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS AVAILABLE SPACE: The space on a tower or structure to which antennas of a telecommunications provider are both structurally able and electromagnetically able to be attached.

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS BASE STATION: The primary sending and receiving site in a telecommunications facility network.  More than one base station and/or more than one variety of telecommunications providers can be located on a single tower or structure.

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS CELLULAR SERVICE: A telecommunications service that permits customers to use wireless, mobile telephones to connect, via low-power radio transmission sites called cell sites, either to the public switched network or to other mobile cellular phones.

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS CELLULAR TELECOMMUNICATIONS: A commercial Low Power Mobile Radio Service bandwidth licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to providers in a specific geographical area in which the radio frequency spectrum is divided into discrete channels which are assigned in groups to geographic cells within a service area and which are capable of being reused in different cells within the service area.

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS CELLULAR TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: A cellular telecommunications facility consists of the equipment and structures at a particular site involved in receiving telecommunication or radio signals from mobile radio communications sources and transmitting those signals to a central switching computer which connects the mobile unit with the land-based telephone lines.

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS CHANNEL: The segment of the radiation spectrum to or from an antenna, which carries one signal. An antenna may radiate on many channels simultaneously.

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS COLLOCATION: Locating wireless communications equipment from more than one provider on a single site.

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMMUNICATION TOWER: A guyed, monopole, or self-supporting vertical structure, constructed as a free standing structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure or equipment, containing one or more antennas intended for transmitting and/or receiving television, AM/FM radio, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, or similar forms of electronic communication.

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMMERCIAL SATELLITE DISH: A satellite dish over three feet in diameter used for a communications transmission system.

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS DIRECTIONAL ANTENNA: An antenna or array of antennas designed to concentrate a radio signal in a particular area.

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS ELECTROMAGNETICALLY ABLE: The determination that the signal from and to the proposed new antenna will not significantly interfere with the existing signals from and to other facilities or antennas located on the same tower or structure as determined by a qualified professional telecommunications engineer.  The use of available technologies to alleviate such interference shall be considered when making this determination.

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: All equipment (including repeaters) and locations of equipment with which a telecommunications provider transmits and receives the waves which carry their services regardless of height.  This facility may be sited on one or more towers or structure(s) owned and permitted by the provider or another owner or entity.

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS FREQUENCY: The number of cycles completed each second by an electromagnetic wave measured in Hertz (Hz).

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS MONITORING: The measurement, by the use of instruments in the field, of non-ionizing radiation exposure from telecommunications facilities, towers, antennas or repeaters.

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS MONITORING PROTOCOL: The testing protocol, such as the Cobbs Protocol (or one substantially similar, including compliance determined in accordance with the National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements, Reports 86 and 119), which is to be used to monitor the emissions and determine exposure risk from telecommunications facilities.

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS MONOPOLE: A single self-supporting vertical pole with no guy wire anchors, usually consisting of a galvanized or other unpainted metal, or a wooden pole with below grade foundations.

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES: Commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless exchange access services.  These services include cellular services, personal communications services, specialized mobile radio services, and paging services.

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS REPEATER: A small receiver/relay transmitter and antenna of relatively low power output designed to provide service to areas which are not able to receive adequate coverage directly from a base or primary station.

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS STEALTH FACILITY: Any communications facility which is designed to blend into the surrounding environment.  Examples include architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted antennas painted to match the existing structure, antennas integrated into architectural elements, and antenna structures designed to look like light poles.

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS STRUCTURALLY ABLE: The determination that a tower or structure is capable of carrying the load imposed by the proposed new antennas under all reasonable predictable conditions as determined by professional structural engineering analysis.

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM: The communications transmission system operated by a telecommunications service provider in the municipality or region.

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS TEMPORARY WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY: Any tower, pole, antenna, etc., designed for use while a permanent wireless facility is under construction, or for a special event or conference where a majority of people attending are wireless users.

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS VIEW CORRIDOR: A three-dimensional area extending out from a viewpoint. The width of the view corridor depends on the focus of the view. The focus of the view may be a single object, such as a mountain, which would result in a narrow corridor, or a group of objects, such as a downtown skyline, which would result in a wide corridor. Panoramic views have very wide corridors and may include a 360-degree perspective. Although the view corridor extends from the viewpoint to the focus of the view, the mapped portion of the corridor extends from the viewpoint and is based on the area where base zone heights must be limited in order to protect the view.

 

TELECOMMUNICATIONS WHIP ANTENNA: A vertical antenna that normally transmits signals in 360 degrees. Whip antennas are typically cylindrical in shape, narrow (less than 6 inches in diameter) and long (often measure 18 inches in height or more). Also called omnidirectional, stick or pipe antennas.

 

TEMPORARY SIGN: shall mean any sign erected for a limited period of time.

 

THEATER: An establishment for dramatic, dance, musical, or other live performances.

 

TITLE BLOCK, SUBDIVISION: All plats that have received final approval from the Development Review Board shall incorporate the following:

“Approved by Resolution of the Development Review Board of the Town of Colchester, Vermont on the _____ day of ___________________, 20_____, subject to the requirements and conditions of said Resolution.  Signed this ________day of ________________, 20_____, by ____________________, Chairman or Clerk.”

 

TOWER: A structure on which transmitting and/or receiving antenna (e) are located. Such antenna (e) may be used for commercial, industrial, municipal, county or state telecommunication purposes. Such structure may be a purpose-built free-standing tower, guyed tower, monopole, camouflaged or “stealth” design tower, a roof with mounted antenna (e), or any building façade of steeple, water tower, silo, sign, or other similar structure.

 

TOWN HALL: An establishment used for municipal services such as general office space, meeting facilities, and related storage.

 

TRAIN STATION: An establishment primarily engaged in furnishing passenger train transportation. A train station is customarily a fully enclosed structure. A train station may include accessory retail.

 

TRAIN YARD: A lot, establishment, or area engaged primarily in freight train service, unloading, loading, storage, repair, and maintenance.  This use customarily does not have structures.  An area with more than two track lines running through it that is not a train station, as herein defined, shall be considered a train yard.

 

TRANSFER STATION: An intermediate destination for solid waste or recyclable materials. Solid waste or recyclable materials shall not be stored on site for more than one month. Walk-in and delivery services are customary. This use shall include drop-off recycling terminals.

 

TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes, having a body width not exceeding eight (8) ft.

 

USE, ACCESSORY: A use which is incidental to, customarily found in connection with, and located on the same lot as, the principal use to which it is related. When “accessory” is used in this text, it shall have the same meaning as accessory use. An accessory use includes, but is not limited to, the following:

          (a) Swimming pools for the use of the occupants of a residence, or their guests.

          (b) Domestic or agricultural storage in a barn, shed, tool room, or similar accessory building or other structure.

          (c) Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock in connection with an establishment, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable regulations.

          (d) Storage of goods used in or produced by industrial uses or related activities unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district regulations.

          (e) Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, subject to the parking regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located.

          (f) Uses incidental to a main use such as, but not limited to: offices of an establishment located on the site of the establishment.

          (g) Accessory off-street loading, subject to the off-street loading regulations for the district in which the lot is located.

 

USE, PRINCIPAL: A use listed in the Table of Permissible Uses.

 

VARIANCE: An allowed deviation from specific requirements pertaining to a district granted by the Development Review Board to an applicant pursuant to 24 V.S.A. Section 4469.

 

VETERINARY CLINIC: An establishment where animals are given medical care and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the medical care received.  A veterinary clinic customarily has outside amenities such as dog runs and paddocks for large animals such as horses, cows, llamas, etc.

 

VICINITY MAP - A detailed map which shows, within a prescribed area, the relation of the proposed development or subdivision to adjacent properties and the surrounding area, indicating curb cuts, property and building lines, streets, easements, etc.

 

VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with these regulations herein. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3 is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. This definition shall only pertain to Section 6.03, Flood Plain District, herein.

 

WALL SIGN: shall mean a sign attached to, painted on, or erected against the wall of a building or structure including any interior wall whether attached to windows or otherwise which is placed in view of the general public from outside the structure.  A wall sign shall not include signs that project from the wall in excess of nine (9) inches.

 

WALL: shall mean the surface area of any façade of any side or face of a building, or portion thereof.

 

WAREHOUSING: The indoor storage of goods, materials, and merchandise for shipment to or processing on another property. Warehousing shall exclude distribution and truck terminal facilities.  No outside storage is allowed.

 

WET BAR: A counter top area with a sink and/or sometimes containing a dishwasher or under counter fridge.  A wet bar does not contain a heating element for food such as a range, oven, burner, microwave, or toaster oven.

 

WHOLESALE SALES: An establishment engaged in selling goods, products, material, and merchandise stored on the premises to retailers or persons who are the intermediaries between the producer and the consumer; to industrial, commercial, institutional or professional business users; to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies.

 

WIND TURBINE: A device which converts the kinetic energy of the wind into a useable form of electrical energy. Wind turbines shall also include all accessory structures required for the function thereof.

 

WINDOW SIGN: shall mean a wall sign attached to, painted on, or erected on the interior of a window with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the face of said window, including any stand, shelving, counter or other structure which is placed in view of the general public from outside the structure.

 

YARD: The open spaces on a lot unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this regulation and as defined herein (See also Appendix B Diagrams): 

(a) Front Yard: An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest line of the main building.

(b) Rear Yard: An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest line of the main building.

(c) Side Yard: An open space between a main building and the side lot line extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point of the side lot to the nearest point of the main building.

GENERAL CATEGORIES
SPECIFIC USE

R3

R2

R1

R5

R10

GD1

GD1C

GD2

GD4

GD4C

LS1

LS2

COM

IND

BD

AGR

MHP

FP

AMU

1.000  RESIDENTIAL

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.100 Single-Family Dwelling

1.110 Detached, one dwelling unit per lot

1.111 Site-built and modular structure

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

C

P

P

C

P

 

 

 

P

 

 

P

1.112 Mobile home

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

C

P

P

C

P

 

 

 

P

P

 

P

1.113 Occupant is directly engaged with on-premises commercial use

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

C

P

P

C

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.120 Detached, more than one dwelling per lot

1.121 Site-built

P1

P1

P1

P1

P1

P1

P1

C1

P1

P1

C1

P

 

 

 

P1

 

 

P1

1.122 Mobile home park

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

P1

 

 

1.200 Two-Family Dwelling

1.210 Duplex

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

C

P

 

 

 

P

 

 

P

1.220 Primary residence with accessory apartment

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

C

P

P

C

P

 

 

 

P

 

 

P

1.300 Multi-Family Dwelling

1.310 Multi-family residence

P1

P1

P1

P1

P1

P1

P1

P1

P1

P1

C1

C

 

 

 

P1

 

 

P1

1.400 Dwellings Emphasizing Special Services, Treatment or Supervision

1.410 Residential Care Home

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

C

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

P

 

 

P

1.440 Halfway house

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.450 Congregate Housing

P1

P1

P1

C

C

P1

P1

P1

P1

P1

 

 

C1

 

 

C

 

 

C

1.500 Miscellaneous, Rooms for Rent Situations

1.510 Boarding house

P

P

P

C

C

P

P

P

C

C

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

C

1.520 Bed & Breakfast

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

C

P

 

 

 

P

 

 

P

1.530 Hotel & Motel

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

 

C

C

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.540 Extended Stay Hotel

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

 

 

C

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.550 Inn

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

P

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.560 Campground

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

C

C

 

C

P

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.570 Primitive Campground

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

C

1.600 Temporary Emergency, Construction and Repair Residences

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

 

P

P

P

P

P

 

P

1.700 Home Businesses

1.710 Home occupations

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

C

P

 

 

 

P

C

 

P

1.720 Home businesses

C

C

C

C

C

C

P

C

C

C

C

C

 

 

 

C

 

 

C

1.800 Planned Residential Development

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

C

P

 

 

 

P

P

 

P

2.000  SALES AND RENTAL OF GOODS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.100 General Sales

2.110 Convenience store

2.111 With gasoline sales

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

C

 

 

P

C

C

 

 

 

 

2.112 Without gasoline sales

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

P

 

 

P

 

P

 

 

 

 

2.120 Shopping Center

2.121 Without drive-up

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

 

P

P

 

 

P

 

P

 

 

 

 

 

2.122 With drive-up

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

 

 

 

 

C

 

C

 

 

 

 

2.130 Retail Sales

2.131 With store area less than 10,000 s.f. without drive-up

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

P

 

P

P

 

P

 

 

 

 

2.132 With store area less than 10,000 s.f. with drive-up

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

C

P

 

 

P

 

P

 

 

 

 

2.133 With store area more than 10,000 s.f. but less than 50,000 s.f. without drive-up

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

 

 

 

P

 

P

 

 

 

 

2.134 With store area more than 10,000 s.f. but less than 50,000 s.f. with drive-up

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

 

 

 

P

 

P

 

 

 

 

2.135 With store area greater than 50,000 s.f. without drive-up

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

P

 

P

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.136 With store area greater than 50,000 s.f. with drive-up

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

P

 

P

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.137 Retail sales with a significant component of goods sold being ag or produced on the premises

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

P

 

 

P

 

P

 

 

 

P

 

2.140 Retail Food Establishment

2.141 With store area less than 5,000 s.f.

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

P

 

P

P

 

P

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.142 With store area greater than 5,000 s.f. & supermarkets

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

 

C

 

 

P

 

P

 

 

 

 

 

2.150 Wholesale Establishment

2.151 With store area less than 10,000 s.f.

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

C

C

 

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.152 With store area more than 10,000 s.f. but less than 50,000 s.f.

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.152 With store area greater than 50,000 s.f.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

2.170 Equipment sales with associated repair

2.171 Small equipment

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

C

 

 

P

C

P

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.172 Large equipment

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

2.180 Commercial Greenhouse

No on-premises sales permitted

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

 

P

 

P

P

 

 

P

 

 

On-premises sales permitted

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

C

P

P

 

 

P

 

P

P

 

 

P

 

2.190 Roadside stands for the sale of produce grown on the premises

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

P

 

 

P

2.200 Mobile Home Sales & Rental

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

 

C

 

 

2.300 Marine Sales

2.310 Without associated service & repair

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

 

 

 

 

P

P

C

C

 

 

 

 

 

2.320 With associated service & repair

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

C

 

 

 

 

2.400 Automobile Sales

2.410 Without associated service & repair

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

 

 

 

 

 

2.420 With associated service & repair

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

 

 

 

 

2.500 Automotive Accessory Sales

2.510 Without installation

 

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

P

 

 

P

C

C

 

 

 

 

 

2.520 With installation

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

 

C

 

 

P

C

C

 

 

 

 

2.600 Rental

2.6100 General Merchandise

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

P

P

 

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

2.620 Equipment

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

C

 

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

2.630 Automobile

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

 

 

 

C

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

2.640 Marine

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3.000 OFFICE & SERVICES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3.100  Office

3.110 General Office

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

P

 

P

P

C

C

 

 

 

 

3.120 Research Facility or Laboratory

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

C

C

 

C

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

3.130 Medical Office

3.131 With not more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

P

 

C

P

 

C

 

 

 

 

3.132 With greater than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

P

C

C

 

 

P

 

C

 

 

 

 

 

 

3.133 With Clinic

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

C

C

 

 

P

 

C

 

 

 

 

3.200 General Services

3.210 Radio & Television Studio

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

P

 

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

3.220 Financial Institution

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

P

 

C

P

C

C

 

 

 

 

3.230 Banks

3.231 With drive-up windows

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

C

P

 

 

P

 

C

 

 

 

 

3.232 Without drive-up windows

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

P

 

P

P

 

C

 

 

 

 

 

3.240 Personal or Business Service

 

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

P

 

P

P

 

P

 

 

 

 

 

3.250 Artist Production Studio

 

 

 

 

C

C

P

P

P

P

P

C

P

P

C

P

C

 

 

C

 

3.260 Funeral home

 

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

P

 

 

P

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3.270 Crematorium

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

 

 

 

 

3.280 Drycleaner & Laundromat

3.281 Majority of business is walk-in or self-serve

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

P

P

P

 

C

P

 

C

 

 

 

 

 

 

3.282 Majority of business is not walk-in

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

 

C

C

 

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

3.290 Animal Services

3.291 Veterinary Clinic

 

 

 

C

C

C

C

C

P

P

 

C

P

 

C

C

 

 

C

 

 

3.292 Kennel

 

 

 

P

P

 

C

 

C

C

 

 

P

C

C

P

 

 

P

3.293 Grooming Facility

 

 

 

C

C

C

C

C

P

P

 

C

P

 

C

C

 

 

C

 

 

3.294 Animal Shelter

 

 

 

C

C

 

C

 

C

C

 

 

P

 

C

C

 

 

C

3.300 Automotive Services

3.310 Service & Repair

3.311 Without body work

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

P

 

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

 

3.312 With body work

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

C

 

 

C

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

3.320 Body Work

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

C

 

 

C

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

3.330 Car Wash

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

C

 

 

P

C

C

 

 

 

 

 

3.340 Gasoline Sales

3.341 Without Service & Repair

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

C

 

 

P

C

C

 

 

 

 

 

 

3.342 With Service & Repair

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

 

 

 

P

C

C

 

 

 

 

4.000 MANUFACTURING & PROCESSING, OF GOODS, MERCHANDISE AND EQUIPMENT

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.100 All operations conducted entirely within fully enclosed building

4.110 Printing & binding production facilities

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

C

P

 

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

4.120 Photocopy & printing shop with accessory retail

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

C

P

 

 

P

 

P

 

 

 

 

 

4.130 Equipment repair

4.131 Small equipment

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

P

P

 

C

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.132 Large equipment

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

P

 

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

4.140 Manufacturing & processing with related distribution & warehousing

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

C

 

C

 

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

4.150 Small-Scale Manufacturing

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

P

 

P

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

4.200 Operations conducted within & outside fully enclosed building

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.210 Lumber & contractor’s yard

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

C

C

 

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

4.220 Salvage yard

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

 

 

 

 

 

4.230 Landscape contractor’s yard

 

 

 

 

C

C

 

C

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

C

 

 

P

4.3 Slaughter

House

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

 

 

 

5.000 EDUCATIONAL, CULTURAL, RELIGIOUS, PHILANTHROPIC, SOCIAL, FRATERNAL USES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5.100 Schools

5.110 Elementary and secondary including associated grounds and athletic and other facilities

C

C

C

C

C

P

P

P

P

P

 

C

 

 

 

C

 

 

C

5.120 Trade or vocational schools

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

P

 

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

5.130 Colleges, universities, community colleges (including associated facilities such as dormitories, office buildings, athletic fields, etc.)

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

P

 

 

C

 

C

 

 

 

 

5.200 Religious Use  such as churches, synagogues, and temples (including associated residential structures for religious personnel and associated buildings but not including elementary school or secondary school buildings)

C

C

C

C

C

P

P

P

P

P

 

P

P

 

C

C

 

 

C

5.300 Orphanage

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

C

C

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5.400 Cultural Facilities such as libraries, museums, art galleries, art centers and similar uses

5.410 Located within a building having a gross floor area not exceeding 500 square feet

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

P

P

 

C

 

 

 

C

5.420 Within a building having a gross floor area exceeding 500 square feet

C

C

C

C

C

P

P

P

P

P

 

P

P

 

C

 

 

 

C

5.500 Social clubs such as, union halls, fraternal clubs and lodges

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

P

P

C

P

P

 

C

 

 

 

 

6.000 RECREATION & ENTERTAINMENT

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6.100 Activity conducted entirely within building or substantial structure

6.110 Athletic facility

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

C

P

 

 

 

 

6.120 Movie theaters

6.121 Seating capacity of not more than 300

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

P

 

C

P

 

C

 

 

 

 

6.122 Seating capacity of more than 300

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

C

C

 

 

P

 

C

 

 

 

 

6.130 Theaters & Music Halls

6.131 Seating capacity of not more than 300

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

C

C

 

C

P

 

C

 

 

 

 

 

6.132 Seating capacity of more than 300

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

C

 

 

P

 

C

 

 

 

 

6.140 Adult Entertainment

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6.150 Event Facility

 

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

P

C

P

P

 

P

C

 

 

C

 

6.160 Indoor Firing Range

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

C

C

C

C

 

 

C

C

C

C

 

 

C

6.200 Activity conducted primarily outside enclosed buildings or structures

6.210 Recreational facilities –privately owned facilities such as golf and country clubs, etc.

 

 

 

C

C

C

C

C

P

P

P

P

P

 

C

C

 

C

C

6.220 Publicly owned and operated outdoor recreational facilities such as athletic fields, golf courses, tennis courts, swimming pools, parks, etc.

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

C

 

C

C

6.230 Stables and arenas for horses

 

 

 

P

P

C

C

C

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

P

 

 

P

6.240 Racing tracks - automobile and motorcycle

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

 

 

 

6.250 Open air markets, farm and craft markets,, produce markets

 

 

 

C

C

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

C

P

 

 

P

6.260 Drive-in movie theaters

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

 

C

C

 

 

P

 

 

 

 

 

 

6.270 Water-based facilities

6.271 Marinas and yacht clubs

 

 

 

C

C

C

C

 

C

C

P

C

P

 

 

 

 

 

 

6.272 Residential Marine Associations

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

 

 

 

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6.280 Outdoor Firing Range

 

 

 

C

C

 

 

 

C

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

C

6.300 Coliseums, stadiums and all other facilities listed in the 6.100 & 6.200 classifications designed to seat or accommodate more than 1,000 people

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

 

 

P

C

C

 

 

 

 

 

 

7.000 INSTITUTIONAL RESIDENCE, CARE,  OR CONFINEMENT FACILITIES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7.100 Hospital 

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

P

C

C

 

 

P

 

 

 

 

 

 

7.200 Nursing Care Home

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

P

 

 

P

7.300 Nursing care institution

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

P

P

P

 

 

C

 

 

 

 

 

 

7.400 Mental Health Facility (other than halfway houses)

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

 

 

 

 

7.500 Correctional facilities

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

 

 

 

7.600 Home-based day care facilities up to six children

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

C

P

 

 

 

P

P

 

P

7.700 Intermediate day care facilities

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

P

C

C

C

P

C

 

P

7.800 Large day care facilities

C

C

C

C

C

P

P

P

P

P

 

C

C

C

C

C

C

 

C

7.900 Hospice Care Home

 

 

 

C

C

P

P

P

P

P

 

 

P

C

P

C

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8.000 RESTAURANTS, BARS, NIGHT CLUBS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8.100 Restaurants

8.110 Standard

8.111 With outdoor seating

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

P

C

P

P

 

C

 

 

 

 

8.112 Without outdoor seating

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

P

C

C

P

 

C

 

 

 

 

8.120 Short-Order

8.121 No drive-up service

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

C

P

 

C

P

C

C

 

 

 

 

8.122 With outdoor seating

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

C

P

 

 

P

C

C

 

 

 

 

8.123 Drive-up service allowed

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

C

 

 

C

 

C

 

 

 

 

8.200  Bars

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

 

 

 

 

 

 

8.300 Night Clubs

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

C

C

C

C

 

 

 

 

 

 

8.400 Mobile Food Units

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

C

C

 

C

C

C

C

 

 

 

P

9.000 STORAGE AND PARKING

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

9.100 Automobile parking garages or parking lots not located on a lot on which there is another principle use to which the parking is related

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

C

C

 

C

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

9.200 Storage of goods not related to the sale or use of those goods on the same lot where they are stored

9.210 Warehousing with all storage within completely enclosed structures

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

P

P

 

 

 

P

9.220 Mini-storage with all storage within completely enclosed structures

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

 

 

 

 

9.230 Archival Facility

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

C

 

 

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

9.240 Distribution Facility

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

 

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

P

9.250 Auto, marine, or equipment storage outside completely enclosed structures

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

C

 

C

P

P

P

 

 

 

C

 

9.260 Marine storage inside

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10.000 AGRICULTURAL, SILVICULTURAL, MINING, QUARRYING OPERATIONS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10.100 Agricultural operations

10.110 Excluding livestock

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

 

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

P

 

C

P

10.120 Including livestock

 

 

 

P

P

C

C

 

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

P

 

C

P

10.200 Silvicultural operations

C

C

C

P

P

P

P

C

P

P

 

 

P

P

P

P

C

 

P

10.300 Mining operations

 

 

 

C

C

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

P

 

C

 

 

C

10.400 Reclamation landfill

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

P

C

 

 

 

 

10.500 Accessory on-farm business

 

 

P

P

P

P

 

 

P

 

 

 

 

 

 

P

 

 

P

11.000 MISCELLANEOUS PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC FACILITIES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

11.100 Cemetery

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

C

C

 

 

C

 

 

C

11.200 Waste Processing

11.210 Sanitary Landfill

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

 

 

 

11.220 Transfer Station

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

 

 

 

 

11.300 Transit Centers

11.310 Train Station

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

P

 

 

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

11.320 Train Yard

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

 

 

 

 

11.330 Bus Station

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

C

C

 

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

11.400 Public Garage

11.410 Local

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

 

 

C

 

 

C

P

P

 

 

 

 

11.420 State

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C

 

C

 

 

C

P

P

 

 

 

 

11.500 Municipal Services

11.510 Town Hall

C

C

C

C

C

P

P

P

P

P

 

 

P

 

C

 

 

 

 

11.520 Community Center

C

C

C

C

C

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

C

C

 

 

C

 

11.530 Police stations

C

C

C

C

C

P

P

P

P

P

 

 

P

C

C

C

 

 

C

 

11.540 Fire stations

C

C

C

C

C

P

P

P

P

P

 

 

P

C

C

C

 

 

C

 

11.550 Rescue squad, ambulance services

C

C

C

C

C

P

P

P

P

P

 

 

P

C

C

C

 

 

C

11.600 National guard center

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

 

C

 

 

C

P

C

 

 

 

 

11.700 Civil defense operations

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

C

 

 

 

 

 

C

C

 

 

 

 

11.800 Post Office

 

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

P

 

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

11.900 Essential Service Facility

11.910 Neighborhood

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

C

C

P

P

P

P

P

C

P

11.920 Community or regional

C

C

C

P

P

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

P

P

P

P

 

C

P

12.000 TOWERS AND RELATED STRUCTURES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

12.100 Tower

12.110 Less than 50 feet tall

C

C

C

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

 

P

P

P

P

C

 

P

12.120 50 feet tall or greater

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

C

 

 

P

P

P

C

C

 

C

 

12.130 Wind Turbine

C

C

C

C

C

 

 

 

C

 

 

 

C

C

C

C

 

 

C

13.000 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES USED IN CONNECTION WITH THE CONSTRUCTION OF A PERMANENT BUILDING OR FOR SOME NON-RECURRING PURPOSE

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

 

P

14.000 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

P

 

1 = Subject to PUD Standards        P=Permitted Use       C=Conditional Use        Blank =Not Allowed

Table of uses only.

For specific conditions and exceptions & GD3 District see text.

COLCHESTER DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS

SUPPLEMENT 42

 

District

Density

Minimum Lot Size

Frontage

Primary Front Yard Setback

Primary Side Yard Setback

Primary Rear Yard Setback

Acc. Front Yard Setback

Acc.

Side Yard Setback

Acc. Rear Yard Setback

Total Lot Coverage Max

Primary Building Height Max

Acc. Building Height Max

R3-I

1 DU/10,000 sf

10,000 sf

1 du./100 feet

30 ft

 

15 ft

25 ft

30 ft

10 ft

10 ft

30%

40 ft 

25 ft 

R3-II

1 DU/15,000 sf

15,000 sf

1 du./100 feet

30 ft

 

15 ft

25 ft

30 ft

10 ft

10 ft

30%

40 ft 

25 ft 

R2-I

1 DU/15,000 sf

15,000 sf

1 du./125 feet

30 ft

 

15 ft

25 ft

30 ft

10 ft

10 ft

30%

40 ft 

25 ft 

R2-II

1 DU/20,000sf

20,000 sf

1 du./125 feet

30 ft

 

15 ft

25 ft

30 ft

10 ft

10 ft

30%

40 ft 

25 ft 

R1-I

1 DU/30,000 sf

30,000 sf

1 du./150 ft

30 ft

 

15 ft

 

25 ft

30 ft

10 ft

10 ft

30%

40 ft

25 ft 

R1-II

1 DU/40,000sf

40,000 sf

1 du./150 ft

30 ft

 

15 ft

 

25 ft

30 ft

10 ft

10 ft

30%

40 ft 

25 ft 

R5

1 DU/5 acres

40,000 sf

1 du./300 ft

75 ft

50 ft

100 ft

75 ft

50 ft

100 ft

20%

40 ft 

35 ft 

R10

1 DU/10 acres

40,000 sf

1 du./300 ft

75 ft

50 ft

100 ft

75 ft

50 ft

100 ft

20%

40 ft

35 ft 

GD1

Class I

1 DU/10,000 sf

10,000 sf

1 du./100 ft

30 ft

10 ft

30 ft

30 ft

10 ft

30 ft

60%

40 ft ridge

35 ft flat

30 ft ridge

25 ft flat

GD1

Class II

1 DU/20,000sf

20,000 sf

1 du./100 ft

30 ft

10 ft

30 ft

30 ft

10 ft

30 ft

60%

40 ft ridge

35 ft flat

30 ft ridge

25 ft flat

GD2

Class I

(MU)

1 DU/ 4,356 sf

20,000 sf

1 du./100 ft

30 ft

 

15 ft

 

30 ft

45 ft

 

15 ft

 

30 ft

70 %

40 ft ridge

35 ft flat

40 ft ridge

35 ft flat

GD2

Class II

(MU)

1 DU/ 10,890 sf

20,000 sf

1 du./100 ft

30 ft

 

15 ft

 

30 ft

45 ft

 

15 ft

 

30 ft

70 %

40 ft ridge

35 ft flat

40 ft ridge

35 ft flat

GD4

1 DU/10,000sf

10,000 sf

1 du./100 ft

30

15 ft

25 ft

45 ft

15 ft

30 ft

60%

20 ft eave

34 ft ridge

24 flat rooflines

20 ft eave

34 ft ridge

24 flat rooflines

BD

 

10,000 sf

100 ft

25 ft.

15 ft.

25 ft.

25 ft.

15 ft.

25 ft.

80%

0 ft ridge

35 ft flat

40 ft ridge

35 ft flat

COM

 

20,000 sf

100 ft

45 ft

15 ft

30 ft

45 ft

15 ft

30 ft

Class I  70%

Class II 60%

40 ft ridge

35 ft flat

40 ft ridge

35 ft flat

IND

 

40,000 sf

150 ft

45 ft

20 ft

25 ft

45 ft

15 ft

15 ft

80%

0 ft ridge

35 ft flat

40 ft ridge

35 ft flat

AGR

1 DU/25 acres

40,000 sf

1 du./

300 ft

75 ft

50 ft

100 ft

75 ft

50 ft

100 ft

20%

40 ft ridge

35 ft flat

40 ft ridge

35 ft flat

District

Density

Min Lot Size

Frontage

Primary Front Yard Setback

Primary Side Yard Setback

Primary Rear Yard Setback

Acc. Front Yard Setback

Acc.

Side Yard Setback

Acc. Rear Yard Setback

Total Lot Coverage Max

Total Building Coverage Max

Primary Building Height Max

Acc. Building Height Max

 

MHP

1 DU/ 15,000sf

15,000 sf

1 du./

100 ft

15 ft

10 ft

10 ft

15 ft

10 ft

10 ft

80%

 

40 ft ridge

35 ft flat

25 ft ridge

20 ft flat

 

FP

 

40,000 sf

300 ft

200 ft

200 ft

200 ft

200 ft

200 ft

200 ft

10%

 

40 ft ridge

35 ft flat

25 ft ridge

20 ft flat

 

AMU

1 DU/

40,000sf

40,000 sf

150 ft

30 ft

 

15 ft

 

25 ft

30 ft

10 ft

10 ft

30%

 

40 ft ridge

35 ft flat

25 ft ridge

20 ft flat

 

LS1

1 DU/

30,000 sf

30,000 sf

120 ft

15 ft

15ft

15 ft

15 ft

15 ft

15 ft

40%

40%

40 ft ridge com.

35 ft flat com.

20 ft. ridge res.

20 ft. ridge res.

20 ft.

 

LS2

1 DU/

10,000 sf

10,000 sf

100ft

20 ft

15 ft

15 ft

15 ft

15 ft

15 ft

40%

40%

40 ft ridge com.

35 ft flat com.

20 ft. ridge res.

20 ft. ridge res.

20 ft.

 

Additional Considerations

(1) = In all districts, total front yard coverage shall not exceed 30%.

(2) = 45 foot front yard setback required for primary and accessory structures on highways (see Article 2.05 Setbacks & Buffers)

(3) = Minimum lot size and setbacks may be reduced when approved in accordance with Article Nine

(4) = In the Agricultural District, silos and grain elevators shall be excluded from height restrictions.

(5) = The height of buildings may be increased in accordance with Article Two Section Seven.

(6) = Multi-family = MU and Dwelling Unit = DU

(7) Please consult associated Article and Section in Development Regulations for additional considerations and requirements.

(8) In accordance with Section 2.06E herein accessory structure heights may be increased up to up to thirty (30) feet in height or the height of the primary structure whichever is less.

(9) The AMU District has a minimum .5 acre lot size and maximum 1 acre lot size for residential lots.  Lot coverage in the AMU District may be increased in accordance with Section 6.04E.

(10) The dimensional standards for the GD3 District can be found in Section 4.03 of the Development Regulations.

(11) For lots accessed off a private drive or road, the front yard setback shall also apply to that section of the lot that fronts the private road or drive.

 

Class I = Municipal water and either municipal sewer or community septic                                 Class II =Individual on-site septic

APPENDIX C: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS

 

A.    Purpose. No use otherwise allowed, shall be permitted within any district, which does not conform to the following standards of use, occupancy, and operation, which standards are hereby established as the minimum requirements to be maintained within said area:

 

Land Use Category

Time Period

One hour Average dBA

Undeveloped tracts of land in all Zoning Districts

7:00 am to 9:00 pm

70

Undeveloped tracts of land in all Zoning Districts

9:00 pm to 7:00 am

45

Residences, motels, hotels, inns, municipal services, schools, religious institutions, libraries, hospitals, parks, outdoor recreation facilities, playgrounds, active recreational amenities in all Zoning Districts

7:00 am to 9:00 pm

75

Residences, motels, hotels, inns, municipal services, schools, religious institutions, libraries, hospitals, parks, outdoor recreation facilities, playgrounds, active recreational amenities in all Zoning Districts

9:00 pm to 7:00 am

45

Developed lands, properties, or activities not included in the above two categories in all Zoning Districts

7:00 am to 9:00 pm

75

Developed lands, properties, or activities not included in the above two categories in all Zoning Districts

9:00 pm to 7:00 am

75

B.    Fire and Explosion Hazards. All activities involving, and all storage of, inflammable and explosive materials shall proceed with, and be provided with, adequate safety devices against the hazards of fire and explosion, and such adequate fire-fighting and fire suppression equipment and devices as are standard in the industry. Burning of waste materials in open fires is prohibited at any point. The relevant provisions of State of local laws and regulations shall also apply.

 

C.    Vibration.  No vibration shall be produced which is transmitted through the ground and is discernible without the aid of instrument at or beyond the lot lines; nor shall any vibration produced exceed 0.002g peak at up to 60 cps. frequency, measured at or beyond the lot line using either seismic or electronic vibration measuring equipment.  Vibrations occurring at higher than 50 cps. frequency or periodic vibrations shall not induce accelerations exceeding .001 g. Single impulse periodic vibrations occurring at an average interval greater than five (5) minutes shall not induce accelerations exceeding .01g.

 

D.    Noise.  No excessive, unnecessary, unreasonably loud noise or disturbance shall be made, cause to be made, or assisted in making that disturbs, or endangers the comfort, health, peace, or safety of others within the immediate vicinity of the noise or disturbance. Sound level measurements shall be taken with a sound level meter meeting the minimum American Standards Institute (ANSI) requirements for Type I and II accuracy, and shall use the fast response setting. Noise measurements shall be made at the property line. The noise measurements shall not exceed the following stated limits during the stated time periods for noise generated on properties within each land category:

 

 

C. Smoke. No emission shall be permitted at any point, from any chimney or otherwise, of visible gray smoke of a shade equal to or darker than No. 2 on the Power’s Micro-Ringle-Mann Chart, published by McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, Inc. and copyright 1954 (being a direct facsimile reduction of the standard Ringle-Mann Chart as issued by the  United States Bureau of Mines), except that visible gray smoke of a shade equal to No. 2 on said chart may be emitted for four (4) minutes in any 30 minutes. These provisions applicable to visible gray smoke shall also apply to visible smoke of a different color but with an apparently equivalent opacity.  Wood or coal burning for residential heating uses is accepted.

 

D. Odors.  No emission shall be permitted of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detected when diluted in the ratio of one (1) volume of odorous air emitted to four (4) volumes of clean air. Any process which may involve the creation or emission of any odors shall be provided with a secondary safeguard system, so that control will be maintained if the primary safeguard system should fail. There is hereby established as a guide in determining such quantities of offensive odors Table III, “Odor Thresholds”. In Chapter 5, “Air Pollution Abatement Manuals”, copyright 1951 by Manufacturing Chemists’ Association, Inc., Washington D.C.

 

E. Fly Ash, Dust, Fumes, Vapors, Gases, Other Forms of Air Pollution.  No emission shall be permitted which can cause any damage to health to animals, vegetation or other forms or property, or which can cause any excessive soiling at any point on the property of others, and in no event any emission from any chimney, or otherwise, of any solid or liquid particles in concentrations exceeding .022 parts per million (PPM) of 60 micrograms/cu. meter of the conveying gas. Sulfur dioxide contact shall not exceed .022 PPM or 60 micrograms/cu. meter.  For measurement of the amount of particles in gases resulting from combustion, standard corrections shall be applied to stack temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit and 50% excess air.

 

F. Electromagnetic Radiation.  It shall be unlawful to operate, or cause to be operated, a planner or intentional source of electromagnetic radiation for such purposes as communication, experimentation, entertainment, broadcasting, heating, navigation, therapy, vehicle velocity measurement, weather survey, aircraft detection, topographical survey, personal pleasure, or any other use directly or indirectly associated with these purposes which does not comply with the then current Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission regarding such sources of electromagnetic radiation, except that government owned plants, the Regulations of the Interdepartmental Radio Advisory committee shall take precedence over the Regulations of the Federal Communication Commission regarding such sources or electromagnetic radiation. Further said operation in compliance with the Federal Communications Commission, or the Interdepartmental Radio Advisory Committee Regulations shall be unlawful if such radiation causes an abnormal degradation in performance of other electromagnetic radiators or electromagnetic receptors of quality and proper design because of proximity, primary field, blanketing, spurious re-radiation, harmonic content, modulation or energy conducted by power or telephone lines.  The determination of “abnormal degradation in performance” and of “quality and property design” shall be made in accordance with good engineering practices as defined in the latest principles and standards of the institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers. In case of any conflict between the latest standards and principles of the above groups, the following precedence in the interpretation of the standards and principles shall apply:

1.     The Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers. 

 

G. Radioactive Radiation. No activities shall be permitted which emit dangerous radioactivity at any point beyond the property line. The handling of radioactive materials, the discharge of such materials into air and water, and the disposal of radio-active materials shall be in conformance with Regulations of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission as set forth in Title 10, Chapter One, Part 20-Standards for Protection Against Radiation, as amended; and all applicable Regulations of the State of Vermont, enforced on the date of the adoption of this Ordinance.

 

H. Heat. For the purpose of these Regulations, heat is defined as thermal energy of a radioactive, conductive or convective nature.  Heat emitted at any or all points shall not at any time cause a temperature increase on any adjacent property, whether such change by in the air or the ground in a natural stream or lake, or in any structure on such adjacent property.

 

I. Liquid or Solid.  No discharge shall be permitted at any point into any sewage disposal system or watercourse, or lake, or into the ground, except in accord with standards approved by the State Department of Health, Environmental Control Board, or other regulation department or agency, of any materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements.  There shall be no accumulation of solid wastes conductive to the breeding of rodents or insects.

 

J. Other Requirements. Other requirements found elsewhere in these Regulations shall also apply, as well as other local or State Ordinances, Statutes or Regulations, and Federal Law, Statutes and Regulations.

APPENDIX D: TRAFFIC GENERATION DATA and CALCULATION PROCEDURES

 

A. General Standards.  In evaluating traffic impacts, specific data contained in the ITE TRIP GENERATION MANUAL, SIXTH EDITION shall apply.  All calculations shall be based on Trip Generation Rates for the PM peak hour of adjacent street traffic or, if not available, the PM peak hour of generator.  Sizes are expressed in terms of gross square footage of floor area (GFA) or gross square footage of leasable area (GLA).  The rates are subject to change and any subsequently issued ITE trip generation rates shall be applicable in place of those listed below.

 

B. Specific Standards.  The applicant may submit a traffic study certified by an engineer licensed in the field of traffic or otherwise considered to be a traffic engineer in accordance with the Secretary of State’s standards.  This traffic study may incorporate similar traffic counts.  The Town may also chose to hire, at the applicant’s expense, an outside third party consultant to evaluate or produce traffic standards.    All traffic studies shall meet the standards set in Chapter 14 of the Colchester Code of Ordinances as a minimum.


 

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

WARNED FOR SELECT BOARD

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

1.     Amend Section 2.09(2) and (7) to allow larger accessory buildings administratively and clarify process.

2.     Clarify Section 6.03F(1) that floodproofing is required only for substantial improvement, reconstruction, or enlargement.

3.     Amend Section 7.03F(4) to add design certification for seawalls and similar structures.

4.     Amend Section 8.03A to add accessory on-farm business

5.     Clarify in Section 9.05D and Section 12.02 Building Envelopes that accessory buildings may be located outside the building envelopes.

6.     Amend Sections 2.04, 2.04 and 9.07D(1) and (3) to include footprint lot references.

7.     In Section 9.07D(5) clarify recreational amenities required for more than 5 units on lots greater than 3 acres.

8.     Add Section 10.15 Change of Occupancy and reference in Section 11.03A.

9.     Amend Section 12.02 to add definition of Accessory On-Farm Business and Footprint Lot. 

10.  Amend Section 12.02 to separate out definitions of Accessory Building and Accessory Structure.

11.  Amend Section 12.02 Community Septic to remove requirement for separate lot.

12.  Amend Section 12.02 to include definition for Footprint Lot.

13.  Amend Section 12.02 Inn to clarify size of establishment subject to limitations on apartment type accommodations.

14.  Amend Section 12.02 Sivicultural Operations to define tree size and exclusions.

15.  Amend Table A-1 to remove mining and landfills (Sections 10.3 & 4) from FLP, ADD 10.5 Accessory on-farm business, and clarify that blank equals not allowed.

16.  Amend Table A-2 to increase maximum lot coverage in the Mobile Home Park District from 20% to 80%.

17.  Amend Appendix C to clarify noise limits.

11/28/2019

12/17/2019

2/11/2020

3/4/2020

 

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #41

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

WARNED FOR SELECT BOARD

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

1.     Amend Article 1 to rename the Zoning Regulations the Development Regulations to incorporate the Subdivision Regulations;

2.     Amendments throughout the Regulations to delete “Zoning” as the title of the regulations and add ”Development” to the title of the regulations;

3.     Amend Section 2.02C to add subdivision approval;

4.     Amend Section 2.07E(7) to clarify exempt play structures;

5.     Amend Section 2.18 to clarify multiple signage allowed for multi-unit buildings;

6.     Amend Section 7.03C to remove Pumphouses as a permitted use in the Shoreland District;

7.     Amend Section 7.03C(7) to specify public recreational uses;

8.     Amend Section 7.03F(6) to allow Shoreland stairs to be 48” instead of 44”;

9.      Amend Section 8.05 to correct spelling and clarify technical review;

10.  Amend Article 9 to incorporate the Subdivision Regulations;

11.  Amend Article 11 to incorporate the Subdivision Regulations;

12.  Amend Section 12.02 to add a definition of Firing Range Indoor & Outdoor, Recreational Amenities Informal, Recreational Amenities Active, Poolhouse, Wet Bar, and Subdivision Regulation definitions;

13.  Amend TableA-1 to add Indoor Firing Range and Outdoor Firing Range to Section 6.000.

14.  Add Appendix H Plat and Boundary Line Adjustment Requirements

11/7/17

1/4/18

1/23/18

2/14/18

 

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #40

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

WARNED FOR SELECT BOARD

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

1.     Amend Section 2.02C Official Map to remove the Lakeshore Drive Bypass and relabel the Circumferential Highway as a future road.  Add proposed separated path and emergency access in the vicinity of Malletts Bay Avenue and the Circumferential Highway corridor.

2.     Amend Section 2.10B(1) to clarify fence location;

3.     Amend Section 2.18B to add exemption for construction signs;

4.     Amend Sections 3.04F, 3.05F, and 6.01F to add additional standards for contractors yard landscape;

5.     Amend Table A-1 to add contractors yard landscaping as conditional use in R5, R10, & AGR Districts;

6.     Amend Appendix F to rezone parcels the following parcels:

Portions of Parcel ID #08-021003 AGR to R2

12-022000-0000000 AGR to R5

12-023000-0000000 AGR to R5

Portions of 06-005002-0000000 AGR to R2

 

11/10/16

2/23/17

3/28/17

4/19/17

 

 

 

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #39

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

WARNED FOR SELECT BOARD

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

1.     Amend Section 2.05B to reference setbacks in Lakeshore District on Blakely Road;

2.     Amend Section 2.05H to allow green infrastructure and outside seating in the front setback;

3.     Amend Section 2.12 to reference LS1 District;

4.     Amend Section 4.05 to establish the Lakeshore One District;

5.     Add Section 4.06 to establish the Lakeshore Two District;

6.     Amend Section 6.03C to allow green infrastructure;

7.     Amend Section 6.03D to establish a process for increasing footprints of floodproofed structures conditionally in the West Lakeshore Drive vicinity;

8.     Amend Section 7.03D to delete the word “residential”;

9.     Amend Section 10.01C to allow marina access, circulation, and parking to not be paved;

10.  Amend Section 10.01O to reduce parking requirements for marinas;

11.  Amend Section 10.04 to include impervious area infiltration requirements to landscaping standards;

12.  Amend Section 12.02 to add definitions of event facility, green stormwater infrastructure, greening, and manufacturing small-scale and enhance the definition of marinas;

13.  Amend Table A-1 to add LS1 and LS2 District;

14.  Amend Table A-1 add Section 2.640 Marine Rental, 4.150 Small-Scale Manufacturing, 6.150 Event Facility, and 9.260 Marine Storage Indoor;

15.  Amend Table A-2 to add the LS1 &  LS2 Districts;

16.  Amend Appendix F to rezone parcels to LS1 and LS2.

6/7/16

6/30/16

8/9/16

8/31/16

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #38

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

WARNED FOR SELECT BOARD

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

1.     Amend Section 2.07E to exempt fishing houses from permits;

2.     Amend Section 2.09A(7) to allow accessory structures in front yards without proof of hardship;

3.     Amend Section 2.12 to include digital application requirements for variance applications;

4.     Amend Section 4.03 Table 1 to allow multi-family dwellings conditionally on the first floor of B Streets;

5.     Amend Section 4.03 Table 2 subsection 2C to reduce the minimum height of buildings on A Streets to 2 stories and require that no more than 60% of the total frontage of A Streets be the minimum height;

6.     Amend Section 4.03 Table 2 subsection 2C to reduce ground floor ceiling height and add a requirement for ground floor façade height;

7.     Amend Section 4.03 Table 3 subsection 3C to increase the maximum height on B Streets;

8.     Amend Section 4.03 Table 3 subsection 3C to reduce ground floor ceiling height

9.     Amend Section 4.03 Table 5 subsection 5B to require not more than 50% of B Streets frontage be multifamily in use and  that the second story on an A or B Street must have an articulated vertical façade of 50% or greater in order to count for a second story.

10.  Amend Section 4.03 Table 5 subsection 5D to clarify drive through locations;

11.  Amend Section 4.03 Table 6 to clarify when linear buildings are required;

12.  Amend Section 8.03 to clarify triggers for site plan review;

13.   Amend Section 8.05D to include digital application requirements for site plan applications;

14.  Amend Section 8.05F for digital record copies of site plan approvals;

15.  Amend Section 8.05I for digital as-built requirements;

16.  Amend Section 8.10 to include digital application requirements for conditional use applications;

17.  Amend Section 11.03 to include digital application requirements for zoning, wastewater, and sign permits;

18.  Amend Section 11.09 to include digital application requirements for appeals;

19.  Amend Section 12.02 to strike “seasonal” from mobile food unit definition;

20.  Amend Section 12.02 to add definitions of indoor and outdoor firing ranges.

21.  Amend Table A-1 to add Section 6.400 Firing Ranges and permissible and conditional uses in districts;

22.  Amend Table A-1 Section 8.400 to strike “seasonal” from mobile food unit;

23.  Amend Table A-1 Section 14.0 to clarify that PUDs are allowed in all buildable districts;

24.  Amend TableA-2 notes to clarify front yards on private roads or drives;

25.  Amend Appendix F to rezone portions of parcel ID#08-021003 from AGR to R2;

26.  Amend Appendix G to update digital application requirements.

12/15/15

1/21/2016

2/9/2016

3/2/16

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #37

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

WARNED FOR SELECT BOARD

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

1.     Amend Section 2.03 District Boundaries to clarify Floodplain District boundaries;

2.     Amend Section 212B to include reference to Section 6.03 and 7.04;

3.     Amend Section 6.03 to clarify the Floodplain Regulations and allow floodproofing of structures to be done administratively through the building permit process, allow for the enlargement of residential structures that are floodproofed so long as the footprint is maintained or reduced, and allow for the rebuilding of sheds so long as they are wet-floodproofed;

4.     Amend Section 7.03 to change the Shoreland District bounds to 250 feet from the mean watermark of Colchester Pond and Lake Champlain (delete Winooski & Lamoille Rivers), clarify tree cutting and replanting requirements, and add paths to permitted uses as long as they are meeting the set dimensional requirements for stairs;

5.     Amend Section 7.04 Water Protection District to include a new Fluvial Erosion Hazard Overlay District that mimics the Shoreland District under Section 7.03 however only applies to the Winooski and Lamoille Rivers;

6.     Amend Zoning Map to rezone parcels as codified in Appendix F herein: 25-005003 R3 to GD1 and Portions of Parcel ID #41-035002 GD1 to R3 (per Zoning Map)

5/27/2015

8/20/15

9/8/15

9/30/15

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #36

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

WARNED FOR SELECT BOARD

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

1.     Amend Section 10.13B to allow commercial vehicles exceeding the size requirements of 10.01M as part of a home businesses.

2.     Amend Section 12.02 to add a definition of Hospice Care Home.

3.     Amend Appendix A-1, Table of Uses, to add 1.720 Home Business as a Conditional Use in the R1, R2, and R3 Districts.

4.     Amend Appendix A-1 to add 7.900 Hospice Care Home

 

2/3/2015

3/5/2015

3/25/2015

4/14/2015

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #35

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

WARNED FOR SELECT BOARD

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

1.     Amend Section 2.02C Official Map to update parks, roads, facilities, parcels, proposed roads in the vicinity of Severance Corners, and existing and proposed separated paths.

2.     Strike Section 2.04F that currently requires a certificate of appropriateness for development on pre-existing lots without public road frontage.

3.     Amend Section 2.18 to allow feather signs, increase the size of permanent signs at Water Tower Hill, and allow temporary signs to increase from 10 feet to 12 feet in height.

4.     Amend Section 8.09B to create a cumulative limit for administrative amendments of five years.

5.     Amend Section 8.09C to deleted Development Review Coordinator and replace with Administrative Officer.

6.     Amend Section 10.14 to allow the waiver of septic integrity reports and septic replacement areas.

7.     Amend Section 12.02 definition for Bar to allow entertainment and recreational activities.

8.     Amend Section 12.02 definition for Gross Floor Area to be measured from exterior walls and include all appurtenances.

9.     Amend Section 12.02 definition for Nightclub to define as a Bar that charges for entertainment.

10.  Amend Appendix A-2 to define DU as dwelling unit.

11.  Amend Zoning Map to rezone parcels as codified in Appendix F herein:

            03-031003 GD3 to R3

            03-030003 GD3 to R3

 

 

7/15/2014

      9/25/2014

10/14/2014

11/5/2014

 

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #34

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

WARNED FOR SELECT BOARD

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

1.     Amend Zoning Map to rezone parcels as codified in Appendix F herein:

40-006002 COM to GD1

40-007002 COM to GD1

40-061002 and all subnumbers R2 to R3

40-061132   R2 to R3

 

 

11/21/13

12/10/13

1/1/14

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #33

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

WARNED FOR SELECT BOARD

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

1.     Amend Article Seven to add Section 7.07 General Development One Commercial District

2.     Amend Sections 8.05D and 8.10C to require land owner signature on applications.

3.     Amend Section 10.04F to decrease length of surety for landscaping.

4.     Amend Section 10.04G to decrease amount retained of landscape surety.

5.     Amend Section 11.03 to require digital formats, fix typos, and landowner signature on applications.

6.     Amend Section 12.02 to add definition of Shopping Center with Drive-Up and delete Firewood Operation.

7.     Amend Table A-1 to add GD1C Overlay District and shopping centers with drive-up use.  Delete Firewood Operation.

8.     Amend Table A-2 to delete footnote four.

9.     Amend Zoning Map to rezone parcels in the Heineberg/Prim Road neighborhood to create cohesive planning areas as codified in Appendix F herein.

7/16/13

9/19/13

10/08/13

10/30/13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #32

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

WARNED FOR SELECT BOARD

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

1.     Amend Section 11.07(A) & (B) to conform to revised 24 V.S.A. Section 1974(a) for fines.

2.     Remove “Life Safety” and replace with “Building” Inspector throughout.

3.     Amend Section 8.10E(3) to insert “an undue” to comply with 24 V.S.A. Section 4414(3)(A).

4.     Amend Section 10.01I to comply with 2010 ADA standards for accessible parking spaces.

5.     Amend Section 2.05 Setbacks and Buffer to remove applicability to GD3 District.

6.     Amend Section 10.01 to remove applicability of parking standards to GD3 District.

7.     Strike and replace Section 4.03 GD3 District.

8.     Strike GD3 District from Table A-1 Table of Permissible Uses and reference Section 4.03 instead.

9.     Strike GD3 District from Table A-2 Dimensional Requirements and reference Section 4.03 instead.

12/11/12

1/17/13

2/13/12

3/6/13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #31

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

WARNED FOR SELECT BOARD

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

1.     Amend Section 2.07 of the Zoning Regulations to exempt piers, docks, and similar structures from permits.

2.     Amend Section 2.18 to clarify multi-tenant building signage and projecting signage height requirements

3.     Amend Section 2.09A(2) to conditionally allow larger accessory structures on larger parcels.

4.     Amend Section 7.03 to exempt piers, docks, and similar structures from permits. Clarify enlargement of residential structures requirements, and fence and boat launching ramp permitting requirements.

5.     Amend Section 9.01C(9) to clarify buffer requirements.

6.     Amend Section 11.03C to include sign permit effective dates.

7.     Amend Section 11.05A align with Building Permit requirements of Chapter 4 of the Colchester Code of Ordinances.

8.     Amend Section 12.02 definitions of Marina and Residential Marine Association to remove hazard to navigation requirements and additional frontage for additional boat requirements.  Amend definition of Structure to remove “water”.

9.     Amend Section 12.02 definitions to clarify Seasonal Mobile Food Unit time of operation.

2/21/12

4/19/12

5/8/12

5/30/12

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #30

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

WARNED FOR SELECT BOARD

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

1.     Delete the Sign Regulations in its entirety;

2.     Move all sign regulations to Section 2.18 of the Zoning Regulations

3.     Amend Article XI and Section 2.12 of the Zoning Regulations to reference signs.

4.     Amend Article XII of the Zoning Regulations to include sign definitions

5.     Include changes to temporary sign regulation in Section 2.18 of the Zoning Regulations allowing longer durations of display.

6.     Amend Table A-1 of the Zoning Regulations to allow Automotive Service and Repair (section 3.311) conditionally in the GD2 District.

7.     Rezoning .77 of an acre of the northwest corner of parcel 06-023002 depicted in Appendix F and on the Zoning Map from IND to COM.

 

3/15/11

   3/31/11

4/26/11

5/18/11

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #29

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

WARNED FOR SELECT BOARD

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

Reduce the minimum acreage requirement for PUD’s in Section 9.01C(3) from five acres to 1.5 acres.
Change 9.01C to do away with the requirement for a density plan with each application. 
Clarify Section 9.01C(5) to specify Class II and III wetlands and floodplains instead of “wet areas and soils unsuitable for development”. 
Specify in Section 9.01C(9) that the PUD buffer of 50 feet is for residential districts and not commercial. 
Section 9.01D(1) delete GD District to clearly state that the waiver of dimensional standards, not just setbacks, is applicable to all districts per current practice of the DRB.
Change Section 9.01D(3) to allow for the use of structured recreational areas within open space in the GD1 District.
Change Section 5.03 to eliminate a 45 foot setback for gas canopies in the Business District.
 

10/5/10

2/3/11

2/22/11

3/16/11

 

 

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #28

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

WARNED FOR SELECT BOARD

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

8.   Change the title DRB Coordinator to Zoning Administration throughout.

9.   Change the title Town Planner to Director in Section 2.03D(1)

10.            Fix a typo under Section 2.04H to delete Street and insert Road.

11.            Add language to Section 2.05D to clarify how setbacks are measured in the MHP District.

12.            Clarify Section 2.05J for setback waivers to clearly state that structures can encroach in the setbacks up the amount already encroaching as currently interpreted.

13.            State in Section 2.07 that port-o-lets are temporary structures and must be removed in 15 days unless associated with an ag operation, public park or construction site.  A follow-up to this is in Section 2.097(e) that states portable toilets can not be permanently permitted.

14.            Clearly state in Section 2.07 that play structures such as swings and treehouses are exempt from permits.

15.            Clarify and consolidate Section 2.09B (2) and Section 10.03 for regulating trailers and trash.

16.            Change Section 2.12 to clarify nonconformity as related to seasonal dwellings to allow for reconstruction and possible expansion.

10. Delete the first sentence of 2.19B as the new Public Works Standards now take precedent.

11. Section 7.03 specify the maximum stair size and handrail requirements for at least one side of the stairs in the Shoreland District (as currently interpreted in a handout).  Provide flexibility in accommodating rise and run in the Shoreland District for exterior stairs.  Also, clarify that nonconforming structures within the Shoreland are not subject to the time limitations of Section 2.12.

12. Section 8.04 further specify that interior fit-ups for commercial properties that do not have the potential to increase the impact of the use can be done as just a building permit (i.e. no increase in employees, traffic, wastewater, parking, etc.)

13. Section 8.05 clarify the department responsible for providing abutter lists.

14. Section 10.01C (6) require five-foot setbacks for driveways from property lines however allow for waivers where shared drives are proposed. 

15. Section 10.14, Seasonal Dwelling, the time limits to seasonal occupancy have been expanded.

16. Section 10.14, Seasonal Dwelling, processes are proposed to allow for the consideration of improvements or expansion to seasonal dwellings, a nonconforming use, which had previously been not allowed.

17. Section 10.14, Seasonal Dwelling, it is clarified that the time limits of Section 2.12 do not apply to seasonal dwellings.

18. Section 12.02 Dwelling Unit, Seasonal expand the time limits to seasonal occupancy

19. Table of Uses (A-1) section 6.110 allows Athletic Facilities as permissible uses in the GD1, GD3, and Business Districts.

6/1/10

6/24/10

7/13/10

8/3/10

 

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #27

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

WARNED FOR SELECT BOARD

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

Amend Section 2.08 Multiple Uses to delete the following from the first sentence: “and only one use per lot”.

Amend Zoning Map to rezone parcels in the Exit 16 Neighborhood to Business District as codified in Appendix F herein

5/4/10

6/3/10

6/22/10

7/14/10

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #26

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

WARNED FOR SELECT BOARD

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

The amendments are to Sections 6.04, 12.02, Table A-1, Table A-2 of the Zoning Regulations to refine and clarify the purpose and permitted uses of the Agricultural Mixed Use (AMU) District.  These changes include clarifications of the area, density, and dimensional requirements of the district. The proposed amendments also include the implementation of the AMU District through the rezoning of the following parcels depicted in Appendix F and on the Zoning Map:

03-033003 AGR to AMU

07-033003 AGR to AMU

07-046003 AGR to AMU

 

2/2/10

2/18/10

3/9/10

3/31/10

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #25

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

WARNED FOR SELECT BOARD

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

The proposed amendments are to Sections 2.01, 2.12, 6.03, 7.04, 11.10, & 12.02 of the Zoning Regulations to comply with FEMA requirements for municipal floodplain regulation including, but not limited to, referencing the Digital Flood Insurance Rate Maps forthcoming the summer of 2010

1/19/10

2/18/10

3/9/10

3/31/10

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #24

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

WARNED FOR SELECT BOARD

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

Amend Zoning Map to rezone parcels in the Town Services and Shipman Hill Neighborhoods to create cohesive planning areas as codified in Appendix F herein

12/15/09

1/21/10

2/9/10

3/2/10

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #23

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

WARNED FOR SELECT BOARD

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

Amend Zoning Map to rezone parcels in the Village Core to create cohesive planning areas as codified in Appendix F herein

08/04/09 & 08/12/09

09/17/09

10/13/09

11/04/09

 

 

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #22

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

WARNED FOR SELECT BOARD

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

Amend Zoning Map to rezone parcels in the Village Core to create cohesive planning areas as codified in Appendix F herein

08/04/09

09/17/09

10/13/09

11/04/09

 

 

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #21

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

WARNED FOR SELECT BOARD

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

Amend Section 7.03F to clarify seawall requirements

2/17/09

3/5/09

3/24/09

4/15/09

Amend Section 12.02 to clarify Convenience Store definition and Building Height definition.

2/17/09

3/5/09

3/24/09

4/15/09

Amend Table A-2 to increase heights.

2/17/09

3/5/09

3/24/09

4/15/09

Amend Appendix B to revise height diagrams to measure to top of structure and floor area diagrams to eliminate parking floor area and rename total floor area gross floor area.

2/17/09

3/5/09

3/24/09

4/15/09

Amend Zoning Map to rezone parcels on outer limits of the Village Neighborhood Area to eliminate split-zoned parcels and create cohesive planning areas as codified in Appendix F herein

2/17/09

3/5/09

3/24/09

4/15/09

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #20

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

WARNED FOR SELECT BOARD

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

Amend Section 2.04F to clarify when Board review is triggered

5/20/08

7/3/08

8/26/08

9/17/08

Amend Section 2.05C to include planned ROWs, sidewalks, and bikepaths

5/20/08

7/3/08

8/26/08

9/17/08

Create Business District in Section 2.01, 5.03, 10.01B, 10.02, Table A-1 and Table A-2

5/20/08

7/3/08

8/26/08

9/17/08

Rename Conservation District the Agricultural Mixed Use District and amend Section 2.01, 6.04, 7.06, 10.02, Table A-1 and Table A-2

5/20/08

7/3/08

8/26/08

9/17/08

Allow admin. review in Section 7.03F(4) and clarify seawall construction requirements

5/20/08

7/3/08

8/26/08

9/17/08

Fix Typos in Section 7.03 and 10.01N

5/20/08

7/3/08

8/26/08

9/17/08

Amend Section 10.01C4 to eliminate stacked spaces from counting to required min. parking requirement

5/20/08

7/3/08

8/26/08

9/17/08

Amend Section 11.05B to remove conflicting procedure & time limits of Article VIII

5/20/08

7/3/08

8/26/08

9/17/08

Amend Article XII and Table A-1 to create Inn use under Section 1.5

5/20/08

7/3/08

8/26/08

9/17/08

Amend Table A-1 to add med. childcare facilities conditionally in residential district

5/20/08

7/3/08

8/26/08

9/17/08

Amend Table A-2 to clarify that frontage requirements are per dwelling unit.

5/20/08

7/3/08

8/26/08

9/17/08

Amend Appendix G to include infrastructure

5/20/08

7/3/08

8/26/08

9/17/08

 


 

SUPPLEMENT #19

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

NOTICE TO

     TOWN

    CLERK

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

Amend Section 2.06 to allow for height waivers for accessory structures with accessory apartments

6/20/06

6/1/06

8/22/06

9/12/06

Amend Section 2.19 Compliance with Chapter 14 of the Colchester Code of Ordinance to include a reference to Chapter 18

6/20/06

6/1/06

8/22/06

9/12/06

Amend Table A-2 to reference changes to Section 2.06

6/20/06

6/1/06

8/22/06

9/12/06

Amend Appendix G Digital Format Requirements to require public infrastructure to be submitted digitally

6/20/06

6/1/06

8/22/06

9/12/06


 

SUPPLEMENT #18

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

NOTICE TO

     TOWN

    CLERK

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

Modify Section 2.05C -  Setback exemptions from Town easement and rights-of-way areas

6/21/05

6/28/05

9/13/05

10/04/05

Add Section 2.05K - ADA / Fire egress exemptions to setbacks

6/21/05

6/28/05

9/13/05

10/04/05

Delete Section 2.09(B)2(g) - Accessory Structures and Uses

6/21/05

6/28/05

9/13/05

10/04/05

Modify  Table of Permissible Uses -

In GD4 District add 3.294 (Animal Shelter), 9.230 (Archival Facility) and 9.240 (Distribution Facility) as Conditional Uses. In R3, R2, R1, GD2, GD3, and MHP add 10.200 (Sivicultural Operations) as a Conditional Use.

6/21/05

6/28/05

9/13/05

10/04/05

Substantial revisions to the Zoning Map to eliminate spot zoning and create cohesive planning areas codified in Appendix F herein

6/21/05

6/28/05

9/13/05

10/04/05

 


 

SUPPLEMENT #17

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

NOTICE TO

     TOWN

    CLERK

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

Updated technical standards

8/3/04

8/5/04

11/30/04

12/21/04

 Re-numbered and re-ordered the regulations

8/3/04

8/5/04

11/30/04

12/21/04

Complied with Act 115

8/3/04

8/5/04

11/30/04

12/21/04

Expanded definitions and use table

8/3/04

8/5/04

11/30/04

12/21/04

Replace Zoning Regulations in their entirety

8/3/04

8/5/04

11/30/04

12/21/04

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #16

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

NOTICE TO

     TOWN

    CLERK

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

Added Section 2.03 Official Map

1/13/04

1/15/04

2/24/04

3/16/04

 Delete Article 17 Signs

1/13/04

1/15/04

2/24/04

3/16/04

Section 1820 Alteration of Existing Grade and Impervious Area – require permits for any extension of impervious area on a lot

1/13/04

1/15/04

2/24/04

3/16/04

Delete Section 1821

1/13/04

1/15/04

2/24/04

3/16/04

Replaced Article 19 Administration and Enforcement – Allow for municipal ticketing of violations

1/13/04

1/15/04

2/24/04

3/16/04

 

 

                                                                             SUPPLEMENT #15

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

NOTICE TO

     TOWN

    CLERK

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

Change “Zoning Board of Adjustment” and “Planning Commission” to DRB

7/2/02

7/18/02

8/27/02

9/27/02

 Revise Section 1826 to allow accessory structures with front yard

7/2/02

7/18/02

8/27/02

9/27/02

Section 1801 Conforming Uses – allow administrative approvals

7/2/02

7/18/02

8/27/02

9/27/02

Section 1203 – conversion of non-residential to residential in GD-1 district

7/2/02

7/18/02

8/27/02

9/27/02

New Accessory Apartment definition

7/2/02

7/18/02

8/27/02

9/27/02

New Section 1842 Accessory Apartments

7/2/02

7/18/02

8/27/02

9/27/02

Delete existing Section 902.12

7/2/02

7/18/02

8/27/02

9/27/02

Section 1808, same language for PUD’s as for PRD’s

7/2/02

7/18/02

8/27/02

9/27/02

Section 903 – Conditional Uses – allow small offices with DRB approval

7/2/02

7/18/02

8/27/02

9/27/02

Section 1827.11(a)  Housing for the Elderly – new parking requirements

7/2/02

7/18/02

8/27/02

9/27/02

Article I Bars and Café – revise definition for and separate from permitted restaurant uses

7/2/02

7/18/02

8/27/02

9/27/02

Section 1710.12 and 1711 – allow changing message board signs in certain districts and situations

7/2/02

7/18/02

8/27/02

9/27/02

Article X – Add restrictions and construction guidelines on new seawalls

7/2/02

7/18/02

8/27/02

9/27/02

Section 1835 – clarify Storage and Sale of Equipment, Vehicles, Salvage Material or Junk

7/2/02

7/18/02

8/27/02

9/27/02

Table of Permissable Uses – minor housekeeping items and change in layout

7/2/02

7/18/02

8/27/02

9/27/02

Section 1812 – reduce allowed front yard coverage

7/2/02

7/18/02

8/27/02

9/27/02

Article I – New or revised definitions for “DRB”, “Accessory Apt.”, “Post Office”, “Structure”

7/2/02

7/18/02

8/27/02

9/27/02

Section 1503.2 and 1603.4 – revised to allow flexibility in buffer strips

7/2/02

 7/18/02

8/27/02

9/27/02

                                                                                            

 

                                                                             SUPPLEMENT #14

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

   NOTICE TO

     TOWN

    CLERK

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

Amendment to Article I, Section 101 Definitions

Planned Unit Development

9/18/01

7/23/01

9/18/01

10/8/01

Amendment to Article XVI, add to heading – Residential and Commercial

9/18/01

7/23/01

9/18/01

10/8/01

Amendment to Article II, Section 200 DISTRICTS. Add GD-4 and GD-4C OVERLAY)

9/18/01

7/23/01

9/18/01

10/8/01

Permissible Use Section – changes to format

9/18/01

7/23/01

     9/18/01

10/8/01

Addition of Article XXI – GD-4 and GD-4C overlay

9/19/01

7/23/01

9/18/01

10/8/01

 


                                                                              SUPPLEMENT 13

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

NOTICE TO

     TOWN

    CLERK

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

Amendment to the Zoning Map

4/2001

4/17/01

4/24/01

5/16/01

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #12

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

   NOTICE TO

     TOWN

    CLERK

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

Establish a Watercourse Protection District

7/28/99

12/30/98

2/15/00

3/8/00

Establish a Telecommunications Ordinance

7/28/99

12/30/98

2/15/00

3/8/00

Add Fire Safety Standards to the Site Plan Review Criteria

7/28/99

12/30/08

2/15/00

3/8/00

Revised language pertaining to tree cutting within 85 ft. of shoreline

7/28/99

12/30/98

2/15/00

3/8/00

Allow the Town Planner increased authority to approve amendments to Site Plans

7/28/99

12/30/98

2/15/00

3/8/00

Added new section regarding final authorization for connection to public sewer system

7/28/99

12/30/98

2/15/00

3/8/00

Require conformance with the Master Plan for all Site Plans

7/28/99

12/30/98

2/15/00

3/8/00

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #11

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

NOTICE TO

     TOWN

    CLERK

ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

Added design review standards and amended filing requirements to Site Plan Review Criteria

8/12/98

7/23/98

3/16/99

4/14/99

Added signage requirements for Window Signs

8/12/98

7/23/98

3/16/99

4/14/99

Removed “Residential accommodations for servants or caretakers” as an accessory use

8/12/98

7/23/98

3/16/99

4/14/99

Added Circumferential Highway to the definition of an Arterial Highway and established a setback for the Circumferential Highway

8/12/98

7/23/98

3/16/99

4/14/99

Clarified seasonal dwelling units and basic amenities

8/12/98

7/23/98

3/16/99

4/14/99

Clarified language and intent of Section 1807 pertaining to lots not fronting on a public road or public waters

8/12/98

7/23/98

3/16/99

4/14/99

Clarified Article VIII, Section 804 pertaining to PRD’s

8/12/98

7/23/98

3/16/99

4/14/99

Added new section for seasonal dwelling units that do not meet the definition of a non-conforming use

8/12/98

7/23/98

3/16/99

4/14/99

Added definition of “Elderly Housing” and amended Article XV to allow Elderly Housing with density bonuses

8/12/98

7/23/98

3/16/99

4/14/99

Add Elderly Housing to the Table of Permissable Uses in Districts R-1, R-2, R-3, GD-1, GD-2, and GD-3. Add Elderly Housing in the Commercial District subject to Zoning Board Conditional Use Approval. Add multi-family housing in GD-2 District

8/12/98

7/23/98

3/16/99

4/14/99

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #10

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

NOTICE TO

     TOWN

    CLERK

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

 

Clarify definitions relating to non-conforming uses

5/28/97

7/24/97

8/12/97

9/2/97

Ease the regulations pertaining to non-conforming uses and seasonal dwelling units

5/28/97

7/24/97

8/12/97

9/2/97

Amendments to the Zoning Map

5/28/97

7/24/97

8/12/97

9/2/97

 


SUPPLEMENT #9

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

NOTICE TO

     TOWN

    CLERK

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

Amendment to the Table of Permissable Uses to add the new GD-3 district and other zoning district changes

4/17/97

4/23/97

7/24/97

8/26/97

9/9/97

Allow the keeping of animals in the GD-1 and GD-2 districts, with restrictions

4/17/97

4/23/97

7/24/97

8/26/97

9/9/97

Clarify and add definitions

4/17/97

4/23/97

7/24/97

8/26/97

9/9/97

Allow retail sales as conditional uses in the Industrial district

4/17/97

4/23/97

7/24/97

8/26/97

9/9/97

Revise sign regulations

4/17/97

4/23/97

7/24/97

8/26/97

9/9/97

Parking and access revisions to address ADA compliance

4/17/97

4/23/97

7/24/97

8/26/97

9/9/97

Forestry/agricultural use exemptions and revisions to pre-existing, small lot regulations, per statute

4/17/97

4/23/97

7/24/97

8/26/97

9/9/97

 

Expanded site plan review criteria

4/17/97

4/23/97

7/24/97

8/26/97

9/9/97

Codify existing site plan and fill placement waiver policies

4/17/97

4/23/97

7/24/97

8/26/97

9/9/97

Add figures to go with existing language

4/17/97

4/23/97

7/24/97

8/26/97

9/9/97

Change building height restrictions

4/17/97

4/23/97

7/24/97

8/26/97

9/9/97

Revise home-occupation/business regulations

4/17/97

7/24/97

8/26/97

9/9/97

Address temporary structures and commercial use tents

4/17/97

4/23/97

7/24/97

8/26/97

9/9/97

Allow Planning Commission to vary off-street parking requirements

4/17/97

4/23/97

7/24/97

8/26/97

9/9/97

 

Increase height of parking lot lights from 16' to 20'

4/17/97

4/23/97

7/24/97

8/26/97

9/9/97

Clarify expiration of approvals under the Zoning regulations

4/17/97

4/23/97

7/24/97

8/26/97

9/9/97

Create a new General Development GD-3 district, with design guidelines

4/17/97

4/23/97

7/24/97

8/26/97

9/9/97

Minor Revisions to the wetland regulations

4/17/97

4/23/97

7/24/97

8/26/97

9/9/97

Create a new 10 acre rural-residential district

4/17/97

4/23/97

7/24/97

8/26/97

9/9/97

Delete access restrictions for neighboring fast food businesses

4/17/97

4/23/97

7/24/97

8/26/97

9/9/97

 

 


SUPPLEMENT #8 and #8A

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

NOTICE TO

     TOWN

    CLERK

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

Amendment to the Zoning Map

7/96

3/25/97

4/22/97

5/13/97

Amendment to the Zoning Map

7/96

3/25/97

5/13/97

6/3/97

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #7

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION                                    PUBLIC

   HEARING

NOTICE TO

     TOWN

    CLERK

  ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

Amendment to the Zoning Map

3/10/93

7/2/93

7/30/93

8/20/93

Article 1 - Clarify definition of Front Lot Line.

3/10/93

7/2/93

7/30/93

8/20/93

Clarify inadvertent omissions in the text by removing the list of "Permissible Uses" in each district and clarifying the "Table of Permissible Uses"

3/10/93

7/2/93

7/30/93

8/20/93

Clarify the "Special Required Conditions" section of the Shoreline District

3/10/93

7/2/93

7/30/93

8/20/93

Amendment to Section 1828.7 to allow the Planning Commission to waive the paving requirements on certain projects that meet minimum requirements established.

3/10/93

7/2/93

7/30/93

8/20/93

Addition of conditional use clause in all residential and agricultural districts.

3/10/93

7/2/93

7/30/93

8/20/93

Add Firewood Operations as a permitted use in agricultural districts.

3/10/93

7/2/93

7/30/93

8/20/93

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #6

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

PLANNING

COMMISSION PUBLIC

HEARING

NOTICE TO

     TOWN

    CLERK

ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

Amendment to the Zoning Map.

    10/28/92

   11/22/92

   12/22/92

    1/13/93

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #5

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

  PLANNING

COMMISSION PUBLIC

   HEARING

NOTICE TO

     TOWN

    CLERK

ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

Article 1 - Clarify and add definitions.

    09/19/91

   12/06/91

   03/10/92

   04/14/92

Amend the Table of Permissible Uses. 

    09/19/91

   12/06/91

   03/10/92

   04/14/92

Amendments to the Zoning Map.

    09/19/91

   12/06/91

   03/10/92

   04/14/92

 


SUPPLEMENT #4A

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

PLANNING

COMMISSION PUBLIC HEARING

NOTICE TO

     TOWN

    CLERK

ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

Add definitions - Marine Association, Residential and Residence, Primary with Accessory Apartment

      1/9/91

   11/26/91

   12/10/91

     1/1/92

Amend Sections 702 and 902 adding minimum requirements for residential marinas

      1/9/91

   11/26/91

   12/10/91

     1/1/92

Amend table of permissible uses to add Residential Marine Associations (6.275) and Marinas and yacht clubs (6.270)

      1/9/91

   11/26/91

   12/10/91

     1/1/92

Amend Sections 1102 and 1202 adding minimum requirements for Marinas and Yacht Clubs

      1/9/91

   11/26/91

   12/10/91

     1/1/92

 


SUPPLEMENT #4

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

PLANNING

COMMISSION PUBLIC HEARING

NOTICE TO

TOWN

CLERK

ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

Clarify and add definitions

      1/9/91

    5/28/91

    8/27/91

    9/17/91

Amend Section 1801 and 1802 regarding non-complying structures and non-conforming uses to more clearly distinguish between the two and clarify what can be done to non-conforming uses and non-complying structures

      1/9/91

    5/28/91

    8/27/91

    9/17/91

Provide a table of permissible uses for all districts

      1/9/91

    5/28/91

    8/27/91

    9/17/91

Revise the lot coverage requirement for the Commercial, General Development GD1 and General Development GD2 districts

      1/9/91

    5/28/91

    8/27/91

    9/17/91

Change the zoning designation of all properties currently zoned Governmental and eliminate the Governmental District

      1/9/91

    5/28/91

    8/27/91

    9/17/91

 


SUPPLEMENT #3

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

PLANNING

COMMISSION PUBLIC HEARING

NOTICE TO

     TOWN

    CLERK

ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

Article I - Definition - Add the word/definition of "STORAGE".

    08/01/90

   01/04/91

   05/14/91

   06/04/91

General Development - GD-1 - The elimination of the following permitted uses: Shopping centers, automotive repair shops, warehouse/wholesale distributors, automotive, small equipment or trailer sales & service, enclosed light manufacturing/ processing industry, drive-in restaurant/fast food outlets and gasoline service stations.

    08/01/90

   01/04/91

   05/14/91

   06/04/91

Zoning District Changes - A complete list of the affected properties is on file in the Town Clerk's Office and the Zoning and Planning Department.

    08/01/90

   01/04/91

   05/14/91

   06/04/91

 


SUPPLEMENT #2

                                   

 

                          PROPOSAL

PLANNING

COMMISSION PUBLIC HEARING

NOTICE TO

     TOWN

    CLERK

ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

Article XVIII - General Provisions - New section 1814.5, Public ROW Dedication

      05/16/90

   09/21/90

   11/13/90

   12/05/90

Article XVIII - General Provisions - New section 1826, Special Historic Properties

      05/16/90

   09/21/90

   11/13/90

   12/05/90

 

 

SUPPLEMENT #1

                                     

 

                            PROPOSAL

PLANNING

COMMISSION PUBLIC HEARING

NOTICE TO

     TOWN

    CLERK

ADOPTED

EFFECTIVE

     DATE

Article I - Definitions – Defined Sewage Disposal Systems, Cross-District

    12/13/89

   02/28/90

   04/17/90

   05/18/90

GOV, MHP, R-1, -2, -3, COMM, GD-1, GD-2 and I Permitted cross-district sewage disposal systems when approved by the Zoning Board of Adjustment

    12/13/89

   02/28/90

   04/17/90

   05/18/90

Article V - Revised Section 501.7 to say "property is actively involved in" instead of "occupant shall be engaged"

    12/13/89

   02/28/90

   04/17/90

   05/18/90

Article V - Revised Section 502.6(b) to say "sufficient" instead of "minimum of eight"

    12/13/89

   02/28/90

   04/17/90

   05/18/90

Article VII - Section 702.7(b) - Removed minimum acreage requirement

    12/13/89

   02/28/90

   04/17/90

   05/18/90

Article IX - Section 905.3 – Revised building height requirements

    12/13/89

   02/28/90

   04/17/90

   05/18/90

Article XI - Section 1102 – Deleted Section .6(c)

    12/13/89

   02/28/90

   04/17/90

   05/18/90

Article XVIII - Section 1816 - Added .2 and .3 regarding cross-district sewage disposal

    12/13/89

   02/28/90

   04/17/90

   05/18/90

Article XVIII - Section 1822 - Removed the requirement to obtain a zoning permit

    12/13/89

   02/28/90

   04/17/90

   05/18/90

 
APPENDIX F: ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS

 

 

EFFECTIVE March 4, 2020

06-007002 R3 to R2

06-006002 R3 to R2

 

EFFECTIVE April 19, 2017

Portions of Parcel ID #08-021003 AGR to R2

12-022000-0000000 AGR to R5

12-023000-0000000 AGR to R5

Portions of 06-005002-0000000 AGR to R2

 

EFFECTIVE August 31, 2016

06-021002-0000000 GD1 to Lakeshore 2

06-022002-0000000 GD1 to Lakeshore 2

06-023002-0000000 IND to Lakeshore 2 & IND

06-024002-0000000 GD1/R1 to GD1           

60-038002-0000000 COM to Lakeshore 2

60-039002-0000000 COM to Lakeshore 2

60-040002-0000000 COM (Partial FP) to Lakeshore 1 (Partial FP)           

62-001002-0000000 R1 to Lakeshore 2

62-002002-0000000 R1 to Lakeshore 2

62-003002-0000000 R1 to Lakeshore 2

62-004002-0000000 COM to Lakeshore 2

62-019002-0000000 R1 to Lakeshore 2

62-020002-0000000 R1 to Lakeshore 2

62-021002-0000000 R1 to Lakeshore 2

62-021012-0000000 COM to Lakeshore 2

62-022022-0000000 GD1 to Lakeshore 2

62-023002-0000000 COM to Lakeshore 2

62-024002-0000000 COM to Lakeshore 2

62-025002-0000000 GD1 to Lakeshore 2

62-025012-0000000 GD1 to Lakeshore 2

62-026002-0000000 GD1 to Lakeshore 2

62-028002-0000000 GD1 to Lakeshore 2

62-029002-0000000 COM (Partial FP) to Lakeshore 1 (Partial FP)           

62-030002-0000000 COM (Partial FP) to Lakeshore 2 (Partial FP)           

62-031002-0000000 GD1 (Partial FP) to Lakeshore 2 (Partial FP) 

62-032002-0000000 COM (Partial FP) to Lakeshore 1 (Partial FP)           

62-033002-0000000 R1 (Partial FP) to Lakeshore 1 (Partial FP)    

62-034002-0000000 R1 (Partial FP) to Lakeshore 1 (Partial FP)    

62-035002-0000000 R1 (Partial FP) to Lakeshore 1 (Partial FP)    

62-036002-0000000 R1 (Partial FP) to Lakeshore 1 (Partial FP)    

62-037002-0000000 R1 (Partial FP) to Lakeshore 1(Partial FP)     

62-038002-0000000 R1 (Partial FP) to Lakeshore 1(Partial FP)

62-039002-0000000 R1 to Lakeshore 1

62-040002-0000000 R1 (Partial FP) to Lakeshore 1(Partial FP)     

65-001002-0000000 COM to Lakeshore 2 (and all subparcels)

65-003002-0000000 COM to Lakeshore 2

65-004002-0000000 COM to Lakeshore 2

65-005002-0000000 COM (Partial FP) to Lakeshore 2 (Partial FP)           

65-006002-0000000 COM to Lakeshore 2

65-007002-0000000 R1 to Lakeshore 2

65-008002-0000000 R1 to Lakeshore 2

65-009002-0000000 R1 to Lakeshore 2

65-010002-0000000 R1 (Partial FP) to Lakeshore 1(Partial FP)     

65-011002-0000000 R1 (Partial FP) to Lakeshore 1 (Partial FP)    

65-012002-0000000 COM to Lakeshore 1

65-013002-0000000 COM to Lakeshore 1

65-014002-0000000 COM (Partial FP) to Lakeshore 1 (Partial FP)           

65-015002-0000000 COM (Partial FP) to Lakeshore 1 (Partial FP)           

65-016002-0000000 COM (Partial FP) to Lakeshore 1 (Partial FP)           

65-017002-0000000 COM (Partial FP) to Lakeshore 1 (Partial FP)           

65-019002-0000000 COM (Partial FP) to Lakeshore 1 (Partial FP)           

65-020002-0000000 COM (Partial FP) to Lakeshore 1 (Partial FP)           

65-021002-0000000 COM (Partial FP) to Lakeshore 1 (Partial FP)           

65-021012-0000000 COM (Partial FP) to Lakeshore 1 (Partial FP)           

65-022002-0000000 COM (Partial FP) to Lakeshore 1 (Partial FP)           

65-023002-0000000 GD1 to Lakeshore 1

65-025002-0000000 COM to Lakeshore 2

66-001002-0000000 R1 to Lakeshore 2

66-002002-0000000 R1 to Lakeshore 2

66-003003-0000000 GD1 to Lakeshore 2

66-004003-0000000 R2 to Lakeshore 1

66-005003-0000000 R2 to Lakeshore 1

66-005003-0010000 R2 to Lakeshore 1

66-005003-0020000 R2 to Lakeshore 1

66-005003-0030000 R2 to Lakeshore 1

66-006013-0000000 R2 to Lakeshore 1

66-006003-0000000 R2 to Lakeshore 1

66-007003-0000000 R2 to Lakeshore 1

66-008003-0000000 R2 to Lakeshore 1

66-009023-0000000 R2 to Lakeshore 1

66-009033-0000000 R2 to Lakeshore 1

66-016013-0000000 R2 to Lakeshore 2

66-017003-0000000 R2 to Lakeshore 2

66-018003-0000000 R2 to Lakeshore 2

66-019003-0000000 R2 to Lakeshore 2

66-020003-0000000 R2 to Lakeshore 2

66-021003-0000000 R2 to Lakeshore 2

66-021013-0000000 R2 to Lakeshore 2

66-022003-0000000 COM to Lakeshore 2

66-022013-0000000 COM to Lakeshore 2

66-022022-0000000 COM to Lakeshore 2

66-022032-0000000 COM to Lakeshore 2

66-023002-0000000 R2 to Lakeshore 2

66-024002-0000000 R2 to Lakeshore 2

66-024012-0000000 R2 to Lakeshore 2

66-024022-0000000 R2 to Lakeshore 2

66-024052-0000000 R2 to Lakeshore 2

66-025002-0000000 COM to Lakeshore 2

 

EFFECTIVE March 2, 2016

Portions of Parcel ID #08-021003 AGR to R2

 

EFFECTIVE September 30,2015

25-005003 R3 to GD1

Portions of Parcel ID #41-035002 GD1 to R3 (per Zoning Map)

 

 

EFFECTIVE  November 5, 2014

03-031003 GD3 to R3

03-030003 GD3 to R3

 

 

EFFECTIVE January 1, 2014

40-006002 COM to GD1

40-007002 COM to GD1

40-061002 and all sub-numbers R2 to R3

40-061132   R2 to R3

 

 

EFFECTIVE October 30, 2013

37-073002       COM to GD1

41-099002       COM   to GD1

41-041002       COM   to R3

05-005002       COM   to GD1

40-002012       COM   to GD1

40-001002       COM   to GD1

40-062002       COM   to GD1

40-062022       COM   to GD1

40-062012       COM   to GD1

40-063002       COM   to GD1 & GD1C

40-063012       COM   to GD1 & GD1C

40-064002       COM   to GD1 & GD1C

41-095002       COM   to GD1 & GD1C

41-097002       COM   to GD1 & GD1C

41-098002       COM   to GD1 & GD1C

41-094002 and all subnumbers          COM   to GD1 & GD1C

41-092002       COM/R3 to GD1 & GD1C

41-093002 and all subnumbers          COM   to GD1 & GD1C

41-052002       COM   to GD1

41-051002       COM   to GD1

41-033002       COM   to GD1

41-034002       COM   to GD1

41-035002       COM   to GD1

41-006002       COM   to GD1

41-006012       COM   to GD1

41-005002       COM   to GD1 & GD1C

41-004002       COM   to GD1 & GD1C

41-003002       COM   to GD1 & GD1C

41-002002       COM   to GD1 & GD1C

41-001002       COM   to GD1 & GD1C

37-025002       COM   to GD1 & GD1C

37-028002       COM   to GD1 & GD1C

37-030012       COM   to GD1 & GD1C

37-030002       COM   to GD1 & GD1C

37-031002       GD1    to GD1 & GD1C

37-018002       COM   to GD1 & GD1C

37-017002       COM   to GD1 & GD1C

37-016002       COM   to GD1 & GD1C

37-073002       COM to GD1C

39-010002       COM   to GD1

40-083002       COM   to R2

06-026072       GOV   to R1

49-001012       COM to GD1

49-013002       COM to GD1

49-014002       COM to GD1

49-020002       COM to GD1& GD1C

49-024002       COM to GD1& GD1C

49-026012       COM to GD1 & GD1C

49-026002       COM to GD1 & GD1C

51-006002       COM to GD1& GD1C

51-007002       COM to GD1& GD1C

49-027002       COM to GD1& GD1C

51-009002       COM to GD1

40-003002       COM to GD1

40-005002       COM to GD1

49-021002       COM to GD1& GD1C

49-022002       COM to GD1& GD1C

49-023002       COM to GD1& GD1C

49-025002       COM to GD1& GD1C

51-009012       COM to GD1

51-010002       COM to GD1

51-010012       COM to GD1

51-002002       R2 to GD1

51-003002       R2 to GD1

51-004002       R2 to GD1

51-005002       R2 to GD1

51-005012       R2 to GD1

51-005022       R2 to GD1

51-005032       R2 to GD1

51-005032-0010000   R2 to GD1

51-014002       R2/COM to R2

53-003002       R3 to R2

51-016002       GD1 to R2

37-020002       COM to GD1

37-021002       COM to GD1

37-023002       COM to GD1

37-024002       COM to GD1& GD1C

37-006002       R2/FLP to GD1/FLP

37-007002       R2/FLP to GD1/FLP

37-072002       R2 to GD1

05-013002       FLP/R2 to FLP/GD1

37-010012       R2 to GD1

37-010022       R2 to GD1

37-010032       R2 to GD1

37-010042       R2 to GD1

37-010052       R2 to GD1

37-010062       R2 to GD1

26-018003      AGR to R1

37-013002       GD1 TO GD1 & GD1C

37-014002       GD1 TO GD1 & GD1C

37-015002       GD1 TO GD1 & GD1C

Portions of Parcel ID #06-023002 IND to COM (per Zoning Map)

 

 

EFFECTIVE May 30, 2012

49-001022 COM to GD1

 

EFFECTIVE May 18, 2011

06-023002 A 109.99 ft. by 315.91 ft., 0.77 of an acre portion of the northwest corner IND to COM

 

 

EFFECTIVE July 14, 2010

03-017013 IND to BD

03-022013 IND to BD

03-021003 IND to BD

03-019003 IND to BD

03-020003 IND to BD

01-020323 IND to BD

01-020263 IND to BD

01-020243 IND to BD

01-020233 IND to BD

01-020063 IND to BD

01-020073 IND to BD

01-020083 IND to BD

01-020093 IND to BD

01-020103 IND to BD

01-020153 IND to BD

01-020163 IND to BD

01-020173 IND to BD

01-020183 IND to BD

01-020193 IND to BD

01-020203 IND to BD

01-020213 IND to BD

01-020223 IND to BD

03-022043 IND to BD

03-018003 IND to BD

03-018013 IND to BD

 

 

EFFECTIVE MARCH 31, 2010

03-033003 AGR to AMU

07-034003 AGR to AMU

07-046003 AGR to AMU

 

 

EFFECTIVE MARCH 2, 2010

06-022002 R1 to GD1

66-003003 R1 to GD1

65-023002 R1 to GD1

06-021002 R1 to GD1

06-014002 R1 to GD1

06-002002 R1 to GD1

06-001002 R1 to GD1

06-017012 R3 to GD1

06-017002 R3 to GD1

06-016002 R3 to GD1

06-015002 R3 to GD1

06-013002 FP/COM to FP/GD1

06-012002 R1 to GD1

06-012012 R1 to GD1

06-011002 R3 to R2

06-010002 R3 to R2

06-008002 AGR to R2

06-009012 AGR to R2

06-009002 AGR to R2

 

 

EFFECTIVE NOVEMBER 4, 2009

1.     04-003003 AGR to R1

2.     04-011003 AGR to R1

3.     04-018003 AGR to R1

4.     04-018013 AGR to R1

5.     04-020003 AGR to R1

6.     04-022013 R1 to R3

7.     04-022023 R1 to R3

8.     04-022033 R1 to R3

9.     04-022043 R1 to R3

10.  04-023003 R1 to R3

11.  04-024003 R1 to R3

12.  04-024023-001 R1 to R3

13.  04-024023-002 R1 to R3

14.  04-024023-003 R1 to R3

15.  04-024023-004 R1 to R3

16.  04-024023-005 R1 to R3

17.  04-024023-006 R1 to R3

18.  04-024023-007 R1 to R3

19.  04-024023-008 R1 to R3

20.  04-024023-009 R1 to R3

21.  04-024023-010 R1 to R3

22.  04-024023-011 R1 to R3

23.  04-024023-012 R1 to R3

24.  04-024023-013 R1 to R3

25.  04-024023-014 R1 to R3

26.  04-024023-015 R1 to R3

27.  04-024023-016 R1 to R3

28.  04-024023-017 R1 to R3

29.  04-024023-018 R1 to R3

30.  04-024023-019 R1 to R3

31.  04-024023-020 R1 to R3

32.  04-024023-021 R1 to R3

33.  04-024023-022 R1 to R3

34.  04-024023-023 R1 to R3

35.  04-024023-024 R1 to R3

36.  04-027003 R1 to R3

37.  04-032013-001 R1 to R3

38.  04-032013-002 R1 to R3

39.  04-032013-003 R1 to R3

40.  04-032013-004 R1 to R3

41.  04-032013-005 R1 to R3

42.  04-032013-006 R1 to R3

43.  04-032013-007 R1 to R3

44.  04-032013-008 R1 to R3

45.  04-032013-009 R1 to R3

46.  04-032013-010 R1 to R3

47.  04-032013-011 R1 to R3

48.  04-032013-012 R1 to R3

49.  04-032013-013 R1 to R3

50.  04-032013-014 R1 to R3

51.  04-032013-015 R1 to R3

52.  04-032013-016 R1 to R3

53.  04-032013-017 R1 to R3

54.  04-032013-018 R1 to R3

55.  04-032013-019 R1 to R3

56.  04-032013-020 R1 to R3

57.  04-032013-021 R1 to R3

58.  04-032013-022 R1 to R3

59.  04-032013-023 R1 to R3

60.  04-032013-024 R1 to R3

61.  04-032013-025 R1 to R3

62.  04-032013-026 R1 to R3

63.  04-032013-027 R1 to R3

64.  04-032013-028 R1 to R3

65.  04-123003 R1 to R3

66.  04-124003 R1 to R3

67.  04-125003 R1 to R3

68.  04-126003 R1 to R3

69.  04-127003 R1 to R3

70.  04-128003 R1 to R3

71.  04-129003 R1 to R2

72.  08-041003 R1 to R3

73.  08-041013 R1 to R3

74.  08-041023 R1 to R3

75.  08-042003 R1 to R3

 

EFFECTIVE NOVEMBER 4, 2009

1.     08-014003 AGR & R3 & R2 to GD1

2.     11-009003 COM to GD1

3.     24-007003 R2 to GD1

4.     24-007013 R2 to GD1

5.     24-007023 R2 to GD1

6.     24-009003 R2 to GD1

7.     24-010003 R2 to GD1

8.     24-011003 R2 to GD1

9.     24-012003 R2 to GD1

10.  24-013003 R2 to GD1

11.  24-014003 R2 to GD1

12.  24-014013 R3 to GD1

13.  24-015003 R2 to GD1

14.  24-016003 R2 to GD1

15.  24-017003 R2 to R3

16.  24-018003 R2 to R3

17.  24-018013 R2 to R3

18.  24-019003 R2 to R3

19.  24-020003 R2 to R3

20.  24-021003 R2 to R3

21.  24-022003 R2 to R3

22.  24-023003 R2 to GD1

23.  24-023013 R2 to R3

24.  24-024003 COM to GD1

25.  24-025003 R2 to R3

26.  24-026003 R2 to R3

27.  24-026013 R2 to R3

28.  24-027003 R2 to R3

29.  25-001003 R2 to GD1

30.  25-002003 R2 to GD1

31.  25-005003 R2 to R3

32.  25-006003 R2 to R3

33.  25-053003 R2 to R3

34.  25-053013 R2 to R3

35.  25-054003 R2 to R3

36.  25-094003 R2 to R3

37.  25-094013 R2 to R3

38.  25-094023 R2 to R3

39.  25-095003 R2 to R3

40.  25-096003 R2 to R3

41.  25-097003 R2 to R3

42.  25-098003 R2 to R3

43.  25-0108013 R2 to R3

44.  26-001003 R2 to GD1

45.  26-002003 R2 to GD1

46.  26-003003 R2 to GD1

47.  26-004003 R2 to GD1

48.  26-005003 COM to GD1

49.  26-005013 COM to GD1

50.  26-006003 COM to GD1

51.  26-007003 COM to GD1

52.  26-008003 COM to GD1

53.  26-009003 COM to GD1

54.  26-010003 COM to GD1

55.  26-011003 COM to GD1

56.  26-012003 COM to GD1

57.  26-013003 COM to GD1

58.  26-014003 COM to GD1

59.  26-014013 COM to GD1

60.  26-014023 COM to GD1

61.  26-015003 COM to GD1

62.  26-016003 COM to GD1

63.  26-022003 COM to GD1

64.  26-023003 COM to GD1

65.  26-024003 COM to GD1

66.  26-025003 COM to GD1

67.  26-026003 R1 to GD1

68.  26-026013 COM to GD1

69.  26-027003 R2 to GD1

70.  26-027013 R2 to GD1

71.  26-028003 AGR to GD1

72.  26-028013 AGR to GD1

73.  26-029003 COM to GD1

74.  26-030003 R2 to GD1

 

EFFECTIVE APRIL 15, 2009

1.     22-185003 GD1 to IND

2.     22-173003 COM to GD1

3.     22-173003 R1 to GD1

4.     22-175003 R3 to GD1

5.     22-176003 R3 to GD1

6.     22-180003 R3 to GD1

7.     22-181003 R3 to GD1

8.     22-182003 R3 to GD1

9.     22-183003 R3 to GD1

10.  22-183013 R3 to GD1

11.  22-184003 COM to GD1

12.  09-003003 R2/AGR to R2

13.  09-005003 R2/AGR to R2

14.  26-017003 COM to GD1

15.  27-016003 COM / R2 to GD1

16.  27-015003 R2 to GD1

17.  27-018003 COM to GD1

18.  27-017003 COM to GD1

19.  27-017013 COM to GD1

20.  27-018013 COM to GD1

21.  26-019003 COM to GD1

 

EFFECTIVE SEPTEMBER 17, 2008

Parcel ID #03‑024013 IND to BD
2.     Parcel ID #03‑023003 IND to BD

3.     Parcel ID #03‑023013 IND to BD

4.     Parcel ID #03‑023023 IND to BD

5.     Parcel ID #03‑023033 IND to BD

6.     Parcel ID #03‑023043 IND to BD

7.     Parcel ID #03‑028003 IND to BD

8.     Parcel ID #03‑054003 IND to BD

9.     Parcel ID #03‑055003 IND to BD

10.  Parcel ID #03‑056003 IND to BD

11.  Parcel ID #03‑057003 IND to BD

12.  Parcel ID #03‑058003 IND to BD

13.  Parcel ID #03‑060003 IND to BD

14.  Parcel ID #03‑061003 IND to BD

15.  Parcel ID #03‑062003 IND to BD

16.  Parcel ID #03‑063003 IND to BD

 

 

EFFECTIVE OCTOBER 4, 2005

Parcel ID #70-001003-0000000  GD1 to R1
Parcel ID #59-004002-0000000  R1 to R2
Parcel ID #08-023013 RR to AGR
Parcel ID #08-023003 RR to AGR
Parcel ID #14-026010-0000000   AGR to GD4
Parcel ID #14-014010-0000000  RR to R10
Parcel ID #14-024000-0000000  RR to GD4
Parcel ID #17-051003-0000000  COM to GD4
Parcel ID #17-003030-0000000   R1/GD1 to GD4
Parcel ID #17-002000-0000000  R1 to GD4
Parcel ID #17-003020-0000000   GD1 to GD4
Parcel ID #17-003070-0000000   GD1 to GD4
Parcel ID #17-003060-0000000   GD1 to GD4
Parcel ID #17-003050-0000000   GD1 to GD4
Parcel ID #17-003040-0000000   GD1 to GD4
Parcel ID #16-010010-0000000  COM to R1
Parcel ID #17-015010  GD4 to R1
Parcel ID #16-033000-0000000 COM to GD1
Parcel ID #16-031000-0000000 COM to GD1
Parcel ID #16-026000-0000000 COM to GD1
Parcel ID #16-027010-0000000 COM to GD1
Parcel ID #16-027000-0000000 COM to GD1
Parcel ID #03-066003  IND to COM
Parcel ID #03-028003  IND/R1 to IND
Parcel ID #04-033003  R1 to R3
Parcel ID #01-020273  IND to COM
Parcel ID #03-025013  R3 to COM
Parcel ID #03-024033  R3 to COM
Parcel ID #03-065003  IND to COM
Parcel ID #03-064003  IND to COM
Parcel ID #03-197003  IND to COM
Parcel ID #03-198003  IND to COM
Parcel ID #03-199003  IND to COM
Parcel ID #03-200003  IND to COM
Parcel ID #03-201003  IND to COM
Parcel ID #03-206023  COM/IND to COM
Parcel ID #03-195003  COM/IND to COM
Parcel ID #03-193003  IND to COM
Parcel ID #03-192003  IND to COM
Parcel ID #03-191003  IND to COM
Parcel ID #03-024003  IND to COM
Parcel ID #03-207003  IND to COM
Parcel ID #03-181003  IND to COM
Parcel ID #03-182003  IND to COM
Parcel ID #03-183003  IND to COM
Parcel ID #03-184003  IND to COM
Parcel ID #03-185003  IND to COM
Parcel ID #03-186003  IND to COM
Parcel ID #03-187003  IND to COM
Parcel ID #03-188003  IND to COM
Parcel ID #01-015001  GOV to GD2
Parcel ID #01-016010  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #01-018000  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #01-017000  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #19-027001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #19-023001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #19-023011  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #19-028001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #01-011001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #19-025001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #19-026001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #01-010001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #01-009001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #19-024001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #01-012001  GD1/IND to GD2
Parcel ID #01-013001  GD1/IND to GD2
Parcel ID #01-008001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #01-007001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #01-006001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #01-001001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #01-002001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #01-003001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #01-004001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #18-019001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #18-017011  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #18-017021  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #18-018001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #18-017001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #18-003001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #18-004001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #18-005001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #18-006001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #18-008001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #18-009001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #18-010001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #18-011001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #18-012001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #18-013001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #18-014001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #18-015001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #18-016001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #18-001001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #18-002021  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #01-005001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #19-001001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #19-002001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #19-002011  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #19-003001  GD1 to GD2
Parcel ID #19-004001  GD1 to GD2
100. Parcel ID #19-010011 GD1 to GD2

101. Parcel ID #19-005011 GD1 to GD2

102. Parcel ID #19-005001 GD1 to GD2

103. Parcel ID #19-006011  GD1 to GD2

104.Parcel ID #19-006001  GD1 to GD2

105.Parcel ID #19-007001  GD1 to GD2

106.Parcel ID #19-008001  GD1 to GD2

107.Parcel ID #19-009001  GD1 to GD2

108.Parcel ID #19-009011  GD1 to GD2

109.Parcel ID #19-010001  GD1 to GD2

110.Parcel ID #19-011001  GD1 to GD2

111.Parcel ID #19-016001  GD1 to GD2

112.Parcel ID #19-017001  GD1 to GD2

113.Parcel ID #19-018001  GD1 to GD2

114.Parcel ID #19-019011  GD1 to GD2

115.Parcel ID #19-015001  GD1 to GD2

116.Parcel ID #19-019001  GD1 to GD2

117.Parcel ID #19-020001  GD1 to GD2

118.Parcel ID #19-021001  GD1 to GD2

119.Parcel ID #19-022001  GD1 to GD2

120.Parcel ID #19-014001 GD1 to GD2

121.Parcel ID #08-037023-0000000 IND to GD3

122.Parcel ID #04-030043-0000000 COM to GD3

123.Parcel ID #08-039003-0000000 AGR to GD3

124.Parcel ID #03-030003-0000000 R3 to GD3

125.Parcel ID #08-040003-0000000 R1 to GD3

126.Parcel ID #08-040013-0000000 R1 to GD3

127.Parcel ID #57-008002 RR to GD1

128.Parcel ID #57-005002 R1 to R5

129.Parcel ID #57-005022 R1 to R5

130.Parcel ID #54-044012 RR/R2 to R2

131.Parcel ID #55-008002 R5 to GD1

132.Parcel ID #55-014002 R5 to GD1

133.Parcel ID #55-013002 R5 to GD1

134.Parcel ID #55-012002 R5 to GD1

135.Portions of Parcel ID #54-051002 R5 to GD1 (per Zoning Map)

136.Parcel ID #12-019000-0000000 R1 to R5

137.Parcel ID #12-019010-0000000 R1 to R5

138.Parcel ID #12-011000-0000000 R1 to R5

139.Parcel ID #12-009000-0000000 R1 to R5

140.Parcel ID #12-009010-0000000 R1 to R5

141.Parcel ID #12-021000-0000000 AGR to R5

142.Parcel ID #14-003000-0000000 R10 to AGR

143.Parcel ID #15-018010-0000000 RR to R10

144.Parcel ID #15-018000-0000000 RR to R10

145.Parcel ID #12-027000-0000000 RR to R10

146.Parcel ID #12-031000-0000000 RR to R10

147.Parcel ID #15-025000-0000000 RR to R10

148.Parcel ID #15-024000-0000000 RR to R10

149.Parcel ID #15-024010-0000000 RR to R10

150.Parcel ID #14-001000-0000000 RR to R10

151.Parcel ID #14-002010-0000000 RR to R10

152.Parcel ID #14-002050-0000000 RR to R10

153.Parcel ID #14-002020-0000000 RR to R10

154.Parcel ID #14-002030-0000000 RR to R10

155.Parcel ID #14-002040-0000000 RR to R10

156.Parcel ID #14-002000-0000000 RR to R10

157.Parcel ID #14-004010-0000000 AGR to R10

158.Parcel ID #14-010000-0000000 AGR to R10

159.Parcel ID #14-004020-0000000 RR to R10

160.Parcel ID #14-004000-0000000 RR to R10

161.Parcel ID #14-007060-0000000 RR to R10

162.Parcel ID #14-007050-0000000 RR to R10

163.Parcel ID #14-007040-0000000 RR to R10

164.Parcel ID #14-007030-0000000 RR to R10

165.Parcel ID #14-007020-0000000 RR to R10

166.Parcel ID #14-007010-0000000 RR to R10

167.Parcel ID #14-012000-0000000 RR to R10

168.Parcel ID #14-008000-0000000 RR to R10

169.Parcel ID #14-005000-0000000 RR to R10

170.Parcel ID #14-005040-0000000 RR to R10

171.Parcel ID #14-005020-0000000 RR to R10

172.Parcel ID #14-006000-0000000 RR to R10

173.Parcel ID #14-005030-0000000 RR to R10

174.Parcel ID #14-005010-0000000 RR to R10

175.Parcel ID #14-009000-0000000 RR to R10

176.Parcel ID #14-010000-0000000 RR to R10

177.Parcel ID #14-011000-0000000 RR to R10

178.Parcel ID #14-013000-0000000 RR to R10

179.Parcel ID #14-014020-0000000 RR to R10

180.Parcel ID #14-014030-0000000 RR to R10

181.Parcel ID #14-014010-0000000 RR to R10

182.Parcel ID #14-014000-0000000 RR to R10

183.Parcel ID #07-033003 AGR to R1

184.Parcel ID #07-019003 AGR to R1

185.Parcel ID #12-026003-0000000 AGR to R5

186.Parcel ID #12-025003-0000000 RR to AGR

187.Parcel ID #15-023003-0000000 AGR to R10

188.Parcel ID #12-024003-0000000 AGR to R5

189.Parcel ID #12-028003-0000000 AGR to R5

190.Parcel ID #12-026013-0000000 AGR to R5

191.Parcel ID #28-040373 R1 to R3

192.Parcel ID #28-084000 R1 to R3

193.Parcel ID #28-089003 R1 to R3

194.Parcel ID #28-090003 R1 to R3

195.Parcel ID #28-091003 R1 to R3

196.Parcel ID #28-092003 R1 to R3

197.Parcel ID #28-039003 R1 to R3

198.Parcel ID #28-088003 R1 to R3

199.Parcel ID #28-087003 R1 to R3

200.Parcel ID #28-086003 R1 to R3

201.Parcel ID #28-040003 R1 to R3

202.Parcel ID #28-083003 R1 to R3

203.Parcel ID #28-040353 AGR to R3

204.Parcel ID #28-040343 AGR to R3

205.Parcel ID #28-040382 R1 to R3

206.Parcel ID #28-040333 AGR to R3

207.Parcel ID #28-082093 AGR to R3

208.Parcel ID #04-006003 MHP to R1

209.Parcel ID #08-001003 R1/AGR to AGR

210.Parcel ID #04-018003 R1 to AGR

211.Parcel ID #67-010003 COM to R2

212.Parcel ID #67-002033 R3 to R2

213.Parcel ID #67-002073 R3 to R2

214.Parcel ID #67-002023 R3 to R2

215.Parcel ID #11-002003 COM to GD1 (includes northern portion that was R1)

216.Parcel ID #70-047003 R1 to GD1

217.Parcel ID #70-044003 GD1 to R1

218.Parcel ID #70-040003 COM to R1

219.Parcel ID #69-012003 COM to R2

220.Parcel ID #68-040003 COM to R2

221.Parcel ID #69-020003 R1 to R2

222.Parcel ID #69-021003 R1 to R2

223.Parcel ID #69-022003 R1 to R2

224.Parcel ID #69-023003 R1 to R2

225.Parcel ID #69-024003 R1 to R2

226.Parcel ID #69-025003 R1 to R2

227.Parcel ID #69-026003 R1 to R2

228.Parcel ID #69-027003 R1 to R2

229.Parcel ID #69-028003 R1 to R2

230.Parcel ID #69-029003 R1 to R2

231.Parcel ID #69-030003 R1 to R2

232.Parcel ID #69-011003 R1 to R2

233.Parcel ID #69-005003 R1 to R2

234.Parcel ID #69-006003 R1 to R2

235.Parcel ID #69-007003 R1 to R2

236.Parcel ID #69-008003 R1 to R2

237.Parcel ID #69-009003 R1 to R2

238.Parcel ID #69-010003 R1 to R2

239.Parcel ID #69-018003 R1 to R2

240.Parcel ID #69-019003 R1 to R2

241.Parcel ID #69-001003 R1 to R2

242.Parcel ID #69-002003 R1 to R2

243.Parcel ID #69-003003 R1 to R2

244.Parcel ID #69-004003 R1 to R2

245.Parcel ID #69-014003 R1 to R2

246.Parcel ID #69-015003 R1 to R2

247.Parcel ID #69-016003 R1 to R2

248.Parcel ID #69-017003 R1 to R2

249.Parcel ID #68-022003 R1 to R2

250.Parcel ID #68-021003 R1 to R2

251.Parcel ID #68-020003 R1 to R2

252.Parcel ID #68-019003 R1 to R2

253.Parcel ID #68-018003 R1 to R2

254.Parcel ID #68-017003 R1 to R2

255.Parcel ID #68-016003 R1 to R2

256.Parcel ID #68-015003 R1 to R2

257.Parcel ID #68-014003 R1 to R2

258.Parcel ID #68-014013 R1 to R2

259.Parcel ID #68-013003 R1 to R2

260.Parcel ID #68-012013 R1 to R2

261.Parcel ID #68-012003 R1 to R2

262.Parcel ID #68-011003 R1 to R2

263.Parcel ID #68-010003 R1 to R2

264.Parcel ID #68-009003 R1 to R2

265.Parcel ID #68-008003 R1 to R2

266.Parcel ID #68-008013 R1 to R2

267.Parcel ID #68-007003 R1 to R2

268.Parcel ID #68-006003 R1 to R2

269.Parcel ID #68-005003 R1 to R2

270.Parcel ID #68-005013 R1 to R2

271.Parcel ID #68-004013 R1 to R2

272.Parcel ID #68-004003 R1 to R2

273.Parcel ID #68-003003 R1 to R2

274.Parcel ID #68-002003 R1 to R2

275.Parcel ID #68-001003 R1 to R2

276.Parcel ID #68-023003  R1 to R2

277.Parcel ID #68-024003  R1 to R2

278.Parcel ID #68-025003  R1 to R2

279.Parcel ID #68-025013  R1 to R2

280.Parcel ID #68-026003  R1 to R2

281.Parcel ID #68-027003  R1 to R2

282.Parcel ID #68-028003  R1 to R2

283.Parcel ID #68-029003  R1 to R2

284.Parcel ID #68-030003  R1 to R2

285.Parcel ID #68-031003  R1 to R2

286.Parcel ID #68-032003  R1 to R2

287.Parcel ID #68-033003  R1 to R2

288.Parcel ID #68-034003  R1 to R2

289.Parcel ID #68-035003  R1 to R2

290.Parcel ID #68-037003  R1 to R2

291.Parcel ID #68-038003  R1 to R2

292.Parcel ID #68-038013  R1 to R2

293.Parcel ID #68-039003  R1 to R2

294.Parcel ID #68-041003  R1 to R2

295.Parcel ID #68-041013  R1 to R2

296.Parcel ID #68-042003  R1 to R2

297.Parcel ID #68-042013  R1 to R2

298.Parcel ID #68-043003  R1 to R2

299.Parcel ID #68-044003  R1 to R2

300.Parcel ID #68-045003  R1 to R2

301.Parcel ID #68-045013  R1 to R2

302.Parcel ID #67-021003  R1 to R2

303.Parcel ID #67-022003  R1 to R2

304.Parcel ID #67-022023  R1 to R2

305.Parcel ID #67-022013  R1 to R2

306.Parcel ID #67-032003  R1 to R2

307.Parcel ID #67-034003  R1 to R2

308.Parcel ID #67-033003  R1 to R2

309.Parcel ID #67-031003  R1 to R2

310.Parcel ID #67-025003  R1 to R2

311.Parcel ID #67-024003  R1 to R2

312.Parcel ID #67-023003  R1 to R2

313.Parcel ID #67-035003  R1 to R2

314.Parcel ID #67-036003  R1 to R2

315.Parcel ID #67-037003  R1 to R2

316.Parcel ID #67-038003  R1 to R2

317.Parcel ID #67-039003  R1 to R2

318.Parcel ID #67-041003  R1 to R2

319.Parcel ID #67-042003  R1 to R2

320.Parcel ID #67-043003  R1 to R2

321.Parcel ID #67-044003  R1 to R2

322.Parcel ID #67-045003  R1 to R2

323.Parcel ID #07-082003  R1 to R2

324.Parcel ID #07-078003  R1 to R2

325.Parcel ID #07-079003  R1 to R2

326.Parcel ID #07-079013  R1 to R2

327.Parcel ID #67-029003  R1 to R2

328.Parcel ID #67-028003  R1 to R2

329.Parcel ID #67-027003  R1 to R2

330.Parcel ID #67-026003  R1 to R2

331.Parcel ID #07-132003  R1 to R2

332.Parcel ID #07-131003  R1 to R2

333.Parcel ID #07-130003  R1 to R2

334.Parcel ID #07-129003  R1 to R2

335.Parcel ID #07-128003  R1 to R2

336.Parcel ID #07-127003  R1 to R2

337.Parcel ID #07-126003  R1 to R2

338.Parcel ID #07-125003  R1 to R2

339.Parcel ID #07-124003  R1 to R2

340.Parcel ID #07-123003  R1 to R2

341.Parcel ID #07-122003  R1 to R2

342.Parcel ID #07-121003  R1 to R2

343.Parcel ID #07-120003  R1 to R2

344.Parcel ID #07-119003  R1 to R2

345.Parcel ID #07-118003  R1 to R2

346.Parcel ID #07-117003  R1 to R2

347.Parcel ID #07-116003  R1 to R2

348.Parcel ID #07-115003  R1 to R2

349.Parcel ID #07-114003  R1 to R2

350.Parcel ID #07-113003  R1 to R2

351.Parcel ID #07-112003  R1 to R2

352.Parcel ID #07-111003  R1 to R2

353.Parcel ID #07-110003  R1 to R2

354.Parcel ID #07-081003  R1 to R2

 

 

EFFECTIVE OCTOBER 8, 2001

 

1.     Tax Map 40, Parcel 66 –  R2 to GD-1

 

2.     Tax Map 40, Parcel 67  -  R-2 to GD-1

 

3.     Tax Map 37, Parcel 80 – R2 to GD-1

 

4.     Tax Map 39, Parcel 2 –  Commercial to GD-1

 

5.     Tax Map 14, Parcel 30 -  Commercial to GD-4C

 

6.     Tax Map 16, Parcel 8 -  Commercial to GD-4

 

7.     Tax Map 17, Parcel 4 –  Commercial to GD-4C

 

8.     Tax Map 17, Parcel 4-1 –  Commercial to GD-4

 

9.     Tax Map 17, Parcel 5 - Commercial to GD-4C

 

10.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 6 –  Commercial to GD-4C

 

11.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 7, -  Commercial to GD-4C

 

12.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 9,  -  Commercial to GD-4C

 

13.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 10, -  Commercial to GD-4 & GD-4C

 

14.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 12, -   Commercial to GD-4C

 

15.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 12-1,  -  Commercial to GD-4C

 

16.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 12-2, -  Commercial to GD-4C

 

17.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 15, -  Commercial to GD-4C

 

18.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 15-1,   Commercial to GD-4 & GD-4C

 

19.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 16,  -  Commercial to GD-4C

 

20.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 19, -  Commercial to GD-4C

 

21.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 1, -   GD-1 to GD-4

 

22.  Tax Map 14, Parcel 23,  -  GD-1 to GD-4

 

23.  Tax Map 14, Parcel 25, -   GD-1 to GD-4

 

24.  Tax Map 14, Parcel 26, -  GD-1 to GD-4

 

25.  Tax Map 14, Parcel 27,  -  GD-1 to GD-4 & GD-4C

 

26.  Tax Map 14, Parcel 28, -  GD-1 to GD4

 

27.  Tax Map 14, Parcel 29,  -  GD-1 to GD-4

 

28.  Tax Map 14, Parcel 31,  -  GD-1 to GD-4

 

29.  Tax Map 14, Parcel 32,  -  GD-1 to GD-4

 

30.  Tax Map 16, Parcel 8, -  GD-1 to GD-4

 

31.  Tax Map 16, Parcel 10, -  GD-1 to GD-4

 

32.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 3, -  GD-1 to GD-4

 

33.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 3-1, -  GD-1 to GD-4

 

34.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 20-1,  GD-1 to GD-4

 

35.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 30, -  GD-1 to GD-4

 

36.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 31, -  GD-1 to GD-4

 

37.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 31-1, -  GD-1 to GD-4

 

38.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 31-3, -  GD-1 to GD-4

 

39.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 31-4, -  GD-1 to GD-4

 

40.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 31-5, -  GD-1 to GD-4

 

41.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 31-6,  -  GD-1 to GD-4

 

42.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 31-7,  -  GD-1 to GD-4

 

43.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 31-8,  -  GD-1 to GD-4

 

44.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 11,  -  IND to GD-4

 

45.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 13, -  IND to GD-4

 

46.  Tax Map 17, Parcel 13-1, -  IND to GD-4

 

AMENDMENTS TO ZONING MAP

 

 

I.          EFFECTIVE APRIL 5, 1983

 

1.         Tax Map 17, Parcel 15‑1 ‑  Residential to Commercial.

 

2.         Tax Map 1, Parcel 13 ‑  General Development GD‑1 to Governmental.

 

3.         Tax Map 4, Parcel 6 ‑  Industrial to Governmental.

 

4.         Tax Map 1, Parcels 15 & 19 ‑  Industrial to Governmental.

 

5.         Tax Map 3, Parcels 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 8‑1 and 6 ‑  Residential R‑1 and Commercial to Industrial.

 

6.         Tax Map 62, Parcel 4 ‑  Residential R‑1 to Commercial.

 

 

II.         EFFECTIVE MARCH 6, 1984

 

1.         Tax Map 8, Parcel 22 ‑  Agricultural to Residential R‑1.

 

2.         Tax Map 3, Parcel 24‑3 ‑  Commercial to Residential R‑3.

 

3.         Tax Map 41, Parcel 7 ‑  Residential R‑1 to Commercial.

 

 

III.       EFFECTIVE MARCH 7, 1985

 

1.         Tax Map 17, Parcel 4 ‑  Agricultural to Commercial.

 

2.         Tax Map 17, Parcel 5 ‑  Residential (R‑1) to Commercial.

 

3.         Tax Map 26, Parcel 29 ‑  Governmental to Commercial.

 

 

IV.       EFFECTIVE MARCH 4, 1986

 

1.         Tax Map 14, Parcel 4 ‑  Agricultural to Rural Residential.

 

 

V.        EFFECTIVE JULY 15, 1986

1.         Tax Map 37, Parcel 20 ‑  R‑2 Residential to General Development GD‑1.

 

2.         Tax Map 37, Parcel 21 ‑  R‑2 Residential to General Development GD‑1.

 

3.         Tax Map 37, Parcel 23 ‑  R‑2 Residential to General Development GD‑1.

 

4.         Tax Map 37, Parcel 24 ‑  R‑2 Residential to General Development GD‑1.

 

5.         Tax Map 37, Parcel 25 and 26 ‑  R‑2 Residential to General Development GD‑1.

 

6.         Tax Map 37, Parcels 28 and 29 ‑  R‑3 Residential to General Development GD‑1.

 

7.         Tax Map 37, Parcel 30‑1 ‑  Commercial to General Development GD‑1.

 

8.         Tax Map 37, Parcel 30 ‑  Commercial to General Development GD‑1.

 

9.         Tax Map 37, Parcel 31 ‑  Commercial to General Development GD‑1.

 

 

VI.       EFFECTIVE DECEMBER 1, 1987

1.         Tax Map 26, Parcel 19 ‑  Agricultural to Commercial.

 

 

VII.      EFFECTIVE APRIL 25, 1989

1.         Tax Map 1, Parcel 16 ‑  General Development 1 to General Development 2.

 

2.         Tax Map 4, Parcel 30 ‑  Agricultural to Commercial.

 

3.         Tax Map 4, Parcel 30‑2 ‑  Agricultural to Commercial.

 

4.         Tax Map 4, Parcel 30‑3 ‑  Agricultural to Commercial.

 

5.         Tax Map 77, Parcel 1 ‑  Commercial to Residential R‑1.

 

6.         Tax Map 17, Parcel 43 ‑ A 100 ft. by 1310 ft. portion of land running north to south and abutting I‑89 ROW  Residential R‑1 to Commercial.

 

7.         Tax Map 4, Parcel 4 ‑  Residential R‑1 to Residential R‑3.

 

8.         Tax Map 17, Parcel 3 ‑  Agricultural to General Development GD‑1.

 

9.         Tax Map 27, Parcels 1 and 1‑1 ‑  Agricultural to Residential R‑2.

 

10.       Tax Map 12, Parcel 16 ‑  Agricultural to Residential RR.

 

11.       Tax Map 51, Parcel 1 ‑  Residential to General Development GD‑1.

 

12.       Tax Map 48, Parcel 19 ‑  Residential R‑2 to Residential R‑3.

 

    

VIII.    EFFECTIVE JULY 5, 1989

 

1.         Tax Map 37, Parcel 32 ‑  Residential R‑2 to General Development GD‑1.

 

2.         Tax Map 37, Parcel 72‑1 ‑  Residential R‑2 to General Development GD‑1.

 

3.         Tax Map 37, Parcel 74 ‑  Residential R‑2 to General Development GD‑1.

 

4.         Tax Map 37, Parcel 75 ‑  Residential R‑2 to General Development GD‑1.

 

5.         Tax Map 37, Parcel 76 ‑  Residential R‑2 to General Development GD‑1.

 

6.         Tax Map 37, Parcel 77 ‑  Residential R‑2 to General Development GD‑1.

 

7.         Tax Map 37, Parcel 78 ‑  Residential R‑2 to General Development GD‑1.

 

8.         Tax Map 37, Parcel 79 ‑  Residential R‑2 to General Development GD‑1.

 

 

IX.       EFFECTIVE AUGUST 16, 1989

 

1.         Tax Map 3, Parcel 15 ‑  Governmental to Commercial.

 

2.         Tax Map 25, Parcel 108 ‑  Governmental to Residential R‑3.

 

 

X.        EFFECTIVE JUNE 4, 1991

 

1.         Tax Map 5 Parcel 5 - That portion being exclusive of the floodplain  Residential R-1 to GD-1.

 

2.         Tax Map 5 Parcel 6 -  Residential R-1 to GD-1.

 

3.         Tax Map 5 Parcel 7 -  Residential R-1 to GD-1.

4.         Tax Map 5 Parcel 7-1 -  Residential R-1 to GD-1.

 

5.         Tax Map 5 Parcel 9 -  Commercial COM to GD-1.

 

6.         Tax Map 37 Parcel 1 -  Residential R-1 to GD-1.

 

7.         Tax Map 37 Parcel 2 -  Residential R-1 to GD-1.

 

8.         Tax Map 37 Parcel 3 -  Residential R-1 to GD-1.

 

9.         Tax Map 37 Parcel 4 -  Residential R-1 to GD-1.

 

10.       Tax Map 37 Parcel 5 -  Residential R-1 to GD-1.

 

11.       Tax Map 37 Parcel 8 -  Residential R-1 to GD-1.

 

12.       Tax Map 37 Parcel 9 -  Residential R-1 to GD-1.

 

13.       Tax Map 37 Parcel 11 -  Residential R-1 to GD-1.

 

14.       Tax Map 37 Parcel 11-1 -  Residential R-1 to GD-1.

 

15.       Tax Map 37 Parcel 12 -  Residential R-1 to GD-1.

 

16.       Tax Map 37 Parcel 13 -  Residential R-1 to GD-1.

 

17.       Tax Map 37 Parcel 14 -  Residential R-1 to GD-1.

 

18.       Tax Map 37 Parcel 15 -  Residential R-1 to GD-1.

 

19.       Tax Map 37 Parcel 20 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

20.       Tax Map 37 Parcel 21 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

21.       Tax Map 37 Parcel 23 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

22.       Tax Map 37 Parcel 24 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

23.       Tax Map 37 Parcel 25 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

24.       Tax Map 37 Parcel 26 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

25.       Tax Map 37 Parcel 28 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

26.       Tax Map 37 Parcel 30 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

27.       Tax Map 37 Parcel 30-1 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

28.       Tax Map 40 Parcel 1 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

29.       Tax Map 40 Parcel 2 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

30.       Tax Map 40 Parcel 2-1 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

31.       Tax Map 40 Parcel 3 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

32.       Tax Map 40 Parcel 4 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

33.       Tax Map 40 Parcel 5 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

34.       Tax Map 40 Parcel 6 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

35.       Tax Map 40 Parcel 7 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

36.       Tax Map 40 Parcel 62 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

37.       Tax Map 40 Parcel 62-1 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

38.       Tax Map 40 Parcel 62-2 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

39.       Tax Map 40 Parcel 63 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

40.       Tax Map 40 Parcel 63-1 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

41.       Tax Map 40 Parcel 64 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

42.       Tax Map 41 Parcel 90 -  Residential R-3 to Commercial.

 

43.       Tax Map 41 Parcel 91 -  Residential R-3 to Commercial.

 

44.       Tax Map 41 Parcel 92 -  Residential R-3 to Commercial.

           

45.       Tax Map 41 Parcel 94 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

46.       Tax Map 41 Parcel 95 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

47.       Tax Map 41 Parcel 97 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

48.       Tax Map 41 Parcel 98 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

49.       Tax Map 41 Parcel 99 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

50.       Tax Map 49 Parcel 1 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

51.       Tax Map 49 Parcel 1-1 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

52.       Tax Map 49 Parcel 1-2 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

           

53.       Tax Map 49 Parcel 2 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

54.       Tax Map 49 Parcel 3 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

55.       Tax Map 49 Parcel 4 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

56.       Tax Map 49 Parcel 5 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

57.       Tax Map 49 Parcel 7 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

58.       Tax Map 49 Parcel 7-2 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

59.       Tax Map 49 Parcel 8 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

60.       Tax Map 49 Parcel 9 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

61.       Tax Map 49 Parcel 10 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

62.       Tax Map 49 Parcel 10-1 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

63.       Tax Map 49 Parcel 13 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

64.       Tax Map 49 Parcel 14 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

65.       Tax Map 49 Parcel 15 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

66.       Tax Map 49 Parcel 18 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

67.       Tax Map 49 Parcel 20 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

68.       Tax Map 49 Parcel 21 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

69.       Tax Map 49 Parcel 22 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

70.       Tax Map 49 Parcel 23 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

71.       Tax Map 49 Parcel 24 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

72.       Tax Map 49 Parcel 25 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

73.       Tax Map 49 Parcel 26 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

74.       Tax Map 49 Parcel 26-1 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

75.       Tax Map 51 Parcel 6 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

76.       Tax Map 51 Parcel 6-1 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

77.       Tax Map 51 Parcel 7 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

78.       Tax Map 51 Parcel 8 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

79.       Tax Map 51 Parcel 9 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

80.       Tax Map 51 Parcel 9-1 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

81.       Tax Map 51 Parcel 10 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

82.       Tax Map 51 Parcel 10-1 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

83.       Tax Map 51 Parcel 12 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

84.       Tax Map 51 Parcel 14 - A 256' x 1110' x 268' x 1110' portion  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

85.       Tax Map 51 Parcel 13 -  Residential R-3 to Residential R-2.

 

86.       Tax Map 51 Parcel 14 -  GD-1 to Residential R-2 (excluding a 256' x 1110' x 268' x 1110' portion in the rear).

 

87.       Tax Map 51 Parcel 14-4 -  Residential R-3 to Residential R-2.

 

88.       Tax Map 51 Parcel 14-5 -  Residential R-3 to Residential R-2.

 

89.       Tax Map 51 Parcel 14-56 -  Residential R-3 to Residential R-2.

 

90.       Tax Map 51 Parcel 15 -  Residential R-3 to Residential R-2.

 

91.       Tax Map 53 Parcel 1 -  Residential R-3 to Residential R-2.

 

92.       Tax Map 53 Parcel 2 -  Residential R-3 to Residential R-2.

 

93.       Tax Map 53 Parcel 4 -  Residential R-3 to Residential R-2.

 

94.       Tax Map 53 Parcel 5 - A portion  Residential R-3 to Residential R-2.

 

95.       Tax Map 53 Parcel 6 - A portion  Residential R-3 to Residential R-2.

 

96.       Tax Map 53 Parcel 7 - A portion  Residential R-3 to Residential R-2. 

 

97.       Tax Map 53 Parcel 7 - A portion  GD-1 to Residential R-2.

 

98.       Tax Map 53 Parcel 8 -  Residential R-3 to Residential R-2.

 

99.       Tax Map 53 Parcel 9 -  Residential R-3 to Residential R-2.

 

100.     Tax Map 42 Parcel 96 -  Residential R-2 to Residential R-3.

 

101.     Tax Map 42 Parcel 97 -  Residential R-2 to Residential R-3.

 

102.     Tax Map 48 Parcel 1 -  Residential R-2 to Residential R-3.

 

103.     Tax Map 48 Parcel 2 -  Residential R-2 to Residential R-3.

 

104.     Tax Map 48 Parcel 19 -  Residential R-2 to Residential R-3.

 

105.     Tax Map 7 Parcel 40 -  Agricultural to Residential R-2.

 

106.     Tax Map 8 Parcel 28-1 - A portion approximately 1153 ft. along Poor Farm and Blakely Roads but limited to 600 ft. in depth north of Blakely Road  Agricultural to Residential R-1.

 

107.     Tax Map 8 Parcel 32 - A portion across the entire width of the property along Blakely Road but limited to 600 ft. in depth north of Blakely Road  Agricultural to Residential R-1.

 

108.     Tax Map 14 Parcel 27 -  Agricultural to GD-1.

 

109.     Tax Map 9 Parcel 16 -  Residential R-1 to Rural Residential.

 

110.     Tax Map 12 Parcel 1 -  Residential R-1 to Rural Residential.

 

111.     Tax Map 12 Parcel 2 -  Residential R-1 to Rural Residential.

 

112.     Tax Map 12 Parcel 4 -  Residential R-1 to Rural Residential.

 

113.     Tax Map 12 Parcel 4-1 -  Residential R-1 to Rural Residential.

 

114.     Tax Map 12 Parcel 5 -  Residential R-1 to Rural Residential.

 

115.     Tax Map 12 Parcel 7 -  Agricultural to Rural Residential.

 

116.     Tax Map 12 Parcel 9 -  Residential R-1 to Rural Residential.

 

117.     Tax Map 12 Parcel 9-1 -  Residential R-1 to Rural Residential.

 

118.     Tax Map 12 Parcel 10 -  Residential R-1 to Rural Residential.

 

119.     Tax Map 12 Parcel 12 -  Residential R-1 to Rural Residential.

 

120.     Tax Map 12 Parcel 13 -  Residential R-1 to Rural Residential.

 

121.     Tax Map 12 Parcel 14 -  Residential R-1 to Rural Residential.

 

122.     Tax Map 12 Parcel 15 -  Agricultural to Rural Residential.

 

123.     Tax Map 12 Parcel 17 -  Agricultural to Rural Residential.

 

124.     Tax Map 12 Parcel 18 -  Agricultural to Rural Residential.

 

125.     Tax Map 12 Parcel 20 -  Agricultural to Rural Residential.

 

126.     Tax Map 14 Parcel 11 - A portion  Agricultural to Rural Residential to the existing Rural Residential zone.

 

127.     Tax Map 14 Parcel 24 - A portion  Agricultural to Rural Residential. 

 

128.     Tax Map 14 Parcel 28 - A portion  brook to the rear of the property  Agricultural to Rural Residential.

129.     Tax Map 17 Parcel 1 - A portion  Agricultural to Rural Residential to the existing Rural Residential zone.

 

130.     Tax Map 16, Parcel 62 -  Commercial to Residential R-1.

 

131.     Tax Map 16, Parcel 63 - A 1200 ft. portion  Commercial to Residential R-1 to the adjoining residential zone.

 

132.     Tax Map 78, Parcel 8-1 -  Commercial to Residential R-1.

 

133.     Tax Map 60, Parcel 1 -  GD-1 to Commercial.

 

 

EFFECTIVE SEPTEMBER 17, 1991

 

1.         Tax Map 13, Parcel 3 -  Governmental to R-1.

 

2.         Tax Map 13, Parcel 4 -  Governmental to R-1.

 

3.         Tax Map 13, Parcel 7 -  Governmental to R-1.

 

4.         Tax Map 13, Parcel 4-1 -  Governmental to R-1.

 

5.         Tax Map 26, Parcel 26 -  Governmental to R-1.

 

6.         Tax Map 65, Parcel 23 -  Governmental to R-1.

 

7.         Tax Map 6, Parcel 22 -  Governmental to R-1.

 

8.         Tax Map 6, Parcel 21 -  Governmental to R-1.

 

9.         Tax Map 6, Parcel 14 -  Governmental to R-1.

 

10.       Tax Map 6, Parcel 12 -  Governmental to R-1.

 

11.       Tax Map 6, Parcel 12-1 -  Governmental to R-1.

 

12.       Tax Map 66, Parcel 1 -  Governmental to R-1.

 

13.       Tax Map 66, Parcel 2 -  Governmental to R-1.

 

14.       Tax Map 66, Parcel 25 -  Governmental to R-1.

 

15.       Tax Map 6, Parcel 27 -  Governmental to R-1.

 

16.       Tax Map 4, Parcel 33 -  Governmental to R-1.

 

17.       Tax Map 42, Parcel 99 -  Governmental to R-3.

 

18.       Tax Map 12, Parcel 35 -  Governmental to Agricultural.

 

19.       Tax Map 8, Parcel 21-1 -  Governmental to Agricultural.

 

20.       Tax Map 26, Parcel 31 -  Governmental to GD-1.

 

21.       Tax Map 26, Parcel 31-1 -  Governmental to GD-1.

 

22.       Tax Map 7, Parcel 56 -  Governmental to GD-1.

 

23.       Tax Map 7, Parcel 57 -  Governmental to GD-1.

 

24.       Tax Map 1, Parcel 19 -  Governmental to GD-2.

 

25.       Tax Map 62, Parcel 29 -  Governmental to Commercial.

 

26.       Tax Map 41, Parcel 35 -  Governmental to Commercial.

 

27.       Tax Map 41, Parcel 34 -  Governmental to Commercial.

 

28.       Tax Map 3B, Parcel 195 -  Governmental to Commercial.

 

29.       Tax Map 3, Parcel 5 -  Governmental to Industrial.

 

30.       Tax Map 1, Parcel 13 -  Governmental to Industrial.

 

31.       Portion of Tax Map 11, Parcel 12 -  Governmental to Industrial.

            Commencing at a point of intersection of the centerline of the Vermont Central Railway and the centerline of the Lime Kiln Bridge, proceeding northerly along the Railway centerline 1,200 feet, then turning right 90 degrees, proceeding easterly 800 feet to the Town Line, turning right and following the Town Line 490 more or less to the Winooski River, then turning right and following the Winooski River Bank to the point of commencement.

 

EFFECTIVE APRIL 14, 1992

 

1.         Tax Map 3, Parcel 39 -   R-1 to MHP.

 

2.         Tax Map 27, Parcel 4 -  Commercial to  R-3.

 

3.         Tax Map 27, Parcel 5 -  Commercial to  R-3.

 

4.         Tax Map 27, Parcel 6 -  Commercial to  R-3.

 

5.         Tax Map 60, Parcel 1 -  Commercial to GD-1.

 

6.         Tax Map 8, Parcel 38-1 -  Agricultural to Rural Residential.

 

7.         Tax Map 16, Parcel 10 -   R-1 to GD-1.

 

8.         Tax Map 16, Parcel 14 -   R-1 to GD-1.

 

9.         Tax Map 17, Parcel 3-1 -   R-1 to GD-1.

 

10.       Tax Map 60, Parcel 38 -  Residential to Commercial.

 

11.       Tax Map 14, Parcel 31 -  Rural Residential to GD-1.

 

12.       Tax Map 14, Parcel 28 - A portion  Rural Residential to GD-1.

 

13.       Tax Map 14, Parcel 29 -  Rural Residential to GD-1.

 

14.       Tax Map 14, Parcel 32 - A portion  Agricultural to GD-1.

 

15.       Tax Map 3, Parcel 45 -  R-1 to Industrial.

 

16.       Tax Map 16, Parcel 10-2 -  Commercial to GD-1.

 

17.       Tax Map 15, Parcel 18 -  Agricultural to Rural Residential.

 

18.       Tax Map 8, Parcel 28-1 - A portion  Agricultural to R-1. 

 

 

19.       Tax Map 24, Parcel 24 -  R-2 to Commercial.

 

20.       Tax Map 16, Parcel 26-1 -  Commercial to GD-1.

 

21.       Tax Map 16, Parcel 29 -  Commercial to GD-1.

 

22.       Tax Map 16, Parcel 31 -  Commercial to GD-1.

 

23.       Tax Map 16, Parcel 32-3 -  Commercial to GD-1.

 

24.       Tax Map 16, Parcel 32 -  Commercial to GD-1.

 

25.       Tax Map 16, Parcel 33 -  Commercial to GD-1.

 

26.       Tax Map 16, Parcel 18 -  Commercial to GD-1.

 

27.       Tax Map 16, Parcel 17 -  Commercial to GD-1.

 

28.       Tax Map 16, Parcel 15 -  R-1 to GD-1.

 

29.       Tax Map 16, Parcel 13-1 -  R-1 to GD-1.

 

30.       Tax Map 16, Parcel 13 -  Commercial to GD-1.

 

31.       Tax Map 16, Parcel 11 -  Commercial to GD-1.

 

32.       Tax Map 16, Parcel 8 -  Commercial to GD-1.

 

33.       Tax Map 17, Parcel 31-7 -  Commercial to GD-1.

 

34.       Tax Map 17, Parcel 31-6 -  Commercial to GD-1.

 

35.       Tax Map 17, Parcel 31-5 -  Commercial to GD-1.

 

36.       Tax Map 17, Parcel 30 -  Commercial to GD-1.

 

37.       Tax Map 17, Parcel 31-3 -  Commercial to GD-1.

 

38.       Tax Map 17, Parcel 31 -  Commercial to GD-1.

 

39.       Tax Map 17, Parcel 31-1 -  Commercial to GD-1.

40.       Tax Map 17, Parcel 20-1 -  Commercial to GD-1.

41.       Tax Map 17, Parcel 31-8 -  Commercial to GD-1.

42.       Tax Map 17, Parcel 31-4 -  Commercial to GD-1.

 

 

EFFECTIVE JUNE 30, 1992

 

1.         Tax Map 3, Parcel 39 -  Residential R-1 to Residential R-3.

 

 

EFFECTIVE JANUARY 13, 1993

 

1.         Tax Map 12, Parcel 25 -  Agricultural to Rural Residential.

 

 

EFFECTIVE AUGUST 20, 1993

 

1.         Tax Map 3, Parcel 30 -  Governmental to Industrial.

2.         Tax Map 6, Parcel 26-7 -  Governmental to Residential R-1.

3.         Tax Map 19, Parcel 27 -  Governmental to General Development GD-1.

4.         Tax Map 25, Parcel 54 -  Governmental to Residential R-2.

5.         Tax Map 26, Parcel 26-1 -  Governmental to Commercial.

6.         Tax Map 31, Parcel 8 -  Governmental to Residential R-1.

7.         Tax Map 33, Parcel 57 -  Governmental to Residential R-1.

8.         Tax Map 65, Parcel 25 -  Governmental to Commercial.

9.         Tax Map 66, Parcel 3 -  Governmental to Residential R-1.

10.       Tax Map 66, Parcel 25 -  Governmental to Residential R-1.

11.       Tax Map 1, Parcel 12 -  Governmental to Industrial.


EFFECTIVE MAY 13, 1997
 

1.               Tax Map 3, Parcel 1 -  Industrial to Residential R-3.

 

2.               Tax Map 3, Parcel 2 -  Industrial to Residential R-3.

 

3.               Tax Map 3, Parcel 17 -  Industrial to Commercial.

 

4.               Tax Map 21, Parcel 11 –  Mobile Home Park to General Development GD-2.

 

5.               Tax Map 28, Parcel 35 –  Agricultural to Residential R-1.

 

6.               Tax Map 7, Parcel 48 –  Agricultural to Residential R-3.

 

7.               Tax Map 57, Parcels 5 & 5-2 –  Rural Residential to Residential R-1.

 

8.               Tax Map 14, Parcel 23 –  Commercial to General Development GD-1.

 

9.               Tax Map 14, Parcel 25 –  Commercial to General Development GD-1.

 

10.            Tax Map 14, Parcel 26 –  Commercial/Agricultural to General Development GD-1.

 

11.            Tax Map 17,  Parcel 6 –  Agricultural to Commercial.

 

12.            Tax Map 67, Parcel 2-2 –  Residential R-2 to Residential R-3.

 

13.            Tax Map 67, Parcel 2-3 –  Residential R-2 to Residential R-3.

 

14.            Tax Map 3, Parcel 39 –  Residential R-3 to Industrial.

 

15.            Tax Map 24, Parcels 5 & 6 –  Residential R-2 to General Development

GD-1.

 

16.            Tax Map 70, Parcel 1 –  Residential R-1 to General Development GD-1.

 

17.            Tax Map 4, Parcel 2 –  Residential R-1 to Residential R-3.

 

18.            Tax Map 4, Parcel 2-1 –  Residential R-1 to General Development GD-1.

 

19.            Tax map 24, Parcel 31 –  Residential R-2 to General Development GD-1.

 

20.            Tax Map 25, Parcel 4 –  Residential R-2 to General Development GD-1.

 

21.            Tax Map 62, Parcel 1 –  Residential R-1 to General Development GD-1.

 

22.            Tax Map 62, Parcel 3 –  Residential R-1 to Residential R-2.

 

 

23.            Tax Map 62, Parcel 31 –  Commercial to General Development GD-1.

 

24.       Tax Map 8, Parcel 1 – one acre  Agricultural to Residential R-1 and balance remaining Agricultural.

 

25.       Tax Map 79, Parcel 2 –  Commercial to Rural Residential RR.

 

26.            Tax Map 59, Parcels 4, 5, 6 –  Rural Residential to Residential R-1.

 

27.            Tax map 12, Parcel 20-2 –  Agricultural to Rural Residential.

 

28.            Tax Map 12, Parcel 20-1 –  Agricultural to Rural Residential.

 

29.            Tax Map 8, Parcel 23 – 10 acres fronting on Roosevelt Highway to be rezoned  Agricultural to Rural Residential, balance of land fronting on Poor Farm Road to remain Agricultural.

 

30.            Tax Map 24, Parcel 14-1 –  Residential R-2 to Residential R-3.

 

31.            Tax Map 8, Parcel 3-1 –  Agricultural to Residential R-1.

 

32.       Tax Map 57, Parcel 9 – as follows:  51 acres  Commercial to General Development GD-1, 15 acres Rural Residential to General Development GD-1.

 

33.       Tax Map 17, Parcel 1 – 98 Coon Hill Road,  Rural Residential to General Development GD-1 (rezoning contingent on merger with Tax Map 14, Parcel 32).

 

34.            Tax Map 14, Parcel 32 –  General Development GD-1/Rural Residential to General Development GD-1.

 

EFFECTIVE JUNE 3, 1997
 

1.         Tax Map 7, Parcel 41 –  Agricultural to Residential R-2.


EFFECTIVE MAY 16, 2001
 

1.     Tax Map 3, Parcel 31 –  Industrial to GD-3

 

2.     Tax Map 4, Parcel 30-3 –  Commercial to GD-3

 

3.     Tax Map 4, Parcel 30-1 and 30-2 –  Commercial to GD-3

 

4.     Tax Map 28, Parcel 9 –  Wetland/Floodplain to R-3

 

5.     Tax Map 35, Parcel 1 –  Industrial to R-2

 

6.     Tax Map 12, Parcel 20-3 –   Agricultural to RR

 

7.     Tax Map 25, Parcel 3 –  R-2 to GD-1

 

8.     Tax Map 79, Parcels 2 and 2-1 – RR to R-1

 

9.     Tax Map 41, Parcel 6 –  R-3 to Commercial

 

10.  Tax Map 49, Parcels 8 & 9 –  Commercial to GD-1

 

11.  Tax Map 49, Parcel 4 –  Commercial to GD-1

 

12.  Tax Map 49, Parcel 3 –  Commercial to GD-1

 

13.  Tax Map 49, Parcels 7-2 & 10 –  Commercial to GD-1

 

14.  Tax Map 49, Parcel 7 –  Commercial to GD-1

 

15.  Tax Map 49, Parcel 5 –  Commercial to GD-1

 

16.  Tax Map 49, Parcel 10-1 –  Commercial to GD-1

 

17.  Tax Map 7, Parcel 48-1 – Agricultural to R-2, property of Samuel Mazza

 

18.  Tax Map 2, Parcel 8 –  Industrial to R-1

 

19.  Tax Map 2, Parcel 10 –  Industrial to R-1

 

20.  Tax Map 8, Parcels 28, 28-3 and 27 –  Agricultural to R-10

 

21.  Tax Map 8, Parcel 26 –  Agricultural to R-10


                  APPENDIX G:

 

DIGITAL FORMAT REQUIREMENTS

 

 

 

 

 

SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE SUBMISSION OF

 

APPLICATIONS IN DIGITAL FORM

 

The submission of applications, site plans, and supporting material in digital format shall occur at or before the time of applying for a permit and should comply with the following specifications:

 

1.     Digital submittals shall be in pdf form with each pdf not exceeding 20mb in size.

2.     Application forms, plans, and supporting documents shall each be separate pdfs.  Plans shall be submitted as a set whenever feasible.

3.     PDFs shall be submitted via e-mail to pzinfo@colchestervt.gov or the requesting reviewer.  If e-mail is not feasible, submissions will be accepted via CD/ DVD.

4.     Files shall be named the address of the property and the type of document followed by the year (i.e. 205RooseveltHgwyApp15).  Each file name shall be unique with no spaces and characters shall be numbers or letters (no characters such as hyphens, #, &, or *).

5.     Subsequent submittals shall include a version reference in the name (i.e. 205RooseveltHgwyApp15v2) or final as the suffix if it is as approved.  Plans submitted as sets shall be resubmitted as sets.  This shall also apply to applications and all other supporting materials with page replacements or updates.

6.     All pdfs shall be at least at 300dpi, color, and to scale if a plan, elevation, or similar document.

7.     Until such time as EGOV may allow otherwise, one paper copy of DRB and WW applications and plans is requested at the time of submittal.

APPENDIX H: PLAT & BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT REQUIREMENTS

 

The submission of plats and boundary line adjustments shall comply with the following specifications:

 

1.     All mylars shall comply with 27 V.S.A. Chapter 17.

 

2.     All mylars shall be legible.

 

3.     All mylars should be 18 inches by 24 inches in dimensions.

 

4.     All mylars shall have the appropriate title block included (please see attached sheet).

 

5.     Complete survey of property by a licensed land surveyor drawn to scale (1 inch = 320 ft. is the preferred minimum).

 

6.     Name, license number, seal, and contact phone number of licensed land surveyor & date prepared.

 

7.     Survey data should be included for all surveys: acreage, property lines, and watercourses. Where appropriate please include contours at two (2) foot elevation intervals (existing and finished), zoning boundaries, base flood elevation, etc.

 

8.     Numerical and graphical scale, date last revised, and north arrow.

 

9.     All requirements specified under the current approved Findings of Fact and Order for the property.

 

10.  Location of easements, public lands, r.o.w.s, sidewalks, public infrastructure, public or private streets (w/names) and other restricted land where appropriate.

COLCHESTER CEMETERIES
RULES AND REGULATIONS
Adopted 28th day of February, 2017
Revised and Updated by the
Town of Colchester
Selectboard
COLCHESTER CEMETERIES
RULES AND REGULATIONS
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11



12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

TOWN
OF
COLCHESTER
CODE OF ETHICS
Approved on May 28, 2019
INDEX
I. Policy Statement Page 1
II. Definitions Page 1
III. Conflict of Interest Page 3
IV. Unilateral Communications – Public Body Page 4
V. Disclosure Procedure – Public Body Page 5
VI. Incompatibility of Office Page 5
VII. Standards of Conduct Page 6
VIII. Board of Ethics Page 7
IX. Code Violation Page 8
X. Board of Ethics – Procedure on Complaint Page 8
XI. Remedies Page 9
XII. Applicability of Code Page 9
XIII. Severability Page 9
XIV. Effective Date after Passage Page 10
XV. Distribution of Code of Ethics Page 10
1
CODE OF ETHICS
§ I. POLICY STATEMENT
Public service is public trust. The affairs of government must be conducted openly, honestly and
impartially, so that the public’s confidence in the integrity of its municipal affairs shall be
maintained. The purposes of this Code are to set forth standards of ethical conduct; to assist Public
Officials and Public Members in establishing policy for their conduct; and to develop and maintain
a tradition of responsible and effective public service. Municipal employees are responsible to
comply with ethical standards in a series of municipal polices and procedures, in fact, far more
than this Code. However, there are employment and labor law which the Human Resources
Director, Town Manager, Town Attorney, and in some cases the Selectboard are involved in
adjudicating.
§ II. DEFINITIONS
As used in this section, the following words, unless a different meaning is required by the content
or is specifically prescribed, shall have the following meanings:
A. All references to “Town”, unless otherwise specified, refer to the Municipality of Colchester.
B. Public Official, or Public Member (hereinafter “Official or Member”) means any person, paid
or unpaid, holding a position by election, or appointment, but not employment in the service of
the Town of Colchester, including members of any board, committee, commission, or council
thereof.
C. “Public Body” means all boards, committees, commissions, councils and any other such group
elected or appointed.
D. “Official Act or Action” means any legislative, administrative, appointive or discretionary act
of an Official or board, committee, commission, or council thereof.
E. “Conflict of Interest” means
1) A real or seeming incompatibility between a Public Official or Member private interests
and his or her public or fiduciary interests to the municipality he or she serves. A conflict of
interest arises when there is a direct or indirect personal or financial interest of a Public
Official or Member or a person or group closely tied with the Public Official or Member’s
including his or her spouse, household member, child, stepchild, parent, grandparent,
grandchild, sibling, aunt or uncle, brother- or sister-in-law, business associate, or employer
or employee thereof, in the outcome of an official act or action, or any other matter pending
before the Public Official or Member or before the public body in which the Public Official
or Member holds office. A conflict of interest may take any of the four following forms:
2
a. A direct financial conflict of interest arises when a Public Official or Member acts
on a Town matter that has a direct financial impact on that Public Official or
Member.
b. An indirect financial conflict of interest arises when a Public Official or Member
acts on a Town matter that has a financial impact on a person or group closely tied
to the Public Official or Member.
c. A direct personal conflict of interest arises when a Public Official or Member acts
on a Town matter that has a direct and significant impact on the Public Official or
Member in a non-financial way r.
d. An indirect personal conflict of interest arises when a Public Official or Member
acts on a Town matter in which the Public Official or Member’s judgment may be
affected because of a familial or personal relationship or membership in some
organization and a desire to help that person or organization further its own
interests.
2. A situation where a Public Official or Member has publicly displayed a prejudgment of
the merits of a particular Town quasi-judicial proceeding. This shall not apply to a
member’s particular political views or general opinion on a given issue.
3. A situation where a Public Official or Member has not disclosed ex parte
communication(s) related to a quasi-judicial proceeding that is before the body to which
that Public Official or Member belongs.
F. “Independence” means actual independence or the appearance thereof.
G. “Immediate Family” means spouses, Civil Union partners, children, stepchildren, parents,
step-parents, brothers, sisters, grandparents, nephews, nieces, sons-in-law, daughters-in-law,
fathers-in-law, mothers-in-law, brothers and sisters-in-law and any dependent or other persons
living in one’s household.
H. “Close Personal Friend” means anyone beyond an Official, or Member’s immediate family
with whom the Official, or Member has or had a close friendship, primarily outside of
municipal business, such that the involvement of the Official, or Member in any issue
involving the friend’s interests would create the appearance of a “conflict of interest” to a
reasonable observer.
I. “Recusal” means stepping aside from public office or duty during discussions and vote when a
conflict of interest or lack of independence has been declared. It is required, or in the case of
public meetings recommended, that the recused person leaves the room where the discussion
and vote are taking place.
3
§ III. CONFLICT OF INTEREST
An Official, or Member shall not engage in any act which is in conflict with, or creates an
appearance of conflict with, the performance of official duties. An Official, or Member is deemed
to have a conflict of interest, if she/he takes part in any of the following acts or actions:
A. Acceptance of Gifts and Favors
An Official, or Member shall not accept, receive, take, seek, or solicit, directly or indirectly, any
gift or favor if it could be reasonably expected that the gift or favor would influence the action or
judgment of the Official, or Member, or be considered as part of a reward for action or inaction.
This provision shall not apply to:
1. Attendance at a hosted meal when it is provided in conjunction with a meeting directly
related to the conduct of Town business or where official attendance is appropriate.
2. An award publicly presented in recognition of public service.
3. Seasonal gifts of nominal value (not more than $250 per calendar year).
B. Appointment of Immediate Family Members or Close Personal Friends
An Official, or Member shall not participate in the appointment, vote for appointment or
discussion of any appointment of an immediate family member or close personal friend to any
office or employment with the Town.
C. Prior Knowledge of Town Actions
An Official, or Member shall not receive or have any financial interest in any sale to the Town of
any service or property when such financial interest was received with prior knowledge that the
Town intended to purchase such property or obtain such service.
D. Other Potential Financial Interests and Agreements
An Official, or Member shall not influence the Town’s selection of, or its conduct of business with
a person, organization or business having business with the Town, if the Official, or Member or an
immediate family member, business associate or close personal friend has a financial interest in or
with the person, organization or business. The Official, or Member shall not participate in the
discussion, negotiation, or vote on contracts or other business arrangements falling under this
section. In all instances, disclosure of the conflict and recusal is required.
E. Private Employment
An Official, or Member shall not engage in, solicit, negotiate for, accept private employment from,
or render services for a private interest when such employment or service is incompatible with the
proper discharge of official duties or could impair independence of judgment or action in the
performance of official duties.
F. Use of Confidential Information
An Official, or Member shall not disclose or use, without legal authorization,
confidential information acquired in the course of official duties to engage, directly or indirectly,
in any transactions to further his or her or another person’s personal interest or to use such
information to the detriment of any person or entity.
4
G. Conflict with Official Duties
An Official, or Member who holds an interest or position in any organization who is or may be
entering into a financial, business, commercial, or private transaction/arrangement with the Town
which creates a conflict with their official duties, shall disclose the conflict. In addition, recusal is
required prior to any consideration of the matter.
§ IV. UNILATERAL COMMUNICATIONS – PUBLIC BODY
In any matter before a Public Body, an Official or member should not communicate with or accept
a communication from a person the Public Body has reasonable grounds for believing is a party to
the matter outside of a public hearing. The presiding officer of the Public Body may engage in such
communications, if and only if there is notice and opportunity to participate given to all parties in
accord with 24 V.S.A. § 1207(a). A member should disclose any such communication at an open
meeting of the Public Body prior to any consideration on the matter, and the official or member
should recuse himself or herself, if appropriate.
A “party” as used in this paragraph means a person who:
A. Holds an interest or has an agreement to acquire an interest in a business entity or the
property of a business entity which desires to enter into any agreement with the Town,
where the Town’s entering into the agreement depends upon the official action of the
Public Body.
B. Is associated with or has an agreement to associate with such a business entity, whether as
employee, director, officer, broker, agent, contractor, subcontractor, purchaser or seller, or
in any other capacity where the Town’s agreement with such business entity depends upon
the official action of the Public Body.
C. Holds an interest in any property, real or personal, which is the subject of any preceding or
proposed action pending before the Public Body, or any agreement or understanding to
acquire such an interest.
D. Qualifies as a “party” under 24 V.S.A. § 1201(4).
Officials and Members are forbidden from communicating with others about a pending matter, but
communications to a Public Body member by citizens who are not parties to the matter are not
subject to disclosure requirements.
5
§ V. DISCLOSURE PROCEDURE - PUBLIC BODY
If a matter comes before a Public Body as to whether an Official, or Member is required to make
disclosure, the affected member shall make such a disclosure, at an open meeting, prior to any
consideration of the matter.
Participation after Disclosure
Upon the Official, or Member’s disclosure of an interest, agreement, association, employment or
other arrangement, the Official, or Member shall recuse himself or herself from the matter, and
more specifically:
1. Such Official, or Member shall not, during any part of the Public Body meeting pertaining
to the matter requiring such disclosure, represent, advocate on behalf, or otherwise act as
the agent of the person or business entity in or with which the member has such interest or
relationship.
2. Such Official, or Member is recommended to leave the room during any public hearing of
the issue, and he or she shall not participate in any consideration of, or vote on the matter
before the Public Body. Such Official, or Member shall not attend or participate in any
non-public executive sessions, deliberations, discussions, or votes on the matter.
3. If the Official, or Member should have an interest in a matter under consideration by any
Public Body that may be established by the Town, such Official, or Member shall not,
during any part of a meeting pertaining to the matter, represent, advocate on behalf of, or
otherwise act as the agent of the person or business entity in or with which the Official or
Member has such an interest or relationship.
The foregoing shall not be construed as prohibiting the Official, or Member from testifying as to
factual matters at a hearing of the Public Body, if requested or allowed by said Public Body.
Further, this section shall not be construed to limit the right of an individual to represent a personal
interest or express an opinion so long as the Official, or Member identifies himself or herself as a
private citizen with a personal interest in the matter, who is speaking in that limited capacity.
§ VI. INCOMPATIBILITY OF OFFICE
In accord with 17 V.S.A. § 2647, it shall be a conflict of interest if a Public Official or Municipal
Employee holds or exercises more than one of the following offices or positions at the same time:
A. Any Public Official, elected or appointed, shall not be hired as an employee or consultant
during that Public Official’s term of office without the approval of the Select Board.
B. An Official, Employee, or Member, or any member of the Official, or Member’s immediate
family, shall not perform the duties of auditor or attorney for the Town.
6
C. The Town Manager shall not hold or exercise the office of Town Clerk/Treasurer or Tax
Assessor.
D. A member of the Select Board shall not hold or exercise the office of Town Clerk/ Treasurer
or Tax Assessor, or serve on any Public Body that may be established by the Town, with the
exception of the Civil Board of Authority.
E. A Planning Commissioner shall not hold or exercise the office of Director of Planning and
Zoning, Town Planner or Zoning Administrator or be a member of the Development Review
Board.
F. A Development Review Board member shall not hold or exercise the office of Director of
Planning and Zoning, Town Planner or Zoning Administrator or be a member of the
Planning Commission.
§ VII. STANDARDS OF CONDUCT
Every Public Official or member of the Town of Colchester shall be subject to and abide by the
following standards of conduct:
A. Public Property
An Official, or Member shall not request or permit the unauthorized use of Town-owned vehicles,
equipment, materials, or property for personal convenience or gain.
B. Disclosure of Interest in Legislation
An Official, or Member who has a financial or material interest in any legislation coming before a
Public Body shall publicly disclose on the official record of the Public Body the nature and extent
of any financial or material interest the Official or Member has in such legislation.
C. Representation Before Any Municipal Department for a Fee
An Official, or Member shall not receive, or enter into any agreement, expressed or implied, for
compensation for services to be rendered in relation to any matter before any department of the
municipality, whereby compensation is to be dependent or contingent upon any action by such
municipal department with respect to such matter.
D. Advocacy/Political Activity
An Official, or Member shall not orally, by letter, or otherwise, solicit or be in any matter
concerned in soliciting any assessment, subscription, or contribution to any political party, nor be a
party to such solicitation by others while representing the Town. An Official, or Member shall not
promise an appointment to any municipal position as reward for any advocacy/political activity,
nor shall they retaliate or threaten to retaliate against other Officials, Members or Employees, for
refusal to support or participate in any advocacy or political issue including but not limited to the
signing of petitions. Petitions for elected office or any ballot items shall not be solicited inside
Town buildings while Town employees are working, except that they may be solicited before and
7
after Selectboard and other board and commission meetings to community members who are not
Town employees.
VIII. BOARD OF ETHICS ESTABLISHED
A. The Select Board shall establish a Board of Ethics (the Board). The Board shall consist of not
more than five members, not less than three.
B. The Board shall have the power to interpret the provisions of this Code and other applicable
state law; investigate and report to the Select Board on any alleged violation(s) as provided
below; summon witnesses and schedule hearings in connection with any matter under
investigation or inquiry; recommend sanctions, suspension or removal.
C. The members shall initially serve staggered terms (one to three years) and thereafter three year
terms. They shall serve at the pleasure of the Select Board. Appointments shall be in
accordance with these Code criteria. The Town Manager and Town Attorney may be
ex-officio members of the Board.
D. A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum. The Board shall elect a chairperson annually.
The Board shall meet as it deems necessary.
E. If a complaint is received by the Town Attorney, Select Board or Town Manager, it shall be
reviewed with the Board.
F. Members serving on the Board shall serve without compensation, except the Town Attorney
who shall act in an ex-officio (non-voting) capacity and provide guidance when requested by
the Board.
G. The Board has the authority to:
1. Review complaints.
2. Conduct hearings and fact finding at the request of the Select Board or the Town
Manager.
3. Render opinions on the application of this Code on actual controversies. The Board shall
not provide advisory opinions on potential actions by Officials or members.
4. Report its findings and recommendations to the full Select Board or the Town Manager
depending on how the complaint/request originated.
5. At no time shall any requests to the Board be contrary to the jurisdiction and authority
provided to the Select Board or the Town Manager by the Town Charter and as stipulated
in Section VIII above.
8
§ IX. CODE VIOLATION
Any person who believes that a violation of any portion of this Code has occurred as a result of an
Official or Member’s act or action may send or deliver a signed, written complaint to the Town
Manager, Chair of the Select Board or Town Attorney, whichever is appropriate. The complaint
shall include the name of the person alleged to have committed the violation and the specific act or
acts which constitute the violation.
A. If the complaint alleges a violation by the Town Manager it shall be delivered to the Chair of the
Select Board.
B. If the complaint alleges a violation of a Public Member it shall be delivered to the Chair of the
Select Board.
C. If the complaint alleges a violation of a Public Official it shall be delivered to the office of the
Town’s Attorney.
D. If the complaint alleges a violation of the Town’s Attorney it shall be delivered to the Chair of
the Select Board.
E. If the complaint alleges a violation of the Board of Ethics or a member thereof, it shall be
delivered to the office of the Town’s Attorney, or special counsel appointed by the Selectboard if
necessary for that purpose.
X. BOARD OF ETHICS – PROCEDURE ON COMPLAINT
A. Upon receipt of a fact finding request, or in the case of an elected official, a properly filed
complaint, the Board will set a meeting date as early as possible to commence the review.
B. The Board shall elect a chairperson, if applicable, and conduct its meetings according to
Roberts Rules of Order.
C. The Board is required to comply with the Vermont Open Meeting Law, 1 V.S.A. § 312, et seq.
D. Any hearings shall be conducted under the Board’s rules and regulations, which shall include
the following:
1. oral evidence shall be taken under oath;
2. the complainant and the respondent shall have the right to:
a. be represented by their own legal counsel at their expense;
b. present evidence; and
9
c. examine and cross-examine witnesses
E. At the conclusion of any request for fact finding or complaint review, the Board shall determine
the validity of any violation of the Code and make their recommendations as to the resolution
or disposition of the case to the full Select Board or the Town Manager, whichever was the
source of the request or per Section VIII above.
F. In the event the Board or any of its members become a party to any legal procedure, the Town
will be responsible to represent the Board or any member and hold them harmless.
§ XI. REMEDIES
As part of any decision, the Board of Ethics shall make a recommendation to the Selectboard of
disciplinary action based on its findings and any relevant statutory law, regulations, or policy. All
decisions of the Board of Ethics shall be advisory to the Select Board. The Select Board, is not
obligated to accept the decisions and recommendations of the Board of Ethics.
Effect on Official Actions
If a Public Body takes an official action and an Official, or Member who is required to disclose,
fails to do so; or after disclosing, participates in consideration of the matter or vote; and if such
official action would not have been approved without the vote of that Official or Member, then
such official action shall be voidable by the Public Body. In such instance the matter shall, if
possible, be properly reconsidered in a timely manner pursuant to this Code and the applicable
statutes. The presiding officer or vice-presiding officer shall immediately refer the member who
failed to disclose or recuse to the Board of Ethics for appropriate action.
§ XII. APPLICABILITY OF CODE
This code shall be operative in all instances covered by its provisions except when superseded by
an applicable statutory or policy provision. Should a conflict with present and/or future personnel
rules and regulations occur, the more stringent shall prevail.
§ XIII. SEVERABILITY
If any section, clause, provision, or portion of the Code of Ethics shall be held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by any court, such holding shall not affect or impair any other section, clause,
provision, or portion of the Code.
10
§ XIV. EFFECTIVE DATE AFTER PASSAGE
This Code shall take effect 30 days after passage. This Code, and all amendments, shall not apply
retroactively.
§ XV. DISTRIBUTION OF CODE OF ETHICS
The Town of Colchester shall distribute a copy of this code to every Official, or Member of the
Town within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this code. Each Official, or Member
elected or appointed thereafter shall be furnished a copy before entering upon the duties of the
office Each Official, or Member shall sign a statement indicating they have read and understand
this Code. Annually, the Town Manager shall distribute to each Official, or Member the current
Code of Ethics with a summary of changes, if any, that have been made during the previous
year.

TOWN OF COLCHESTER
EMPLOYEE HANDBOOK
Updated and Approved May 28, 2019
Town of Colchester
EMPLOYEE HANDBOOK
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTON PAGE 1
SECTION 1: PURPOSE AND POLICY PAGE 2
SECTION 2: EQUAL EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITY & NONDISCRIMINATION PAGE 4
SECTION 3: TOWN GOVERNMENT, ORGANIZATION
& RESPONSIBILITIES PAGE 5
SECTION 4: EMPLOYMENT STATUS PAGE 6
SECTION 5: LEAVE TIME PAGE 9
SECTION 6: EMPLOYEE BENEFITS PAGE 22
SECTION 7: DISCIPLINE AND TERMINATION PAGE 25
SECTION 8: GRIEVANCES PAGE 26
SECTION 9: SAFETY AND WELLNESS PAGE 28
SECTION 10: MISCELLANEOUS POLICIES PAGE 30
SECTION 11: ETHICS PAGE 43
PERSONNEL POLICY MANUAL APPENDICES
APPENDIX A: TOWN OF COLCHESTER FRAUD PREVENTION POLICY
APPENDIX B: TOWN OF COLCHESTER PURCHASING POLICY
APPENDIX C: TOWN OF COLCHESTER SOCIAL MEDIA POLICY
APPENDIX D: TOWN OF COLCHESTER DRUG AND ALCOHOL FREE POLICY
APPENDIX E: TOWN OF COLCHESTER HARASSMENT POLICY
1
INTRODUCTION
This employee handbook provides answers to some of the most frequently asked employee
questions. It is a quick reference to some of the policies and procedures with which you should be
familiar.
This handbook is provided as a guide and is not to be considered a contract. There are some
employees in the Town of Colchester whose employment is defined by specific terms in a
collective bargaining agreement. All other employees are employees “at will.” “At will”
employment means that each employee retains the right to terminate his or her employment at
any time, for any reason without notice to the Town. And likewise, the Town has the ability to
terminate an at-will employee’s employment at any time, without prior notice, and for any lawful
reason. Nothing contained in this handbook changes the “at will” relationship.
The Town of Colchester reserves the right to make changes to policies, procedures, and other
statements made in the handbook. Business conditions, federal and state law and organizational
needs may require policies set forth in this handbook to be amended or modified. No such
amendment or modification will change the “at will” nature of employment at the Town of
Colchester. When a policy in this Employee Handbook is amended or modified, the prior version
shall be superseded.
The policies contained in this Employee Handbook substitute and supersede any other
employment policy or procedure previously issued, posted, distributed or practiced by the Town
of Colchester. All earlier policies and procedures related to employment with the Town of
Colchester are hereby retracted.
No statement or promise by a supervisor, past or present, may be interpreted as a change in
policy-nor will it constitute an agreement with an employee.
Should any provision in this Employee Handbook be found to be not enforceable and invalid,
such finding does not invalidate the entire Employee Handbook, but only that particular
provision. We are happy you are working with us serving the people of the Town of Colchester,
Vermont.
2
SECTION 1
PURPOSE AND POLICY
The mission of the Town of Colchester is to provide to its citizens the highest quality municipal
services possible with the resources available. As an employee, you are a valued member of
the team that provides these services. The Town is committed to initiating, promoting, and
maintaining fair and equitable personnel policies for all Town employees, and to do so in
accordance with all applicable Federal and State laws and regulations.
The Town’s personnel policies will reflect the belief that its workforce is made up of considerate,
highly motivated and committed employees who strive to meet the Town’s goals of providing
high-quality municipal services.
The purpose of this Employee Handbook is to combine in one place the personnel policies and
benefits applicable to Town employees, with the exception of those employees covered under a
collective bargaining agreement. If these policies conflict with any policy contained in the
contracts of any bargaining unit recognized by the Town, the contract shall be controlling for any
member of that Union. The Employee Handbook shall also be controlling for the Police
Department when not in conflict with the existing Police Department Rules and Regulations and
Policies and Procedures.
Any development, change or revision of personnel policies within the Town is subject to the
approval of the Select Board, except where the Town of Colchester Charter provides otherwise.
An effort has been made to make this handbook both easy to read and understand. For more
information regarding a particular benefit or policy, an employee may contact his/her supervisor,
Department Head, or Human Resources. This manual constitutes neither a contract of
employment, nor a promise of job security or job permanence.
Each employee is expected to make him/her fully familiar with the policies contained in this
handbook as soon as possible after hire and to maintain awareness of any policy changes
occurring after the effective date of this manual.
The Town regards all personnel as public employees who are to be governed by high ideals of
honor and integrity in all public and personal conduct so as to merit the trust and confidence of
the general public and co-workers.
The Town of Colchester needs your help in making each working day enjoyable and rewarding.
Your first responsibility is to know your own duties and how to do them promptly, correctly and
pleasantly. Secondly, you are expected to cooperate with management and your fellow
employees and to maintain a good team attitude.
How you interact with fellow employees and those whom the Town of Colchester serves, and
how you accept direction can affect the success of your department. In turn, the performance of
one department can impact the entire service offered by the Town of Colchester. Consequently,
whatever your position, you have an important assignment: perform every task to the very best of
your ability.
The Town expects good customer relations between our employees, customers and the general
public. The more good will you promote, the more our customers will respect and appreciate you
and the Town of Colchester’s services.
3
Below are several things you can do to give our customers excellent customer service:
1. Act competently and treat customers, guests and the general public in a business-like,
courteous and respectful manner.
2. Communicate pleasantly and respectfully with other employees at all times.
3. Follow up on questions promptly, provide business-like replies to inquiries and requests,
and perform all duties in an orderly manner.
4. Take great pride in your work and enjoy doing your very best.
4
SECTION 2
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY& NONDISCRIMINATION
The Town of Colchester is an Equal Employment Opportunity Employer. Employment decisions
are based on merit and business needs, and not on race, color, ancestry, religion, sex, age, marital
or civil union status, national origin, sexual orientation, gender identity, place of birth,
citizenship, veteran status, disability, or any other characteristic protected by state or federal laws.
It is the policy of the Town of Colchester to comply with all the relevant and applicable
provisions of the Americans with disabilities Act (ADA). We will not discriminate against any
qualified employee or job applicant with respect to any terms, privileges, or conditions of
employment because of a person’s physical or mental disability. We will also make a reasonable
accommodation as may be required by law, for all employees or applicants with disabilities,
provided that the individual is otherwise qualified to safely perform the essential duties and
assignments connected with the job and provided that any accommodations made do not impose
an undue hardship on the Town.
If you believe that an employment decision has been made that does not conform with
management’s commitment to equal opportunity, you should promptly bring the matter to the
attention of the Human Resources Department. Your complaint will be thoroughly investigated.
There will be no retaliation against any employee who files a complaint in good faith, even if the
result of the investigation produces insufficient evidence to support the complaint.
5
SECTION 3
TOWN GOVERNMENT, ORGANIZATION AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Town Manager
The Town Manager is responsible for implementing and enforcing policies established by the
Select Board. The Manager is the Chief Executive Officer and the head of the administrative
branch of the Town government and is responsible to the Select Board for the efficient
administration of the Town government.
Department Heads
Department Heads are responsible for the efficient operation of their Department. Department
Heads are responsible for the administration and enforcement of the Employee Handbook.
Human Resources
The duties and responsibilities of Human Resources are to administer the Employee Handbook
with such assistance, as may be necessary, from Department Heads and other town officials.
Human Resources scope of responsibility and authority covers all Town employees.
Employees
It is the responsibility of each employee of the Town to perform the duties of his/her position to
the best of his/her ability and at a level and in a manner deemed satisfactory by the Town.
Employee Orientation
All new employees will meet with Human Resources for an orientation within the first week of
employment. During the orientation, the employee is informed of the benefits for which he/she
may be eligible and is supplied with enrollment forms for all such applicable benefits. In order to
begin receiving benefits, the employee must return the completed forms to Human Resources
within five (5) days of the orientation. Failure to return the forms on time may result in a
postponement of the effective date of coverage or denial of coverage.
Attendance and Punctuality
It is important for you to report to work on time and to avoid unnecessary absences. The Town
recognizes that illness or other circumstances beyond your control may cause you to be absent
from work from time to time. However, frequent absenteeism or tardiness may result in
disciplinary action up to and including discharge. Excess absenteeism or frequent tardiness put
an unnecessary strain on your co-workers and can have a negative impact on the success of the
Town.
You are expected to report to work when scheduled. Whenever you know in advance that you are
going to be absent, you should notify your immediate supervisor. If your absence is unexpected,
you should attempt to reach your immediate supervisor as soon as possible. If you must leave a
message on voicemail, you must provide a number where your supervisor may reach you if need
be.
6
SECTION 4
EMPLOYMENT STATUS
Full-Time Employee
Full-time employees are those who are regularly scheduled to work at least forty (40) hours per
week, who has satisfactorily completed an initial probationary period and is employed in a
classified position on a continuous year-round basis.
Regular Part-Time Employee
An employee who has satisfactorily completed an initial probationary period and is employed in a
classified position year-round, and who are regularly scheduled to work thirty (30) to thirtynine
(39) hours per week.
Part Time Employee
A n e m p l o y e e w h o w o r k s l e s s t h a n 3 0 h o u r s a w e e k i n c l u d i n g
a y e a r r o u n d p a r t t i m e e m p l o y e e .
Temporary Employee
An employee hired for an interim period of time, usually to fill in for leaves of absence or
projects of a limited duration.
Casual Employee
A casual employee is an employee who works on an occasional or as-needed basis.
Seasonal Employee
A seasonal employee is a temporary employee in a position working 40 hours per week and
knowingly hired to work for a period exceeding six months.
Per Diem
Per Diem employees are persons who provide Emergency Medical Care for Colchester Rescue
who work less than 30 hours per week on an annual basis.
Independent Contractors
Persons hired by the Town of Colchester to perform a particular job, typically for a limited time
period. These persons may be self-employed or they may work for an outside agency. They are
not considered employees of the Town of Colchester.
Probationary period for all employees
Pursuant to the Town Charter, the Town has established a six-month probationary period. A
Department Head may extend a probationary period of up to an additional six months with the
approval of the Town Manager. Police Officers shall serve a probationary period of twelve (12)
months.
During the probationary period the Manager, in consultation with the Department Head, may at
any time, remove an employee who is unable or unwilling to perform the duties of the position
satisfactorily or whose habits or dependability do not merit the continuation of his or her service
7
to the municipality. Upon request, the Manager shall inform the person of the reasons for his/her
removal in writing within ten (10) working days. Probationary employees removed during
probationary period have no appeal of their removal.
Date of Hire
The first day you report to work is your “official” date of hire. Your hire date is used to compute
your eligibility for various benefits and the applicability of certain working conditions described
in this Employee Handbook.
Employment Vacancies
Whenever there is a vacancy in a full time or regular part time position, the vacancy will
gene r a l ly be posted internally for at least five (5) working days prior to seeking outside
applicants. However, the Town Manager may in his or her sole discretion appoint a candidate
to a vacant position without prior posting or advertising the position externally. An employee
desiring a vacant position must apply for consideration by completing an application within the
five-day period to Human Resources.
Hours of Work
The normal workweek for Town employees is Monday through Friday. It is recognized that
certain positions may be assigned a different workday or workweek schedule based on the needs
of that department.
Each employee will complete and sign weekly timesheets and give them to their supervisor.
Each Department is responsible for submitting weekly time sheets to the Finance Department
with Department Head signature of approval or by designee in the absence of Department Head.
Overtime – Non Exempt Employees (Hourly Employees)
It is recognized that employees’ daily and weekly work schedules and assignments are based on
operating requirements and therefore are subject to change. The Town retains the right (with
reasonable notice to affected employees) to schedule regular work hour schedules, overtime,
number of shifts, and shift assignments for the purpose of promoting the efficiency of Municipal
government.
In conformance with the Fair Labor Standards Act and the Personnel Rules specified, hourly nonexempt
employees shall be paid one and one-half times their regular hourly rate for all actual
hours worked in excess of a forty (40) hour work week or may accrue compensatory time off at a
rate of time and one-half.
All overtime worked and comp time used must be authorized by the employee’s Supervisor or
Departmental Director and logged on the Compensatory Hour Log Sheet before the overtime
work is performed or any compensatory time is used. Contact your Supervisor to obtain Log
Sheets. A copy of this log sheet must be sent to Human Resources
Compensatory Time – Non-Exempt Employees
All hours worked in excess of their regular work week up to forty (40) hours would be
compensated at straight compensatory hours. All hours worked over forty (40) would be
compensated at one and one-half (1 ½).
8
Employees who work 40 hours a week may accumulate compensatory time up to eighty (80)
hours during the fiscal year and may not carry over (40) hours from one fiscal year to another.
Employees working less than forty (40) hours a week compensatory time will be pro-rated based
on the employees normal work week (for example, for a 35 hr. week = 70 max and 35 carry over)
The hour limits represent two weeks of accumulation and one week of carry over.
Approval of compensatory time off from regular hours of employment must be consistent with
the best interests of the Town of Colchester.
Compensatory Time – Exempt Employees
The responsibilities associated with exempt positions are not restricted to specific hours and often
require additional hours or attendance at evening meetings, which are beyond the normal forty
(40) hour workweek. While providing compensatory time for an exempt employee is not
federally mandated, the Town does provide compensatory time at straight time for such
employees in certain circumstances. If an exempt Town employee is required to work between
41 and 44 hours per week, he/she may use flex time within the same pay period (Friday-
Thursday). If an Exempt employee is required to work beyond forty-four (44) hours per week
that employee will then become eligible for compensatory time in an amount equal to any hours
worked beyond 44 in that given work week.
To use compensatory time, exempt employees must request permission of the Town Manager or
Department Head, with notice given to Human Resources by noting it on their time sheet. The
Town Manager reserves the right to limit the use and accrual of compensatory time off, in his/her
sole discretion.
Exempt personnel who work more than forty-four hours in a week are required to record that time
and describe in detail the work performed on the Compensatory Log Sheet. For any
compensatory time used, the employee is required to complete a Leave Request Form to be
approved by the Town Manager or Department Head and a copy sent to Human Resources.
9
SECTION 5
LEAVE TIME
Acknowledging that employees may require time away from work to attend to personal, family
and for medical needs, the Town may provide a variety of paid and unpaid leaves.
Leave is defined as any absence that occurs during an employee’s regularly scheduled work hours
that is approved by a Department Head or his/her designee. Leave may be authorized with or
without pay, and shall be granted in accordance with the policies outlined below based on the
work requirements of the employee’s Department and, whenever possible, the personal needs of
the employee. The various types of paid and unpaid leaves offered are outlined in this section.
Regular full-time or Re g u l a r part-time employees working thirty to forty (30-40) hours in
an average workweek shall earn vacation and sick leave or Paid Time Off based on the average
number of hours worked per week.
Procedure for Requesting Any Form of Leave
Any employee requesting leave time of any kind must submit a Leave Request Form to his/her
immediate Supervisor or Department Head for approval. All Leave Request forms are then given
to Human Resources to verify that sufficient leave is available. The employee will then receive a
signed form indicating approval or denial of the leave request.
For planned leave periods (including but not limited to vacation, sick, compensatory time, and
Family Medical Leave) an employee must submit a request to his/her Department Head or
designee indicating the: 1) type of leave, and 2) dates of intended absence and return. This
request must be approved prior to the taking of the leave. Certain types of leave, including but
not limited to Family Medical Leave Act, leave associated with worker’s compensation injuries
and sick leave, may require medical certification before the leave and a fitness for duty
certification prior to returning to work.
Holiday Leave for Regular Full-Time and Regular Part-Time Employees
All Regular Part-Time employees are entitled to the same recognized holidays as Full-Time
Employees with the following exceptions:
If a holiday falls on a scheduled workday, the employee will be paid for his/her hours normally
worked that day. However, if a holiday falls on the day the employee is not regularly scheduled
to work, the employee will receive no pay for that holiday.
Employees working a flexible schedule, including part-time employees, shall receive holiday pay
for those hours that they are scheduled to work on that holiday.
Whenever a holiday falls on a Saturday or Sunday, the preceding Friday or following Monday,
respectively, shall be the designated holiday.
On recognized holidays, employees shall be excused from all duty not required to maintain
essential Departmental services. The Library and the Recreation Department may be opened on
Town Holidays. Please check with the Department Head for the listing of those holidays. Only
in unusual circumstances and after approval by a Department Head or his/her designee, may an
employee (whose job responsibility does not require maintaining essential departmental services)
work on a holiday.
10
Due to the staff coverage requirement of the Town, not all employees may schedule time off for
the day of a recognized holiday. If a non-exempt employee is required to work on a holiday, that
employee will be paid for the hours worked on that holiday at time and one half. This holiday
premium will be paid at the employee’s regular pay rate. As an alternative to this holiday
premium pay, employees may elect to receive comp time for the same number of hours that he or
she would have been given as holiday pay. The employee may use these hours at a later date with
the approval of his/her Department Head and Human Resources, but these hours will not to carry
over into the next fiscal year.
Recognized Holidays
The following days are recognized as Town holidays:
 New Year’s Day
 Martin Luther King, Jr. Day
 President’s Day
 Memorial Day
 Independence Day
 Labor Day
 Veteran’s Day
 Thanksgiving Day
 Day after Thanksgiving
 ½ day Christmas Eve
 Christmas Day
 ½ day New Year’s Eve
 Two floater days
Eligible employees shall receive two floating days in a fiscal year. Floating days will be prorated
based on number of hours worked in a week. Employees hired after July 1, shall receive two
prorated floating days that will be calculated based on their full months of service in that fiscal
year.
THE FOLLOWING PAID TIME OFF (PTO) POLICY IS IN EFFECT FOR ALL
FULL TIME AND REGULAR PART TIME EMPLOYEES HIRED ON OR
AFTER OCTOBER 1, 2012.
In an effort to provide flexibility to employees for the use of time off, the Town of Colchester is
transitioning to using Paid Time off (PTO) for newly hired employees that are not unionized.
This policy applies to non-unionized new hires who will receive Paid Time Off rather than
Vacation and Sick Time. The amount of Paid Time Off will be noted in their employment offer
letter and based upon their relevant experience for their position. We will be considering
negotiating with the employee unions for PTO in upcoming collective bargaining.
Regular and timely attendance at work is an essential function of everyone at the Town of
Colchester. The Town does recognize, however, that employees have occasional and legitimate
needs for time off (including vacation time, illness, and family illness) and that is the purpose of
the paid time off (PTO) policy. This policy addresses the following topics:
 What is paid time off (PTO)?
 How do I earn PTO days?
 Anniversary dates
 Requesting/tracking PTO time
 General PTO Guidelines
11
WHAT IS PAID TIME OFF (PTO)?
Rather than allotting a certain number of days for vacation time, sick time, and personal time, the
Town uses one category to be known as PTO to give you more flexibility as you need to take off
time during the year.
Although you will need to request your time off in advance, we also recommend that you save
PTO days for unexpected emergencies or illnesses. Please note that we have additional types of
time off for certain special situations, such as bereavement leave, family leave, floating holidays,
and jury duty. The Town Employee handbook outlines allowances for bereavement and jury duty
leave time. Family leave is a type of leave one may take, but not a method of accruing paid
leave.
ACCRUALS
PTO days are accrued monthly. PTO taken will be subtracted from the employee’s accrued time
bank in no less than fifteen (15) minute increments. The number of PTO days that you earn
increases according to the following schedule. Please note that this schedule may be modified
depending on your employment start date. Refer to “Anniversary Dates” for more information.
These hours are based on a forty (40) hour work week – prorated for part-time.
Length of Service Annual Accrual Monthly Accrual
0 up to 3rd yr. anniversary 160 hours 13.33
3rd anniversary up to 4 yr.
anniversary
184 hours 15.33
4 yr. anniversary up to 5 yr.
anniversary
200 hours 16.666 hours
5 yr. anniversary up to 12 yr.
anniversary
240 hours 20.000 hours
12 yrs. anniversary & over 280 hours 23.33 hours
LENGTH OF SERVICE AND ANNIVERSARY DATES
Anniversary dates for the purpose of calculating PTO days will be based on permanent
employment start date. Employees may be granted additional annual accrual rates through
written approval of the Town Manager, taking into consideration prior relevant experience. Such
approval shall be documented in an employee’s personnel file by the Human Resource Director.
Length of service with the Town however, will dictate when an employee moves to the next level
of accrual.
PTO may accrue up to double the rate of accrual in one year. However, the maximum that may
be brought forward to the next Town fiscal year is thirty-five (35) days. Employees are entitled to
borrow PTO leave not to exceed what they would earn in six months of that year. If an employee
separates from the Town, any borrowed PTO will be paid back through a reduction in pay.
Employees are responsible for monitoring and taking their PTO over the course of the year so that
12
they do not lose time accrued. Under documented special and unusual circumstances, with written
approval of the Town Manager, employees may carry over up to seventy (70) days to the next
fiscal year, but not two (2) consecutive years.
GENERAL PTO GUIDELINES
If an employee takes time off which exceeds their PTO balance and which is not approved by the
Town Manager and/or Human Resources, it will be unpaid. Excessive tardiness or unexcused
absences are not acceptable and may be cause for termination.
PTO is subject to Town Manager approval or Department Head approval and not every employee
can take accumulated time during popular vacation times, as the Town must continue to serve
customers. Any employee requesting leave time must submit a Leave Request Form to his/her
immediate Supervisor or Department Head for approval. Employees must provide at least a 10
day notice for leave requests of more than two days. In all cases of requests for leave, provision
of advance notice allows supervisors more time to plan for and potentially grant such requests.
An employee who is absent from work due to injury or illness must:
1) Inform his/her immediate supervisor or Department Head of such fact prior to the
beginning of his/her shift, or in those unusual situations where that is not possible, at the
first reasonable opportunity during the shift.
2) Must report during convalescence at home for more than three days, to his/her immediate
supervisor either in person, by telephone or letter at least one per week.
3) Medical certification may be required for any absence due to illness that lasts more than
three consecutive workdays. The Town reserves the right to require a doctor’s
certification prior to return to work, that the employee can safely perform the essential
functions of his or her job, with our without reasonable accommodation.
Employees are entitled to two floating days at the beginning of each fiscal year. These days are
in addition to PTO. Floating days cannot be carried over from year to year and will be lost if not
used. Unused floating days in the fiscal year of separation will be paid out at time of separation.
Except as set forth below, employees are paid for the PTO they have accrued at employment end,
subject to maximum year to year accumulation of 35 days plus accrued time during the current
year. Employees who give two weeks’ notice of employment termination must work the two
weeks without utilizing PTO. Employees who fail to give two weeks’ notice of their termination
from employment forfeit accrued PTO time, and it will not be paid to them.
This policy is in effect for all employees hired on or after October 1, 2012. For employees who
were not hired under PTO, but for whom this is retroactive, the entire policy is retroactive. That
is, the Town will calculate accruals under the new policy, since date of hire, and then subtract
vacation and sick days taken since date of hire, net of any sick days converted to personal days.
However, no employee for whom this policy is retroactive, shall have a negative balance based
on this calculation, unless they have borrowed days.
13
EMPLOYEES HIRED BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2012 – THE FOLLOWING REMAINS IN
EFFECT:
Vacation Leave
Each regular employee in a full-time or part-time position in the Town of Colchester shall be
entitled to vacation time upon completion of service based on the following schedule and at the
following accrual rates: All regular part-time employee’s working thirty (30) to thirty-nine (39)
hours a week vacation hours are accrued at a prorated amount based upon their average hours per
week.
0 - 1 year 10 days (accrued at 5/6 working day per month)
1 year - 4 years
5 years - 11 years
12 years and over
12 days
18 days
24 days
(accrued at 1 working day per month)
(accrued at 1.5 working days per month)
(accrued at 2 workings day per month)
Vacation requests for Department Heads must be submitted to Human Resources. Human
Resources will then request final approval from the Town Manager. Vacation requests will be
considered and approved or denied based on factors that include, but are not limited to, the
following: conflicts with Departmental work plans; previous opportunities for vacation leave
during popular vacation periods throughout the year; impact on Departmental operations; current
or future business needs; requests already granted to other employees within the same
department; staffing levels; and business needs of the Department and the Town.
Employees may borrow against unearned vacation time an amount not to exceed what he/she
would accumulate up to the remaining period of his/her employment anniversary date.
If employment terminates for any reason and the employee gives proper notice, the town will pay
for unused vacation time at the employee’s regular rate of pay. If an employee separates from
service prior to the employee’s earning previously borrowed vacation time, the employee will be
obligated to pay the Town the cash equivalent of the paid time already provided to that employee.
Vacation time may be accumulated from year to year up to a maximum of thirty-five (35) days.
An employee who will be absent due to vacation and who desires to receive his/her paycheck in
advance, must give at least two (2) weeks advance notice to payroll.
Upon separation, the employee’s last day of continuous work shall be considered his/her last day
of employment and at that time the employee’s active status ends. Vacation time may not be used
to extend an employee’s length of service upon separation.
Upon retirement, an employee’s last day paid will be calculated incorporating any vacation
payout and this will be the date used in determining the employee’s length of creditable service
attributable to the commencement of retirement benefits.
Holiday and School Vacations: There are certain times of the year that are more popular for the
use of vacation and other time off, such as holiday times and school vacations. We need to be
fair about how we balance our need for coverage with the opportunity for all employees to enjoy
these popular leave times. Each Department Director is responsible for assuring that every
14
member of his/her department has a fair opportunity to time off during popular periods. No one,
including a Director, may monopolize vacation time on days before, in between, or after major
holidays. To the extent that employees want to take school holidays or vacations off, Department
Directors should rotate approvals for absences during school vacation times so everyone has fair
access to winter, spring and fall closures of schools.
Sick Leave
Sick leave shall mean any leave attributable to any physical or mental illness or injury that
prevents an employee from performing his/her regular duties.
Sick leave shall not be considered a benefit that an employee may use at his/her discretion, but
shall be used only in case of actual sickness of the employee or a member of the employee’s
immediate family. Immediate family includes: spouse, domestic partner, civil union partner,
parents, grandparents, siblings, children, grandchildren and foster children. Employees are
encouraged to make reasonable efforts to make doctor’s appointments for themselves or for
members of their immediate family outside of working hours, but sick leave may also be utilized
for such appointments if they cannot be scheduled outside of working hours. Supervisors should
use their best judgment to determine whether specific, individual cases fall within the general
intention parameters of this policy.
To be eligible for approved sick leave, an employee who is absent from work due to injury or
illness must:
1) Inform his/her immediate supervisor or Department Head of such fact prior to the
beginning of his/her shift, or in those unusual situations where that is not possible, at the
first reasonable opportunity during the shift.
2) Must report during convalescence at home for more than three days, to his/her immediate
supervisor either in person, by telephone or letter at least once per week.
Medical certification may be required for any absence due to illness that lasts more than three
consecutive workdays. The Town reserves the right to require a doctor’s certification prior to
return to work, that the employee can safely perform the essential functions of his or her job, with
or without reasonable accommodation.
Sick leave may be denied by the Department Head or his/her designee upon a determination that
the employee’s condition is not sufficiently serious to justify sick leave.
Regular employee in a full-time or part-time position shall accrue sick leave at the following
accrual rate:
Less than three (3) years of service, accrue one (1) day per month
More than three (3) years of service, accrue one and one-half (1-1/2) days per month.
Unused Sick Leave may accumulate from year to year, not to exceed 60 sick leave days.
All sick leave balances will be capped at 60 days (480 hours). Regular part-time employee sick
leave hours are accrued on a prorated basis on the number of hours worked in a week (for
example: 20 hour employee would be entitled to 240 hours of sick leave) Employees who
accrued more than sixty (60) days of sick time prior to July 1, 2003 were allowed to “bank” those
accrued sick leave hours that exceeded the annual cap, may still be allowed to use that “banked
15
time,” on the following conditions: “Banked” hours will be ava i lable o nly in a c a s e of
extraordinary illness to be determined at the sole discretion of the Town Manager. Banked hours can only
be used after all other sick hours have been used.
Employees hired before October 1, 2012 with “banked” balances and/or normal sick leave will be paid
for their banked sick and/or normal sick leave upon termination of their employment subject to the
following conditions:
Five (5) through nine (9) years of completed service, at one quarter (1/4) hours at the employee’s base rate
of pay.
Ten (10) years of completed service, at one third (1/3) hours at the employee’s base rate of pay.
Upon Retirement at age 62 with ten or more years of service, or permanent disability, an
employee is entitled to payment of one-half of his/her sick leave balance.
Seasonal Parks Employees. This description is for employees that work 40 hours a week for more than
five months but less than year-round for the Parks department. Seasonal Parks Employees will be
provided Flex Time off during their term of employment for dental, sick, vacation, bereavement, family,
and personal leave, at a maximum of hours per the chart below:
Years of continuous Service as a Seasonal Parks Employee
0-1 years 30
hours30ho
urs
| 2-6 years 40 hours
7-11 years 56 hours | 12+ years 80 hours
First year Seasonal Employees will have a waiting period of thirty (30) calendar days before they
may apply for and be granted permission to use this benefit. Seasonal Parks Employees and entitled to
holiday pay on Town holidays that fall on r e g u l a r workdays during which the employee is not
working. These Seasonal Parks Employee benefits and leave time may not be transferred to any other
class of Town employment to which a Seasonal Parks Employee may transition. Unused flex time will
not be paid out upon separation of employment.
Work Related Injury Leave
In accordance with the laws of Vermont, the Town provides Worker’s Compensation Benefits for
employees injured on the job. These benefits include coverage of medical costs and a portion of wages lost
as the result of a work-related accident or injury.
Injury Reporting, Paperwork
All employees injured on the job, however slightly, must report the incident/accident immediately to his/
her supervisor. The supervisor must file a “First Report of Injury” form and a Supervisor Report to
Human Resources by the end of the next normal workday.
Prompt reporting is the key to prompt benefits. Insure your right to benefits by reporting every injury,
no matter how slight.
Employees returning to work after being absent due to a work-related injury must report to their supervisor
prior to beginning work and must bring a doctor’s “return to work ” certification, demonstrating that they
can safely perform their essential job duties with or without reasonable accommodation, in order to return
to work. This notice is required to list any job restrictions and their expected duration.
Bereavement Leave
The purpose of bereavement leave is to enable an employee to take care of personal arrangements and
needs caused by the death of a member of his/her family, and to relieve him/her of the concern over loss of
earnings on the regularly scheduled workdays immediately following the death.
16
If a death occurs during an employee’s scheduled vacation, additional vacations day(s) may be
granted to make up for those used for bereavement leave.
A. Death of Immediate Family Member
Upon the death of an employee’s spouse, domestic partner, Civil Union partner, child, or foster
child, step-child, parent, step-parent, brother, brother-in-law, sister, sister-in-law, grandchild,
grandparent, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law or daughter-in-law, the employee may
request and the Department Head or his/her designee may grant bereavement leave of up to four
(4) working days following such death without loss of pay.
B. Other
Upon the request of the employee, the Department Head, may, grant up to one (1) day leave to
attend the funeral of a personal friend or member of the employee’s family not listed as
immediate family. An employee may utilize sick, vacation or personal leave to supplement
bereavement leave.
Military Leave
Employees in the National Guard or a branch of the Armed Forces Reserves are eligible for a
leave of absence in order to fulfill their annual field training obligations or to attend special
training sessions, as required by the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights
Act of 1994.
The Town will treat this as non-paid time off. We will, however, pay the employee the difference
in what she/he would have made during that three-week period versus what the National Guard
pays the employee upon presentation of proof of military pay received, exclusive of travel
allowances.
Employees who enter the military service or are called to duty will be granted a leave of absence
and provided with reemployment rights as required by state or federal law.
Employees who are affiliated with the military should provide their supervisors with a copy of
their orders or their training schedule prior to taking military leave, or as soon as practicable after
such leave commences, if the need for leave arises suddenly.
Military Family Leave Entitlements:
Qualifying Exigency Leave – Up to twelve (12) weeks of unpaid leave is available for eligible
employees for certain qualifying exigencies arising out of a covered military member’s active
duty status, or notification of an impending call or order to active duty status, in support of a
contingency operation.
Employees requesting this type of leave must provide proof of the qualifying family member’s
call-up or active military service before leave is granted.
“Qualifying Exigencies” are short-notice deployment military events and related activities,
childcare and school activities, financial and legal arrangements, counseling, rest and
recuperation, post-deployment activities, and additional activities agreed to by the employer and
the employee.
17
Military Caregiver Leave – Up to a combined total of twenty-six (26) weeks of unpaid leave in a
single 12-month period may be provided to eligible employees to care for a covered service
member or veteran recovering from a serious illness incurred in the line of duty on active duty.
Eligible employees are entitled to a combined total of up twenty-six (26) weeks of all types of
FMLA during the single 12-month period. Employees requesting this type of FMLA leave must
provide certification of the family member’s or next-of-kin’s injury, recovery, or need for care.
Jury Leave and Witness Leave
An employee summoned to jury duty or to be a witness in a legal action will be excused from
his/her normal work schedule for the period necessary to perform such duty. If the jury is excused
from duty during working hours, or if the employee is excused as a witness, the employee shall
immediately report for work. An employee required to serve on a jury, or to be a witness in a
legal action and thus be absent from regular duty, shall be paid if applicable, the difference
between the compensation received from such jury service and his/her usual weekly pay upon
presentation of proof of jury pay received.
Employees must present to his/her supervisor a copy of the letter from the court or subpoena
requiring the employee’s appearance as a witness or for jury duty, and must attach it to his/her
time sheet.
These guidelines do not normally apply in instances where the employee is party to a legal action
(in which case, the employee will take vacation time, personal, or leave without pay), unless the
involvement arises as a result of the employee’s job with the Town.
Personal Leave – This section applies to employees hired before October 1, 2012
Once an employee has accrued more than fifteen (15) sick days, he/she may trade one (1) hour
from accumulated sick leave for one (1) hour of personal leave up to a maximum of three (3)
personal days per fiscal year as long as he/she maintains a minimum of fifteen (15) accumulated
sick days. Banked sick leave cannot be used for this purpose. Use of personal leave is subject to
approval and must be authorized by his/her Department Head or designee. Personal days shall
not be carried from fiscal year to fiscal year.
Discretionary Leave Without Pay
Upon affirmative recommendations of the Department Head and Human Resources, the Town
Manager may grant leave without pay for up to thirty (30) calendar days to an employee. At the
expiration of a leave without pay under thirty (30) calendar days, the employee shall return to the
same position. Leave without pay in excess of thirty (30) calendar days (“extended leave”) shall
require the approval of the Town Manager.
Reinstatement for such extended leaves is not guaranteed and shall be granted only at the sole
discretion of the Town Manager. Employees taking extended leaves under this provision, who
decide not to return, or who are not reinstated, are deemed to have voluntarily resigned their
position at the beginning of the extended leave.
Leave without pay granted under this section shall not constitute a break in service; however,
during any extended leave vacation and sick leave shall not accrue. No other benefits will be
provided during this period of leave.
An employee’s benefits will terminate on the first day of the month following the beginning of
any extended, leave unless the employee elects to purchase coverage under COBRA guidelines
18
through the Town’s plans. This does not apply to employees taking unpaid leave under the
Town’s Family Medical Leave policy. The Town will not be responsible for any applicable health
insurance contributions during extended leaves under this provision. The employee will not be
eligible for any disability or life insurance coverage during this leave.
Replacing Employees on Leave
The Town Departments may fill, on a temporary basis, positions of employees granted a leave of
absence of not more than thirty (30) days. Employees on extended leaves may be replaced, at the
sole discretion of the Town, at any time during the extended leave.
Family Medical Leave and Short-Term Family Leave
Introduction and Definitions
The Town provides that an eligible employee may take up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave during a
12-month period relating to the birth or adoption of a child, or relating to the serious health
condition of the employee, the care of a seriously ill family member, or service member, for
exigencies relating to military deployment of a family member or for certain family or schoolrelated
activities consistent with the provisions of the Vermont Parental & Family Leave Act, and
the Federal Family and Medical Leave Act.
Definitions
For purposes of this section, an “immediate family member” for the purposes of this policy shall
mean a spouse, domestic partner, civil union partner, son, daughter, stepchild, foster child,
grandchild, step-parent, or a ward of the employee who lives in the employee’s home, parent,
parent-in law, or other close family member, approved by the Town Manager.
For purposes of this section, a “serious health condition” shall mean an illness, injury,
impairment, or condition that includes any period of incapacity connected with an inpatient
hospital stay or any period of incapacity involving “continuing treatment by a health care
provider” as that phrase is defined in federal regulations.
For purposes of this section, “emergency” means circumstances where the required notice could
have a significant adverse impact on the family member or the employee.
Eligibility
In order to be eligible for leave under the Family Medical Leave Act, an employee must have
been employed for at least one year and have worked at least 1,250 hours during the previous 12-
month period. Under the Vermont Parental and Family Leave Act, an employee must have been
employed for an average of thirty (30) hours a week during the previous 12- month period.
For purposes of this section, the 12-month period shall mean a period in which leave is granted of
12 consecutive months following the date of an employee’s first use of leave under this policy.
Generally only one 12-week leave during each 12-month period is provided even if more than
one qualifying event has occurred. However, up to 26 weeks of unpaid leave may be granted
under this policy, for eligible employees who require leave to care for a seriously ill service
member or veteran.
19
Any additional time, beyond the leave described above must be requested under the terms of the
“Discretionary Leave Without Pay” section above and may be taken only with the permission of
the Town Manager. No such additional unpaid leave may be used to extend the employee’s
family and medical rights under state or federal law.
Leave Due to the Birth or Adoption of a Child
An eligible employee shall be entitled to take 12 weeks of unpaid leave to be used for the birth or
adoption of a child or the initial placement of a child with the employee for the purpose of
adoption or foster care. Such leave must be used within one year of the child’s birth or placement
for adoption or foster care. In some cases, such leave may be used during the course of the
employee’s pregnancy.
Parental leave may be taken intermittently or on a reduced schedule only with the approval of the
Town Manager. If intermittent or reduced schedule leave is used, the employee must give due
consideration to potential disruption to his or her department due to his or her absence.
Employees should consult their Department Heads and Human Resources about intermittent
leave or leave on a reduced schedule.
Medical Leave
An eligible employee shall be entitled to take 12 weeks of unpaid medical leave if the employee
is unable to work because of a serious health condition. An employee shall also be entitled to
take unpaid family medical leave in order to care for an immediate family member with a serious
health condition. Family Medical leave may be taken intermittently or on a reduced schedule,
when medically necessary. Employees should consult their Department Head and Human
Resources about intermittent leave or leave on a reduced schedule.
If intermittent or reduced schedule leave is used, the employee must give due consideration to
potential disruption to his or her department due to his or her absence and the employee may be
required to temporary transfer to an alternative position of equivalent pay and benefits which
better accommodates recurring periods of leave.
Notice of Leave
An employee must provide reasonable notice to Human Resources of intent to take leave under
this policy. We request that notice be provided as soon as the employee is aware that leave is
needed, but not less than 30 days’ notice. In cases of emergency, the employee shall notify the
Town Manager as soon as practicable after the need of the leave arises. All notices must include
the date the leave is expected to commence and the estimated duration of the leave.
An employee shall provide certification from the attending health care provider for the employee
or the employee’s immediate family member supporting the need for medical leave and the
estimated duration of the leave. The Town may require that additional certification from the
attending health care provider is supplied to the Town or that the employee or his or her family
member submit to additional medical examination to confirm the need for the leave. The Town
will confirm with the employee whether the requirement for leave under this section has been met
and whether the leave taken by the employee shall be counted toward the 12-week period
provided by this section.
20
Use of Accrued Paid Leave
An employee may use any available accrued leave time, including sick, vacation and personal
leave, during a Family Medical Leave. The use of accrued paid leave shall not extend the
Parental, Medical or Family leave benefit beyond what is provided by this section.
Continuation of Employee Benefits
An employee shall continue to receive all benefits while on Parental, Medical and Family Care
leave, including any leave time accruals, holiday pay, medical, dental, life, short-term and long
term insurance, and the Town will continue to pay its share of the employee’s health insurance
coverage.
Return to work
Generally, the employees taking family or medical leave under this section are entitled to be
returned to their job, or an equivalent position, at the end of their leave. Certain employees, who
are “key” employees under state and federal law, are not entitled to reinstatement. A “Key
employee” is defined as a salaried, FMLA-eligible employee who is among the highest paid 10
percent of all the employees working for the employer within 75 miles of the employee’s
worksite. Employees considered “key” by the Town shall be informed of their status upon hire,
or upon a change in their duties that qualifies them for “key” employee status.
An employee who wishes to return to work prior to the originally scheduled date shall give at
least one-week notice of his or her intent to return to work.
An employee returning to work after a medical leave will be required to provide certification
from the health care provider that he or she is able to safely perform all the essential functions of
his or her job, with or without reasonable accommodation. Consistent with other existing policies
and state and federal law, the Town may require that the employee complete a return to work
examination with the Town’s medical examiner or other health care provider designated by the
Town.
All qualified returning employees shall be entitled to return to the same position or a position of
like seniority, status and pay within the organization.
Short-Term Family Leave
This leave is provided by Vermont law and only applies to employees who have been employed
an average of 30 hours per week in the year preceding the commencement of requested leave. To
be eligible for this leave, an employee must have been employed for the entire year prior to the
commencement of the requested leave.
In addition to the 12 or 26 weeks of leave provided above, an employee shall also be entitled to
take unpaid leave not to exceed four (4) hours in any 30-day period and not to exceed 24 hours in
any 12-month period for any of the following purposes:
1) To participate in preschool or school activities directly related to the academic
educational advancement of the employee’s child, stepchild, foster child or ward that
lives with the employee, such as a parent-teacher conference.
21
2) To attend or to accompany the employee’s child, stepchild, foster child or ward who lives
with the employee or the employee’s parent, spouse, civil union partner or parent in-law
to routine medical or dental appointments or to other appointments for professional
services related to their care and well-being.
3) To respond to a medical emergency involving the employee’s child, stepchild, foster
child, grandchild, or ward that lives with the employee or the employee’s parent, spouse,
civil union partner or parent-in-law.
22
SECTION 6
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
The Town of Colchester recognizes the importance of providing a comprehensive benefit package
for Full Time Employees and Regular Part Time Employees who regularly work 30
hours or more a week and their dependents. Employe es in othe r ca t egor i es a r e not
e l igibl e for benef i t s unl e s s otherwi se spec i f i ed in thi s document . Components
of the benefit package include: health, dental, vision, life insurance, short-term, and long-term
disability, and retirement.
Eligibility
Unless otherwise specifically stated herein, the benefits described in this section are provided to
regular full-and part-time employees subject to the terms of each of these benefit programs.
Coverage for new eligible employee benefits will begin on the first day of the month following
their hire date. If the hire date is the 1st day of the month, coverage will begin that month as long
as appropriate paperwork is completed that day.
Regular full-time and part-time employees may be eligible for the following benefits subject to
the terms of each of these benefit programs. The cost of these benefits will be prorated based on
the average number of hours worked per week with employees paying a portion of the overall
costs.
 health insurance,
 life, short-term and long-term disability insurance,
 dental
 retirement plans
The Town may make contributions to each of these plans or to the premiums relating to them for
all eligible employees. Dependents are eligible to participate in the group health, vision, and
dental plans. Information is provided to all employees during initial orientation, which details the
benefits available under the Group Plans and the individual eligibility requirements of each such
plan. Any questions should be addressed to Human Resources.
Medical Insurance
The Town offers medical insurance for eligible Town employees. Please see Human Resources
for eligibility requirements and scope of coverage.
All Regular Part-Time employees hired before July 1, 2003 will be provided with the following
subject to the individual eligibility requirements of the applicable benefit plan:
If you work: Employee will pay:
22.5 to 30 hours a week Additional 25% health insurance premium
31 to 40 hours a week No additional amount of premium
23
If employment status changes, including hours worked per week, outside the windows
outlined above, after June 30, 2003 – employees will be subject to the section below:
This section applies to employees hired after July 1, 2003.
If you work: Employee will pay:
30 hours per week Additional 50% health insurance premium
31-35 hours per week Additional 25% health insurance premium
36-40 hours per week No Additional amount of premium
Dental Insurance
The Town will provide a dental insurance program for all eligible employees. Please see Human
Resources for eligibility, contribution and scope of coverage.
Life Insurance – Individual
The Town offers life insurance for all eligible employees who work thirty (30) hours or more.
Please see Human Resources for eligibility, contribution and scope of coverage.
Disability Insurance – Individual
The Town offers all eligible employees who work thirty (30) hours or more non-occupation
accident and sickness insurance. Please see Human Resources for eligibility, contribution and
scope of coverage.
Under the disability insurance coverage for eligible employees commences on the first day of
disability for accidents and on the eighth day for illness if the employee is qualified for such
benefits under the terms of the insurance plan. An employee may at his/her discretion make up
the difference of his/her full pay by drawing the balance of one-third (1/3) pay from accumulated
leave.
Except as otherwise required by law, if an employee is out of work for less than one year on
disability leave the town may continue to offer Health and Dental Insurance benefits. While out
on disability, except as otherwise required by law, employees will not accrue vacation or sick
leave. Employees are required to apply for disability insurance if they are going to be out of work
for two consecutive weeks or more. Please contact Human Resources for more information.
Retirement
The Town of Colchester currently provides a retirement plan for its eligible employees. The
Town contributes a percentage of annual base salary after eligibility requirements are met. For
additional retirement plan details, contact Human Resources.
As of January 1, 2013, all new employees covered under the Vermont Municipal Employee
Retirement System Plan C will not be eligible for payout of sick leave accrual when leaving
employment.
Deferred Compensation
Employees who are eligible may participate in the Town’s Section 457 Deferred Compensation
Plan. The objective of the plan is to provide the employee with a tax-deferred means of savings
24
for retirement. An account is established which is funded solely by the employee’s contributions
to investments offered by the plan. This account is separate from the employer-funded pension
plan.
Employees who are eligible may participate in a Roth IRA and Traditional IRA.
For additional plan details, contact Human Resources.
Temporary Employees are not eligible for benefits. They are eligible for holiday pay if they would
normally be schedule to work that day
Casual Employees and Part Time Employees are not eligible for benefits or holiday pay. Per Diem
Employees are not eligible for benefits. They are not eligible holiday pay but are paid time and a half
pay if they work the holiday day.
Employee Assistance Program
The Town of Colchester strives to provide a healthy and supportive work environment for all
Town employees. The Town sponsors an Employee Assistance Program, available to employees
and their family members. The program is called Invest EAP. You may visit their website at
www.investeap.org - password: xcol
In addition to invest EAP, all law enforcement personnel have access to K. Kelly and Associates.
The Employee Assistance Program is a confidential counseling resource and referral service
intended to help employees address any personal problem that has the potential to affect their
ability to work. Personal problems may include family, work related, marital, emotional,
medical, financial or legal problems. The EAP is an integral part of the health and wellness
programs and it is being provided to employees at no additional cost.
25
SECTION 7
DISCIPLINE AND TERMINATION
Town Employees are expected to act in a manner, which will bring credit upon the Town and will
not adversely affect job performance or the efficiency of Town services. Employees are expected
to be courteous to all members of the general public and co-workers. Town employees will be
required to comply with the Town of Colchester Code of Ethics attached in Appendix A and the
Fraud and Prevention Policy attached in Appendix C and will be required to review and sign
annually.
Police Officers are subject to Title 24, V.S.A. for disciplinary procedures.
There may be times during employment when an employee’s attitude, behavior or performance
may not meet the Town’s standards or expectations. In those instances, the Town reserves the
right to discipline that employee in any manner it deems appropriate, under the circumstances.
Discipline, including or without limitation, suspension or termination, will be prescribed on a
case-by-case basis, at the sole discretion of the Town Manager or his or her designee and based
upon the individual circumstances of such situation. Discipline in any situation may take the
form of coaching, oral or written warnings, suspensions or immediate dismissal. This Discipline
and Termination Section of the Employee Handbook applies in any employment situation,
whether or not otherwise specifically stated in reference to a particular policy in this Employee
Handbook.
If an employee chooses to terminate his or her employment with the Town voluntarily, we request
that the employee give the Town a minimum of two weeks’ notice. If employment is terminated
by the Town, an employee will be paid through his/her last day of employment and will be paid
for accrued vacation leave time.
Prior to termination, an employee will be provided with at least forty-eight (48) hours’ notice that
the Town Manager is considering termination. The employee will be provided with some basic
information as to the reasons that the termination of his/her employment is being considered, and
the employee will be given an opportunity to have a hearing in which the matter will be
discussed.
The employee is also entitled to be accompanied by an attorney or other representative at the
hearing, to hear the evidence presented against the employee and to present evidence on his/her
behalf at employee’s expense.
The Town Manager will preside over this hearing and may be accompanied by counsel or any
other party he or she deems appropriate. The Town Manager shall render a written decision
within fourteen (14) working days after the hearing unless otherwise agreed upon by the parties.
The decision of the Town Manager, as to termination shall be final. The Town Manager may, in
lieu of termination, impose any other form of discipline that he/she deems appropriate under the
circumstances.
26
SECTION 8
GRIEVANCES
The grievance procedure is designed to foster candid and open communication between
employees and supervisors. It is intended that the grievance procedure will serve to improve
employee morale and the operations of all Town departments. No employee shall face any
punishment or discriminatory act as a result of his/her appropriate use of the grievance process.
Policy
The Town of Colchester promotes the fair and unbiased treatment of employees. An employee
who believes that he or she has been discriminated against on the basis of political or religious
affiliation, race, color, national origin, age, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, veteran status,
physical or mental impairment, or any other characteristic protected by law, or who has a dispute
or difference of opinion with the Town involving the meaning, interpretation, or application of an
expressed provision(s) of these policies may personally appeal for relief from that condition.
A grievance may also arise as a result of a personnel and/or disciplinary action.
Grievance Procedure
All grievances shall be handled in accordance with the following procedures. Every effort will be
made to resolve the grievance to the mutual satisfaction of all parties at the lowest organizational
level possible. The employee will have the opportunity to present the grievance to his/her
immediate supervisor and continue with the process up to and including the Town Manager. An
employee may be accompanied by a person of his/her choice and at his/her expense at any step in
the grievance procedure.
Step 1:
The employee shall first present the grievance in writing to the Department Head within ten (10)
days of the occurrence or knowledge of the occurrence, which gave rise for the grievance.
If a grievance is not presented within the time limit, it shall be considered waived. The written
grievance shall state the following:
 The section(s) of the employment policies upon which the grievance is based.
 The occurrence(s) being grieved.
 Applicable times and dates.
 Other pertinent facts
 The remedy sought
The Department Head shall attempt to address the matter and shall respond in writing to the
grievant within five (5) days of receiving the grievance.
Step 2:
If the grievance is not resolved at Step 1, it shall be presented in writing to the Town Manager
within five (5) days of the receipt of the Department Head’s response. The grievant shall indicate
the reason for dissatisfaction with the decision of his or her supervisor and state the redress
sought. The Town Manager shall review the grievance and may at his sole discretion hold a
hearing on the matter.
27
The Town Manager shall render his/her decision on the grievance within five (5) days of the
receipt of the grievance with copies going to the grievant and the Department Head
Step 3:
If the grievance is not resolved at Step 2, it shall be presented in writing to the Select Board
within five (5) days of receipt of the Town Manager’s response, along with a request for a hearing
if the grievant so desires. Such hearing must be held not less than ten (10) days or more than
twenty (20) days after such request. The Select Board may support the action of the Town
Manager or may modify it.
Failure to Respond
Failure by the employee to proceed to the next step within the time frame specified will
automatically terminate the grievance process. However, when mutually agreed upon time limits
may be extended.
Effective Date of Decision
No grievance decision shall have a retroactive effect greater than fourteen (14) days prior to the
filing of the grievance. Pre-approved extended times are permissible.
Grievance Documentation
Documentation resulting from a grievance shall not be kept in an employee’s personnel file, but
maintained in a separate grievance file. Any and all correspondence relating to a grievance shall
be forwarded to Human Resources.
28
SECTION 9
SAFETY AND WELLNESS
The Town of Colchester recognizes its employees as its most important assets in providing
services to the community. As such, management has set a goal of providing a safe and
healthful workplace for all employees. The Town’s Safety Program recognizes that the safe
work behavior of each employee is a key to meeting this goal. Our ultimate goal is to
achieve an accident-free work environment for our employees.
To help meet these goals, the Town will provide safety training to all employees based on the
particular potential hazards of their job duties. We will also provide the necessary personal
protective equipment to help reduce exposure to potential hazards and will allocate resources as
needed to correct hazardous conditions that are brought to our attention.
It is the responsibility of each employee to follow all safe work rules and procedures. If an
employee is unsure of how to do a particular task safely, they should not proceed until they have
received instruction from their supervisor. Each employee is also obligated to report all unsafe
working conditions to their supervisor or manager. It is the responsibility of each supervisor to
monitor and assist employees in the safe performance of their duties. Safe work behaviors and
attitudes are an expected part of each employee’s job performance.
Hazardous Duties
When an employee is called upon to perform a task which the employee considers to be
hazardous and that his/her safety has not been reasonably protected, the employee is expected to
bring the situation to the attention of his/her immediate supervisor. An employee who reasonably
refuses to perform a hazardous duty will not be disciplined. The determination as to whether
such refusal was reasonable shall rest in the sole discretion of the Town Manager and shall be
evaluated based on the facts and circumstances of each situation.
Accident Reporting Procedures
When an employee or other person has been injured or there has been damage to Town or private
property while on the job, a properly completed accident report must be submitted within twentyfour
(24) hours of the accident. The employee’s supervisor and Department Head shall be
responsible for signing and forwarding the proper completed report to Human Resources. Human
Resources will report the incident to the Town Manager. If an employee is injured in a work
related accident, he or she should follow the procedure for workers’ compensation.
HEALTH MAINTENANCE
The Town of Colchester recognizes its most important asset in its employees. As such, the Town
is committed to providing a healthy environment for all employees and their dependents and
recognizes the significance of physical, mental and social well-being which will allow employees
to be able to work to their fullest potential. As such, management is taking an active role in
promoting wellness programs with the intent to encourage healthy behaviors and maintain an
active, healthy lifestyle. It is the hope of management that having these programs in place will
reduce employee absenteeism, decrease rates of illness and injuries, lower levels of stress and
increase productivity to continue to be able to provide the highest quality municipal services
possible to the citizens of the Town.
29
To help meet the goals of a healthy workplace, the Town will establish a Wellness Committee
composed of employees from different departments within the Town. The committee will assess
the needs and interests of employees and their dependents, identify health risks and establish
targets for improvement. The committee may, from time to time, offer various health and safety
programs to employees and evaluate the overall success of the programs.
Employee involvement is the key to making these programs a success. We encourage each
employee to become an active participant in the wellness programs. As well, we expect each
supervisor to encourage and motivate employees to participate in these programs.
30
SECTION 10
MISCELLANEOUS POLICIES
Domestic and Sexual Violence Policy
Domestic Violence: A pattern of coercive behavior used by one person to gain power and
control over another. Domestic Violence may include physical violence, sexual, emotional, and
psychological intimidation, verbal abuse, stalking and economic control. Although men can be
victims of domestic violence, it is a major cause of injury or death to women. Domestic Violence
occurs between people of all racial, economic, educational and religious backgrounds in
heterosexual and same sex relationships, and between people living together or separately,
married or unmarried, and in short-term or long-term relationships. Domestic Violence is legally
defined in Vermont as occurring between family members or persons who, for any length of time,
are living or have lived together as sexual partners or as roommates, are having or had sexual
relationship, and adults or minors who are dating or have dated.
Sexual Violence: A continuum of non-consensual sexual contact ranging from sexual
harassment to sexual assault. Some or all of these acts may also be addressed in the Sexual
Harassment Policy. Sexual violence is any sexual act or behavior that is perpetrated against
someone’s will when someone does not or cannot consent. Victims of sexual violence may know
the perpetrator(s), such as a coworker, supervisor, client or vendor, and/or may be involved in a
dating or marital relationship with the perpetrator, or the perpetrator may be unknown to the
victim. A person of any age or gender may be a perpetrator, or the perpetrator may be unknown
to the victim.
A person of any age or gender may be a victim of sexual violence. Consent is not given when a
perpetrator uses force, harassment, threat of force, threat of adverse personnel action, coercion, or
when the victim is asleep, incapacitated, or unconscious.
Batterer, Abuser, Offender or Perpetrator: The individual who commits an act of domestic or
sexual violence as defined above.
Survivor or Victim: The individual who has been or is currently the subject of domestic or
sexual violence.
Safety Plan: A course of action and precautions that help the victim maintain safety at work
and/or home.
Protection Order: Vermont statutes provide for three types of protection orders:
The Vermont Abuse Prevention Statute (15 V.S.A. Sec. 1101-1115) provides a mechanism for a
victim of abuse to apply for a protection order from the Family Division of the Supervisor Court
called a Relief from Abuse Order. The order restrains an abuser from abusing the victim,
prohibits violent or threatening acts and/or harassment, and/or contact or communication with or
31
Physical proximity to another person. The order also addresses possession of the residence and
custody of children. A protection order from another state or territory shall be accorded full faith
and credit throughout Vermont and shall be enforced as if it were an order of this state.
Title 12 (chapter 178) of the Vermont statutes provides a mechanism for victims of stalking and
sexual assault for protection orders (also called SSA orders) when the perpetrator is not a family
or household member. The process for obtaining an Order against Stalking or Sexual Assault is
similar to that for obtaining a Relief From Abuse order, except that SSA orders are obtained
through the Civil Division of Superior Court and are only available during business hours. The
court can issue temporary and final orders that demand that the defendant stay away from the
plaintiff and her or his children.
Title 33 (33 V.S.A Section 6933) of the Vermont statutes provides a mechanism for vulnerable
adults to apply for protection orders if they have suffered abuse (including sexual abuse), neglect,
or exploitation by a household member, caregiver or anyone else. The vulnerable adult may file a
petition requesting that the defendant refrain from abusing, neglecting or exploiting the
vulnerable adult and/or that they immediately vacate the household.
All of these protection orders are enforceable by law enforcement officers, and violation of an
order is a criminal act punishable by law.
Certified Batterer Intervention Program: a program certified by the Vermont Council on
Domestic Violence and designed to provide education and increase motivation in program
participants to end their abuse and engage in a process of behavior change.
Sexual Violence
A. Responses to Employees who are Victims of Domestic or Sexual Violence
Employees at the Town of Colchester should not be disciplined or discriminated against in hiring,
firing, staffing, or other terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because of being a victim
of domestic violence.
The Town of Colchester acknowledges that victimization can lead to absences, late arrival/early
departure, or decreased productivity. These employment issues may be a result of legal
obligations, medical needs, safety planning and trauma. Reasonable accommodations will be
given to the victim before imposing any employee disciplinary action.
The Town of Colchester encourages victims and other affected employees to contact community
agencies (listed below) for resources and referrals. Many provide free services for safety
planning, accessing protection orders, counseling, support groups, shelter, advice and legal
assistance.
The Town of Colchester will attempt to make available appropriate information, and resources to
victims and other employees.
The Town of Colchester will provide support through referrals to community agencies, our
Employee Assistance Program, and Human Resources. We encourage all employees to take
advantage of these resources. You may contact these resources available twenty-four (24) hours
a day and seven (7) days a week:
 Vermont Network Against Domestic and Sexual Violence, visit
http://www.vtnetwork.org
32
 Vermont Domestic Violence Hotline at 1-800-228-7395
 Vermont Sexual Violence Hotline at 1-800-489-7273
 United Way Information and Referral, dial 211
You may also contact our Employee Assistance Program at 1-800-287-2173, Human Resources
at 264-5504, Police Department at 264-5555.
A. Response to Employees who Commit Acts or Threats of Domestic or Sexual Violence
Any employee who commits acts/threats of domestic or sexual violence at the workplace or while
using workplace resources, will be subject to disciplinary action, which may include but is not
limited to dismissal. If appropriate, law enforcement will be contacted, which may result in
arrest, criminal charges, and/or prosecution. Workplace resource include, but are not limited to,
phone, fax machines, e-mail, mail, automobiles, pagers, office supplies, photocopy machines and
work time.
If an employee intentionally uses their position or workplace resources to enable a perpetrator to
harm/contact a victim, both the employee and perpetrator (if an employee) will be subject to
disciplinary action, which may include but is not limited to dismissal. If appropriate, law
enforcement will be contacted, which may result in arrest, criminal charges, and/or prosecution.
The Town of Colchester recognizes that perpetrators also need assistance and resources. We will
provide, when appropriate, referrals to community agencies, our Employee Assistance Program at
1-80027-2173, certified Batterer Intervention and/or Sex Offender Treatment Program. We
encourage all employees to take advantage of these resources. To find a Batterer Intervention
Program in your area call (802)223-1302 or visit http//www.vtnetwork.org. To find a Sex
Offender Treatment Program in your area call (802)247-31232 or (503)643-1023 or visit
http://www.atsa.com/request-referral.
B. Law Enforcement and Laws
The Town of Colchester will cooperate to the fullest extent legally possible with law enforcement
and other appropriate government agencies. In addition, this policy shall be interpreted and
applied in accordance with all applicable local, state or federal laws.
Drug and Alcohol Testing Policy for CDL-Qualified Employees and Drivers of Town-
Owned Vehicles
In order to uphold the Town’s obligations under the Drug-Free Workplace Act, employees who
are CDL Qualified may be tested periodically for illegal drug use, consistent with State and
Federal laws. Failure to cooperate with the Town’s drug and alcohol testing program, or an
employee’s failure of certain tests performed pursuant to that program may subject the employee
to discipline, up to and including immediate termination.
Employees who become aware of any violations of this policy are required to report any such
violation to their supervisor or Human Resources immediately.
Technology Use and Lack-of-Privacy
A. Introduction
The Town provides various Technology Resources as defined below to authorized employees
only in order to assist them in performing their job duties for the Town. Each employee has a
responsibility to use the Town’s Technology Resources in a manner that increases productivity,
33
enhances the town’s public image, and is respectful of other employees. Failure to follow the
Town’s policies regarding its Technology Resources may lead to disciplinary measures, up to and
including termination of employment. The Police Department adheres to the State of Vermont
Policy.
B. Technology Resources Definition
Technology Resources consist of all electronic devices, software, and means of electronic
communication, including, but not limited to, the following, whether provided or supported by
the Town of Colchester: personal computers and workstations; laptop computers; projectors;
computer hardware such as disk drives and tape drives; peripheral equipment such as printers,
modems, fax machines, and copiers; computer software applications and associated files and data,
including software that grants access to external services, such as the Internet, electronic mail
telephones; cellular phones; pagers; and voicemail systems.
Access to the Town’s Technology Resources is within the sole discretion of the Town Manager.
Generally, employees are given access to the Town’s various technologies based on their job
functions. Only employees whose job performance will benefit from the use of the Town’s
Technology Resources will be given access to the necessary technology.
The Town’s Technology Resources are to be used by employees only for the purpose of
conducting town business. Employees may, however, use the Town’s Technology Resources for
the following incidental personal uses so long as such use does not interfere with the employee’s
duties, is not done for monetary gain, does not conflict with town’s business, and does not violate
any Town policy:
1) To send and receive necessary and occasional personal communications;
2) To prepare and store incidental personal data (such as personal calendars, personal
address lists, and similar incidental personal data) in a reasonable manner;
3) To use the telephone system for brief and necessary personal calls; and
4) To access the Internet for brief personal searches and inquiries during meal times or
other breaks, or outside of work hours provided that employees adhere to all other
usage policies. The Town assumes no liability for loss, damage, destruction,
alteration, disclosure, or misuse of any personal data or communications transmitted
over or stored on the town’s Technology Resources.
5) The Town accepts no responsibility or liability for the loss or non-delivery of any
personal electronic mail or voicemail communications or any personal data stored on
any town property. The town strongly discourages employees from storing any
personal data on any of the town’s Technology Resources.
6) Facebook page names/topics and login information should be given to the technology
department. Official Town Facebook pages may be accessed during work hours.
Facebook logins should be a Town address, not a personal one.
7) Personal use of Facebook pages should only be accessed during lunch or break times.
Facebook chats or instant messaging is prohibited.
8) When you are not actively using Facebook you should log out. Do not leave the
account open and minimized in the task bar while you are doing other work.
The uses of personal external devices such as flash drives, iPods, iPhones, or other personal
digital devices must be approved by the Technology Department prior to use. Security
procedures will be required.
Improper Uses
Prohibition against Harassing, Discriminatory and Defamatory Use
34
The Town is aware that employees use electronic mail for correspondence that is less formal than
written memoranda. Employees must take care, however, not to let informality degenerate into
improper use. As set forth more fully in the Town’s Employee Handbook “Harassment and
Discrimination Policy”, the town does not tolerate discrimination or harassment based on
personal characteristics protected by state or federal law.
Under no circumstances may employees use the town’s Technology Resources to transmit,
receive, or store any information that is discriminatory, harassing, or defamatory in any way.
This would include, but may not be limited to language or images that are sexually explicit,
racially discriminatory, jokes or cartoons or other materials that stereotype people based on any
personal characteristic protected by law.
Employees must not use the Town’s Technology Resources to copy, retrieve, forward or send
copyrighted materials unless the employee has the author’s permission or is accessing a single
copy only for the employee’s reference.
All messages sent and received, including personal messages, and all data and information stored
on the Town’s electronic-mail system, voicemail system or other computer systems/resources are
the Town’s property regardless of the content. As such, the Town reserves the right to access all
of its Technology Resources including its computers, voicemail and electronic-mail systems, at
any time, in its sole discretion.
The Town reserves the right to access any and all information in Technology Resources,
including computer files, electronic-mail messages, and voicemail messages. Employees should
understand, therefore, that they have no right of privacy with respect to any information or
messages – including personal information or messages – created, received or maintained on the
Town’s Technology Resources. The Town may, at its discretion, inspect all files or messages on
its Technology Resources at any time for any lawful reason.
The Town may also monitor its Technology Resources at any time to determine compliance with
its policies, for purposes of legal proceedings, to investigate misconduct, to locate information, or
for any other business purpose.
All software in use on the Town’s Technology Resources is officially licensed software. No
software is to be installed or used that has not been duly paid for and licensed appropriately for
the use to which it is being put. No employee may load any software on town computers, by any
means of transmission, unless authorized in writing in advance by the Technology Assistant.
Authorization for loading software onto the town’s computers should not be given until the
software to be loaded has been thoroughly scanned for viruses.
Use of Personal Cell Phones
The intent of this policy is to ensure that the use of personal electronic devices by department
personnel does not reasonably interfere with productivity and service delivery to the Town of
Colchester, and, to ensure a safe working environment for all employees and the public at large.
The use of personal cell phones for town business is allowed if they are receiving a stipend from
the Town. The use of personal electronic communication devices shall be permitted within the
work place under the following general conditions:
Non-emergency use
 The employee needs to communicate with a family member or address some other form
of important personal business that cannot reasonably be addressed during a designated
35
break period or outside of their normal work schedule. Examples of these types of
situations may include, but not be limited to; notifying family members that you will
need to work late, being notified by a family member of a sick family member, speaking
to a service provider regarding the repair of significant personal property such as a
vehicle or furnace, etc. In these instances, the employee and their family members are
expected to use good judgment in determining the need for personal calls or texting
during working hours.
Emergency use
 The employee needs to 1) be contacted, or 2) contact others in the event of an emergency.
Examples of emergencies would include, but not be limited to, a serious illness or injury
of a family member, significant personal property damage, etc. In these instances, the
employee and their family members are expected to use good judgment in determining
the need for personal calls or texting during working hours.
General
 Under no circumstances shall an employee use a personal electronic device while
engaged in any way in a hazardous activity, or an activity that is intended to prevent a
hazard. Examples of these situations would include, but not be limited to, operating a
motor vehicle or other heavy equipment, operating small equipment such as chain saws
and other hand and power tools, working in and around the roadway, excavations or other
construction activities, flagging traffic, etc. In the event an employee must make or
receive a call under these circumstances, and as provided for under this policy, they must
first remove themselves from the hazardous activity. In the event that the employee is
performing an activity designed to prevent a hazard, they must first be replaced by
another available employee prior to making or returning a call.
Operation of Department Vehicles
No Town vehicle may be used for the personal business of any employee. A Town vehicle may
be used only with the approval of the Department Head of the affected department.
All employees operating a Town vehicle must have a valid Vermont driver’s license or a
Commercial Driver’s License (“CDL”) as applicable. Any employee who operates a Town
vehicle in violation of any motor vehicle law and is proven negligent in the operation of a town
vehicle is subject to the disciplinary process, unless it was determined to be outside of the
operator’s control. All fines assessed against a Town employee when operating a municipal
vehicle will be the responsibility of the employee unless proven otherwise.
All employees operating or riding in Town vehicles shall wear a seat belt at all times when the
vehicle is being operated.
Each employee who operates a vehicle for business purposes must agree to maintain that personal
vehicle is in proper, clean, and safe working condition.
Vehicles must be returned with the same amount of gas as when they left the premises.
Any employee who is operating a motor vehicle owned or provided by the Town must report any
damage to or problem with the motor vehicle to his/her supervisor.
Cell Phone and/or Electronic Device Usage in a Vehicle
This Cell Phone Usage in a Vehicle policy applies to any device that makes or receives phone
36
calls, leaves messages, sends text messages, surfs the Internet, or downloads and allows for the
reading of and responding to email whether the device is company-supplied or personally owned.
An employee who uses a Town-supplied device or a company-supplied vehicle is prohibited
from using a cell phone or similar device while driving, whether the business conducted is
personal or company-related.
This prohibition includes receiving or placing calls, text messaging, surfing the Internet,
receiving or responding to email, checking for phone messages, or any other related purpose
related to your employment; the town, vendors, citizens, volunteer activities, meetings, or civic
responsibilities performed for or attended in the name of the Town; or any other company
related activities not named here while driving. To safely use your cell phone or similar
device you are required to stop your vehicle in a safe location.
Travel Policy
A request for travel must be submitted to the Department Head or his/her designee for
authorization of travel to a convention, meeting, or other official Town Governmental business
that takes an employee away from his/her normal work. Documentation for travel, lodging costs,
and conference fees is required prior to approval of any such travel. The payment of expenses for
undocumented travel is prohibited.
When traveling on Town business, phone calls to immediate family members (as defined in
the bereavement section above) or pertaining to Town business will be allowed. Phone calls
to immediate family members may not exceed $5.00 per day. All requests to reimburse phone
calls must be accompanied by a receipt, which indicates to whom call(s) were made, date,
purpose, phone numbers, and the cost of the call.
Travel Reimbursement
Employees of the Town who use their personal vehicle for business purposes will be
reimbursed at the current IRS approved amount per mile for work-related travel. Travel
expenses between an employee’s home and primary work location are not reimbursable.
Most reimbursed travel will originate from the primary work location, but in cases where time
and distance make it advantageous to leave directly from home, the employee’s reimbursement
will be based on the total work-related miles from office or home whichever is closer to and
from his/her primary work location. Reimbursement requests must be reviewed with the
employee’s supervisor.
Employees who are required to travel for business purposes will be reimbursed for the
expenses shown below. Employees must have business expenses authorized in advance by the
appropriate supervisor and provide receipts to substantiate those business expenses:
Reimbursable expenses are:
 Mileage
 Tolls
 Parking fees
 Overnight accommodations
 Public transportation (air fare, cab fare and gratuity, airport shuttle, etc.)
 Postage
 Long distance business-related calls
Per Diem on the first and last days of your trip shall not follow the federal process of 75% of
a full day. Rather, first and last days shall be pro-rated based on your time of arrival at the
37
airport or time of departure in a vehicle (if leaving from a location other than Town offices,
assume departure time from Town offices) with 7AM for breakfast, noon for lunch, and 6PM for
dinner.
The Town will pay in advance per diem allowances to employees on overnight or out of
state travel, according to the GSA per diem rates, after deducting any meals that are offered and
included in conference registration and /or included in hotel fees. A particular travel shall be
either reimbursement of reasonable
38
expenses after return, or the per diem system, which may be requested before or after
travel. Employees may not request both types of allowances for one trip.
Employees must look up the GSA rates for the location they are going to, print them, review any
documents showing meals supplied, and then submit a written request for advance or post travel
per diem payment to finance along with the written approval of their Department Head. Advance
request shall be made at least five (5) business days in advance of travel is funds are requested for
the travel.
Employees are expected to use the most economical arrangements that allow the employee to
appropriately conduct business. All expenses must be business-related. If an employee fails to
obtain authorization in advance for expenses or fails to provide receipts, the Town reserves the
right to deny reimbursement or reimburse the employee a lesser amount. All requests for
reimbursement must be accompanied by detailed receipts.
Meal Time/Break Periods
All employees are encouraged to schedule a specified period of time of day suitable for a normal
meal period that is an uninterrupted period during which the employee has no duties whatsoever
to perform. However, if requirements of the job preclude that from happening they may with the
Department Head’s approval arrange a different schedule. A rest break of up to twenty (20)
minutes is considered paid working time, a meal break in order to be unpaid has to be at least 30
minutes long and the employee has to be relieved of all work duty. Please refer to your
Department Head for a suitable meal/break period schedule.
Solicitations and Distributions
Solicitation for any cause during working time and in working areas is not permitted. You are not
permitted to distribute non-Town business-related literature in work areas at any time during
working time. Working time is defined as the time assigned for the performance of your job and
does not apply to break periods and meal times.
Persons not employed by the Town are prohibited from soliciting or distributing literature in the
Town working areas. The Town will allow employees to post messages inviting other employees
to participate in non-work related activities in designated non-working areas (i.e. a designated
break room). All such postings must be professional and cannot contain offensive or
discriminatory language or images, must be dated, and will be posted for no longer than 2 weeks
at a time.
Emergency Closing/Inclement Weather
The Town will not close due to normal conditions of bad weather. If there is an extreme
condition that endangers the safety of town employees, due to weather or otherwise, closure will
be announced only by the Town Manager or his/her designee and employees will be paid for the
day. Notification may be made via phone, email or announcement on television or radio.
Each employee of the Town is expected to make his or her own personal safety decision with
regard to reporting to work on days of poor road conditions. Employees choosing not to report to
work or to work a reduced number of hours due to inclement weather will be required to use
personal or vacation time for lost hours. With approval from an employee’s supervisor, time may
also be made up.
39
When severe weather develops or is anticipated to develop during the day and a decision is made
by Management to close early, you will be compensated as if you had worked to the end of your
regularly scheduled hours for that day. If you elect to leave prior to the time a decision is made
by Management to close early, you will be required to use accrued time.
Children in the Workplace
The Town recognizes the primary responsibilities of parents to care for and insure the welfare of
their children. It is recognized that there are times when schools or day cares are closed and child
care is difficult to arrange. It is necessary to balance each employee’s ability to get his or her job
done with their responsibilities to their children when child care may be temporarily unavailable.
The needs of the Town, though, may have to come first, and employees may have to use accrued
time off to deal with child care issues.
In situations where child care is temporarily unavailable children of employees are welcome in
the Town offices under the following conditions:
 Before or after school, if the children can sit quietly doing homework, reading or other
quiet activities in a conference room or the parent’ work area.
 If children are disruptive in the office, alternative care will have to be arranged, or the
employee will need to take the child home and use accrued time off.
 Under no circumstances should the Town offices be used as an alternative to other
regular child care options and excessive use of this privilege may result in the loss of the
opportunity for employees to bring their children to work at all or the discipline of the
employee.
 Under no circumstances should children use town computers, equipment, etc.
Business Casual Dress
The Town has established a casual business attire policy; therefore we ask that employees dress
in a manner that is appropriate for the job being performed and not distracting to other employees
or general public. Remember that employees of the Town are representatives and we expect all
employees to present themselves accordingly. The nature of the work environment and the
services we perform are taken into consideration in the following guidelines:
Business casual is defined as middle ground between business formal wear and street wear.
Tattered jeans, short-shorts, halter or abbreviated shirts or blouses, sweatshirts or torn, rumpled or
dirty appearing clothing are not permitted.
There are instances where the dress policy will be revised because an activity the staff person is
involved in requires different dress.
If you are required to work in outdoor elements check in with your direct supervisor for guidance.
If your supervisor feels your attire and/or grooming is out of place, you may be asked to leave
your workplace until you are properly attired and/or groomed. Employees who violate dress code
standards may be subject to appropriate disciplinary action.
Light Duty Policy
The purpose of this policy is to provide employees who are temporarily unable to safely perform
the essential functions of their jobs with an opportunity to perform alternative duties for a limited
time. An employee or his/her supervisor may request a light duty assignment. The Town will
40
make reasonable efforts to accommodate a request for light duty assignments however light duty
may not always be available.
In order to determine if light duty is appropriate in a given situation, it is the employee’s
responsibility to provide Human Resources with a signed medical release allowing the Town to
speak directly with the attending physician. The physician should provide certification of the
condition; indicate the likely duration and any restrictions on the employee’s work abilities.
When an employee’s condition changes, the Town will require certification that the employee is
able to return to work and safely perform the essential functions of the job, with or without
reasonable accommodations.
Implementation
The Department Head or Supervisor, upon receipt of the light duty list as approved by the
physician, shall then schedule the employee to commence the light duty work as soon as possible
and after making the necessary department arrangements.
Duration
Light duty assignments are intended to be of short duration. No light duty assignments shall
exceed 90 days without permission from the Town Manager. Light duty assignments may not
always be available within a specific Department. If needs exists in other Departments, every
effort will be made to arrange light duty in that Department based on physician’s
recommendations.
During any light duty assignment, the Town at its expense may request the affected employee to
meet with the Town’s physician for a review, evaluation and set of recommendations to
determine if light duty assignments should continue. Based on these recommendations, the
employee may be asked to return to their regular position. Employees unwilling to return to their
position and unable to provide a good reason may be subject to further employment actions, up to
and including termination.
This policy shall apply to all Town of Colchester employees except where collective bargaining
agreements stipulate otherwise or insurance requirements stipulate other courses of action.
Smoking Policy
The Town of Colchester has adopted a Smoking Policy to ensure that the Town is in compliance
with Vermont’s Worksite Smoking Law. Smoking is prohibited throughout town buildings to
include, but not limited to all Municipal offices, the Burnham Memorial Library, the Town
Garage and all associated storage buildings, all waste water pumping stations, the Rescue
Building, the Meeting House, the Historical Society, and the Senior Center.
There shall be no smoking in any municipal vehicles unless the vehicle has been designated a
“smoking vehicle.” Designated “smoking vehicles” shall be those vehicles that are
predominately assigned to employees who are smokers, as identified on the Town’s property
inventory. Smoking in a designated vehicle is conditioned upon the operator taking reasonable
steps to deodorize the vehicle after use. Deodorizing systems shall be provided by the Town.
There shall be no smoking in any designated smoking vehicle when and while any non-smokers
are in or within the immediate vicinity of a “smoking vehicle.”
41
Outside Employment
An employee’s primary employment responsibility shall be to the Town. No employee shall
engage in any outside business activities during his/her regular duties during normal working
hours. Outside employment, which interferes with his/her job performance or results in a conflict
of interest for the Town or the employee shall be prohibited and shall be grounds for disciplinary
action up to and including immediate termination.
If the Department Head or his/her designee deems that such outside employment is a conflict of
interest, he/she will notify the employee in writing stating the reasons for the conflict of interest
and a date by which either the outside or Town employment must cease. The Town Manager
shall have the final say as to whether an employee’s outside employment is a conflict of interest.
The Police Department adheres to the Police Department Rules and Regulations.
Temporary Assignments
Regular employees may be temporarily assigned additional responsibilities, which require a level
of education, experience or skill that is above the normal requirements of their existing position.
Temporary assignments may be due to such things as job vacancies/leaves or temporary special
assignments. When this occurs, a temporary salary adjustment may be made to the salary/hourly
rate under the following conditions:
A. The new responsibilities are part of the job requirements for more than three weeks, and
B. The new responsibilities must have been specifically assigned as temporary duties during
a defined period of time or for a specific set of circumstances.
Under the above conditions, any salary or hourly rate adjustment to be made will be approved by
the Town Manager. As a general rule, however, temporary pay at step one of the grade they are
filling in at, or 5% whichever is greater.
42
Promotions Due to Job Openings or Position Reclassifications
When an employee is promoted or whose position is reclassified into a higher grade, a salary
increase, if any, may be granted. All such determinations will be made on a case-by-case basis
by the Town Manager and Human Resources. In determining what, if any, salary increase should
be applied; individual conditions such as salaries within the job market and internal salary
relationships will be taken into consideration. As a general rule, however, a salary or wage
increase will not be less than the minimum salary for the pay range of the new grade.
Exit Interview
Upon notice of termination, whether voluntary or involuntary, from Town employment, Human
Resources will contact the employee to schedule an exit interview. The purpose of the exit
interview is to share any ideas, concerns, or thoughts about working for the Town. No records of
the interview will be filed in the employee’s personnel file.
Employee Personnel Records
All personnel actions will be documented in an effort to promote accurate maintenance of
personnel records relative to an employee’s employment history, personal status, and leave
information.
Personnel files and original records shall be stored in a secure area within Human Resources.
Access to the files must be through Human Resources.
All files concerning a terminated employee shall be sent to and stored in Human Resources. In
the event that an employee changes jobs resulting in a change in his/her supervisor, the initial
supervisor shall forward all personnel and personnel-related files to Human Resources. No record
of any disciplinary action shall be placed in an employee’s file without written notification to the
employee.
No information shall be placed in a personnel file, or altered, removed or destroyed thereafter,
without knowledge and permission of Human Resources.
Information that is not relevant to the employee’s job performance or otherwise work-related
should not be retained in any personnel file.
Other employee information such as medical files, grievances, and electronic record keeping
system shall be stored in separate files in Human Resources and shall be considered confidential.
Personnel files shall be maintained for each Town employee and shall be considered confidential.
Employees in good standing or the employee’s designated representative (designation shall be in
writing and signed by the employee) may review their own personnel files only in the Human
Resource Department between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, or
by appointment. Additional access to an employee’s personnel file shall be given on a “need to
know” basis as determined by Human Resources and the Town Manager.
Please help keep our records current by updating our records with name, address, and telephone
number changes as soon as possible after the change.
43
Employee References
Town employees shall not provide any professional references on past or current Town
employees to prospective employers or any other organization or individual. Any requests for
references should be forwarded to Human Resources to verify information on dates of
employment and position(s) held by past or current employees.
44
SECTION 11
ETHICS POLICIES
I. POLICY STATEMENT
Public service is public trust. The affairs of government must be conducted openly, honestly
and impartially, so that the public’s confidence in the integrity of its municipal affairs shall be
maintained. The purposes of this Policy are to set forth standards of ethical conduct and to
develop and maintain a tradition of responsible and effective public service, in conformance
with the Town Charter, Section 902 which requires a Town Policy addressing ethics and
conflict of interest.
II. DEFINITIONS
As used in this section, the following words, unless a different meaning is required by the
content or is specifically prescribed, shall have the following meanings:
A. All references to “Town”, unless otherwise specified, refer to the Municipality.
B. Conflict of Interest” means
1) A real or seeming incompatibility between an employee’s private interests and his or her
public or fiduciary interests to the municipality he or she serves. A conflict of interest arises
when there is a direct or indirect personal or financial interest of an employee or a person or
group closely tied with the employee including his or her spouse, household member, child,
stepchild, parent, grandparent, grandchild, sibling, aunt or uncle, brother- or sister-in-law,
business associate, or employer or employee thereof, in the outcome of an official act or
action, or any other matter pending before the employee or before the public body two
which the employee makes recommendations. A conflict of interest may take any of the
four following forms:
a. A direct financial conflict of interest arises when an employee acts on a Town matter
that has a direct financial impact on that employer.
b. An indirect financial conflict of interest arises when an employee acts on a Town matter
that has a financial impact on a person or group closely tied to the employee.
c. A direct personal conflict of interest arises when an employee acts on a Town matter that
has a direct impact on the employee in a non-financial way but is of significant
importance to the employee.
d. An indirect personal conflict of interest arises when an employee acts on a matter in
which the employee’s may be affected because of a familial or personal relationship or
membership in some organization and a desire to help that person or organization
45
further its own interests.
C. “Independence” means actual independence or the appearance thereof.
D. “Immediate Family” means spouses, Civil Union partners, children, stepchildren,
parents, step-parents, brothers, sisters, grandparents, nephews, nieces, sons-in-law,
daughters-in-law, fathers-in-law, mothers-in-law, brothers and sisters-in-law and any
dependent or other persons living in one’s household.
E. “Close Personal Friend” means anyone beyond an employee’s immediate family with
whom the employee has or had a strong friendship, primarily outside of municipal
business, such that the involvement of the employee in any issue involving the friend’s
interests would create the appearance of a “conflict of interest” to a reasonable observer.
F. “Recusal” means stepping aside from public duty during discussions and
recommendations or decision making vote when a conflict of interest or lack of
independence has been declared.
III. CONFLICT OF INTEREST
An Employee shall not engage in any act which is in conflict with, or creates an appearance of
conflict with, the performance of official duties. An Employee is deemed to have a conflict of
interest, if she/he takes part in any of the following acts or actions:
A. Acceptance of Gifts and Favors
An Employee shall not accept, receive, take, seek, or solicit, directly or indirectly, any gift or
favor if it could be reasonably expected that the gift or favor would influence the action or
judgment of the Employee, or be considered as part of a reward for action or inaction. This
provision shall not apply to:
1. Attendance at a hosted meal when it is provided in conjunction with a meeting
directly related to the conduct of Town business or where official attendance is
appropriate.
2. An award publicly presented in recognition of public service.
3. Seasonal gifts of nominal value.of not more than $250 in total per year.
B. Appointment of Immediate Family Members or Close Personal Friends
An Employee shall not participate in the appointment, vote for appointment or discussion of
any appointment of an immediate family member or close personal friend to any office or
employment with the Town.
C. Supervision of Immediate Family Members
An Employee shall not directly supervise, appoint, evaluate or discipline the work or
employment status of an immediate family member or the affairs of the organizational unit in
which the immediate family member is employed. Employees shall not be hired or transferred
into such positions. “Immediate family” means spouses, children, stepchildren, grandchildren,
parents, stepparents, brothers, sisters, grandparents, nephews, nieces, sons-in-law, daughters-in46
law, mothers-in-law, brothers and sisters-in-law and any dependents or other persons living in
your household.
D. Influence over Subordinates
An Employee shall not use his or her position, directly or indirectly, to affect the employment
status of an immediate family member.
E. Prior Knowledge of Town Actions
An Employee shall not receive or have any financial interest in any sale by the Town of any
service or property when such financial interest was received with prior knowledge that the
Town intended to purchase or sell such property or obtain such service.
F. Other Potential Financial Interests and Agreements
An Employee shall not influence the Town’s selection of, or its conduct of business with a
person, organization or business having business with the Town, if the Employee or an
immediate family member, business associate or close personal friend has a financial interest in
or with the person, organization or business. The Employee shall not participate in the
discussion, negotiation, or vote on contracts or other business arrangements falling under this
section. In all instances disclosure of the conflict and recusal is required.
F. Private Employment
An Employee shall not engage in, solicit, negotiate for, accept private employment from, or
render services for a private interest when such employment or service is incompatible with the
proper discharge of official duties or could impair independence of judgment or action in the
performance of official duties.
G. Use of Confidential Information
An Employee shall not disclose or use, without legal authorization, confidential information
acquired in the course of official duties to engage, directly or indirectly, in any transactions to
further his or her or another person’s personal interest or to use such information to the
detriment of any person or entity.
H. Conflict with Official Duties
An Employee who holds an interest or position in any organization who is or may be entering
into a financial, business, commercial, or private transaction/arrangement with the Town which
creates a conflict with their official duties, shall disclose the conflict. In addition, recusal is
required prior to any consideration of the matter.
IV. DISCLOSURE PROCEDURE
An employee shall disclose and rectify a conflict of interest as soon as they become aware of
the conflict. The disclosure shall be made to his or her Department Head who shall either fully
address and rectify the conflict or bring it to the Town Manager or Human Resource Director.
If the Town Manager or Human Resource Director has a complaint, they may report it to the
Town Attorney.
V. STANDARDS OF CONDUCT
Every Employee of the Town of Colchester shall be subject to and abide by the following
standards of conduct:
47
A. Public Property
An Employee shall not request or permit the unauthorized use of Town-owned vehicles,
equipment, materials, or property for personal convenience or gain.
B. Disclosure of Interest in Legislation
An Employee who has a financial or material interest in any legislation coming before a Public
Body—and who has a role in preparing or presenting said legislation--shall disclose such
interest. This disclosure shall be made to the Town Manager, if an employee other than the
Town Manager and if the Town Manager, the disclosure shall be made to the Selectboard
Chair.
C. Representation Before One’s Own Municipal Department
An Employee shall not receive, or enter into any agreement for, expressed or implied,
compensation for services to be rendered in relation to any matter before the Town.
D. Representation Before Any Municipal Department for a Fee
An Employee shall not receive, or enter into any agreement, expressed or implied, for
compensation for services to be rendered in relation to any matter before any department of the
municipality, whereby compensation is to be dependent or contingent upon any action by such
municipal department with respect to such matter.
E. Advocacy/Political Activity
An Employee shall not orally, by letter, or otherwise, solicit or be in any matter concerned in
soliciting any assessment, subscription, or contribution to any political party, nor be a party to
such solicitation by others while representing the Town. An Employee shall not promise an
appointment to any municipal position as reward for any advocacy/political activity, nor shall
they retaliate or threaten to retaliate against other Officials, Members or Employees, for refusal
to support or participate in any advocacy or political issue including but not limited to the
signing of petitions.
VI. POLICY VIOLATION
Any person who believes that a violation of any portion of this Ethics Policy has occurred as a
result of an Employees’ act or action may send or deliver a signed, written complaint to the
Town Manager regarding an employee other than the Town Manager and the Chair of the
Select Board regarding a complaint regarding the Town Manager. The complaint shall include
the name of the person alleged to have committed the violation and the specific act or acts
which constitute the violation. Additionally, an employee or supervisor may also provide
verbal notice of a possible ethics policy violation to their direct supervisor, the Human
Resources Manager or the Town Manager. The Town Manager or Selectboard shall be
responsible to investigate, make findings and impose disciplinary actions up to and including
termination for violations of this Policy.
48
TOWN OF COLCHESTER
PERSONNEL POLICY MANUAL APPENDICES
APPENDIX A: TOWN OF COLCHESTER FRAUD PREVENTION POLICY
APPENDIX B: TOWN OF COLCHESTER PURCHASING POLICY
APPENDIX C: TOWN OF COLCHESTER SOCIAL MEDIA POLICY
APPENDIX D: TOWN OF COLCHESTER DRUG AND ALCOHOL FREE POLICY
APPENDIX E: TOWN OF COLCHESTER HARASSMENT POLICY
EMPLOYEE HANDBOOK ACKNOWLEDGEMENT FORM
The information in the Employee Handbook is intended to be a guide. The Handbook is not
intended to create a contract or guarantee of employment or condition of employment or benefits for
any specific period of time. The Town reserves the right to revise, supplement, or eliminate any
policy, procedure, benefit, or Handbook at any time, with or without notice and without
reissuance of the entire Handbook. Nothing contained in this Employee Handbook alters the at- will
nature of any employee’s employment.
By signing below, you acknowledge receipt of a copy of the Town of Colchester’s Employee
Handbook dated May 28, 2019You acknowledge that you will familiarize yourself with it and all
future updates to it. You also acknowledge that the handbook dated May 28, 2019 supersedes and
replaces all prior handbooks, which are no longer in effect. The Acknowledgement Form will be filed
in your Human Resources file.
EMPLOYEE NAME (PLEASE PRINT) EMPLOYEE SIGNATURE:
DATE:

Town of Colchester
Fund Balance Policy
Approved by Selectboard - 3/8/16
I. Background
The Town of Colchester maintains various funds. Except for the General Fund all have stated purposes for use of the resources therein. Funds are created to provide separate accounting of revenues, expenses, and ongoing valuation of resources. For example, the Wastewater Fund exists for the operation and maintenance of the Town’s wastewater system on the Route 7 and Route 15 corridors. The Town also maintains a Recreation Program Fund. These funds have their own revenues, expenses, assets, and liabilities which are reported within, but also independently of, the Town’s overall financials. Funds have balances, tracking of assets vs. liabilities over time. The balance of special purpose funds (those other than the General Fund) is for the benefit of the purpose of those funds.
The property tax-funded General Fund benefits the Town generally and its fund balance represents the cumulative surplus or deficit of budgets since the fund began. The General Fund is not dedicated to a specific purpose therefore, it is important to describe the purpose of any balance therein.
This policy establishes goals and provides guidance concerning the desired level of fund balance maintained by the Town. Maintenance of a fund balance will mitigate financial risk that can occur from unforeseen revenue fluctuations in tax collections and unanticipated expenditures due to disasters or unexpected and unusual public safety expenses. It will reduce the cost of borrowing, and can provide tax rate stabilization.
II. Purpose
In private business or personal finance it is ideal to have enough money available for unexpected expenses; for times of decreased revenue; or to pay bills as they come in.
For example, a homeowner may need to buy a new roof or replace a septic system, or be out of work due to illness or injury for an extended period of time. Saving for such contingencies is preferable to going into debt.
Savings are achieved in personal finance by earning more than you spend. In business, earning more than you spend, on an accounting basis, results in net income. Net income can be distributed to owners or kept by the business as retained earnings. Retained earnings may be reinvested in the business, kept for future reinvestment or be used to cover unplanned expenses or a lack of revenue.
Like a private business, the Town is an ongoing enterprise. The Town’s annual
General Fund operating budget may result in a surplus (annual revenues exceed expenses) or deficit (annual expenses exceed revenues) in any given year. The sum of the operating surpluses and deficits for all years is called the General Fund fund balance.
Maintenance of a fund balance is essential to the preservation of the financial integrity of the Town and is fiscally advantageous for both the Town and the taxpayers. As with individual or business finance; in a given year the Town may experience a lack of revenue or expenses beyond those planned.
Insufficient revenue can stem from lack of collections in a specific year or over time during extended financial duress. The average tax collection vs. budgeted tax collections from FY11 to FY15 was 99% ($80,446 less than budgeted), but in FY 11, we only collected 95.8% ($362,923 less than budgeted). Tax payments could be more significantly affected by a rise in unemployment.
Additionally, given that the local option sales tax is considered less stable than the property tax, consideration should be given to 1) not budgeting the expense of the entire local option tax revenue estimate and/or 2) maintaining a fund balance in part due to the potential for lack of sales tax revenues.
Expenses might exceed budget due to a disaster or weather event requiring significant public works expenditures, or a significant ongoing police investigation. Although the Town is often eligible for federal and state disaster aid, there is often a matching amount required. It can take years to even determine whether expenditures under a declared disaster are eligible for aid. The fund balance could be used to provide the required match of 7.5% to 25% to federal aid, and to pay for numerous costs that are not reimbursable even under a declared federal disaster.
The Town does not budget for these exceptional situations. Just as with individual or private business finance, we have a tool, the fund balance to provide funding necessary to address unexpected decreases in revenue or unbudgeted expenses.
Cash flow, or working capital, is important. It helps avoid borrowing to pay bills that come due before revenue comes in. Colchester’s first property tax installment of the fiscal year is due August 15. Therefore the Town has one-and-a-half months of expenses to cover before the first tax bill is due.
Reducing cost of borrowing is a way to save money over time. Bonds for debt issued on behalf of the Town of Colchester are generally rated Aa2 by Moody’s. This is the eighth of ten “investment grade” rankings for bonds, which are designated from AAA (highest) to Baa3 (lowest). The interest rate difference from an Aa2 bond (top 8 of 10 investment grades) to a Baa1 bond (bottom 3 of 10 investment grades) is about 0.7%. These investment grades do not include “speculate grades” Ba1 through C, otherwise known as junk bonds. The Town has $5.2 million in outstanding debt to be paid off in 12 years. On this amount and length of loan the difference in borrowing costs between Aa2 and Baa3 is about 28% or approximately $250,000. Having a healthy fund balance is one of the many measures taken when going to market for bonds.
Stabilization of Tax Rate, is another use for a fund balance, especially when the tax rate, like ours is based on growth in value of property through investment and development. In the last five years (ending in FY15 to avoid incorporating the local option tax) net municipal liability (operating and capital expenses funded by property taxes) has grown by 2.1% annually. Yet, the property tax rate, per hundred dollars of property valuation, has decreased by 23% over this five year period. This was due to increased property value and investment of 4.3% annually over this same period.
Should the rate of growth decrease, which is possible because we have a limited supply of developable land, and service needs increase in cost, it would be advantageous to be able to mute the effect of the increase in any given year by applying a portion of the fund balance to the operating budget. This would moderate the impact of a tax increase in any given year.
III. Definitions
Fund balance is a measurement of available financial resources and is the difference between total assets and total liabilities.
GASB Statement 54 distinguishes fund balance classified based on the relative strength of the constraints that control the purposes for which specified amounts can be spent. Beginning with the most restrictive constraints, fund balance amounts will be reported in the following categories:
1) Nonspendable fund balance – amounts that are not in a spendable form (e.g., inventory such as gasoline in tanks, or prepaid expenses such as insurance).
2) Restricted fund balance – amounts that can be spent only for the specific purposes stipulated by parties external to the Town of Colchester (e.g., grants or donations).
3) Committed fund balance – amounts that can be used only for a specific purpose determined by a vote of the voters, including votes on budgets that include commitment of a fund balance. Commitments can be uncommitted by vote or by expiration of the authorization (e.g., the budget year has concluded).
4) Assigned fund balance – amounts intended to be used by the government for specific purposes. Intent can be expressed by the Selectboard.
5) Unassigned fund balance – includes all amounts not contained in other classifications and is the residual classification of the General Fund only. Unassigned amounts are available for any legal purpose.
IV. Policy
Annual Review of Fund Balance The fund balance shall be reviewed annually by the Selectboard after receipt and presentation of the audit by the auditor. Due to the timing of this review, changes to the fund balance as it relates to minimum and maximum unassigned fund balance shall be addressed in the next capital planning or general fund budget process that begins after this review.
Minimum Unassigned Fund Balance It is the goal of the Town to achieve and maintain an unassigned fund balance in the General Fund at fiscal year-end that is not less than 13% of the prior year’s operating expenditures, which shall include for this purpose the operating budget and bond payments.
This formula does not include: a) funding of voter approved capital plans, since they are internal commitments that can be revisited in times of significant economic duress, or b) Legislatively required payments to the School District, regardless of whether or not taxes are actually collected.
If the unassigned fund balance at fiscal year-end falls below the goal, the Town shall develop a restoration plan to achieve and maintain the minimum fund balance.
Maximum Unassigned Fund Balance It is the goal of the Town to achieve and maintain an unassigned fund balance in the General Fund at fiscal year-end that does not exceed 17% of the prior year’s operating expenditures, which shall include for this purpose the operating budget and bond payments.
This formula does not include: a) funding of voter approved capital plans, since they are internal commitments that can be revisited in times of significant economic duress, or b) Legislatively required payments to the School District, regardless of whether or not taxes are actually collected.
If the unassigned fund balance at fiscal year-end exceeds this goal, the Town shall develop a plan to achieve and maintain the minimum fund balance. The plan should take into consideration the operating and capital needs of the Town.
The plan shall consider carefully the use of the fund balance so as not to cause tax spikes. For example: If a) the budgeted general fund increase was $300,000 (3%) over the prior year and there was no increase in grand list value and b) $300,000 of the fund balance was used to eliminate the tax increase altogether. Then the following year: 1) there is again no grand list growth, and another similar budget increase and 2) no fund balance is applied to the budget, then, the resulting tax increase would be 6%. It would be more advantageous (and palatable to taxpayers) to apply the $300,000 over the course of several years to avoid a spike when the fund balance is not used.
The Town could reduce the fund balance by spending it on capital projects. This would be done by both a) having a project approved through the Selectboard held public hearing process which authorizes capital projects and b) funding the projects through a transfer from the general fund to a capital project fund through the voter approval of the general fund budget.

TOWN OF COLCHESTER
HARASSMENT POLICY
Policy Prohibiting Unlawful Harassment and Discrimination
The Town of Colchester intends to provide a work environment that is pleasant, professional, and
free from intimidation, hostility or other offenses that might interfere with work performance.
Unlawful harassment of any sort – verbal, physical, and/or visual will not be tolerated.
The Town expressly prohibits any form of unlawful discrimination or harassment based on an
employee’s race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, ancestry, and place of birth, sexual
orientation, or disability or on the basis of any other characteristic protected under State or
Federal law. Unlawful interference with the ability of our employees to perform their expected
job duties shall not be tolerated and may result in disciplinary action including but not limited to
immediate termination.
Unlawful Behavior
Workplace harassment can take many forms. It may be, but is not limited to, words, signs,
offensive jokes, cartoons, pictures, posters, pranks, intimidation, physical assaults or contact, or
violence that substantially interferes with an individual’s work performance or creates an
intimidating, hostile, or offensive working environment. Harassment is not necessarily sexual in
nature. It may also take the form of other activities, including derogatory statements, not directed
to the targeted employee but observed by the affected employee. Other prohibited conduct
includes, but is not limited to, written material such as notes, photographs, cartoons, articles of a
harassing or offensive nature, and taking retaliatory action against an employee for discussing or
making a harassment complaint.
Unlawful harassment may include, but is not limited to, actions such as these:
 threatening a person with violence
 bullying or intimidating an employee
 making derogatory or discriminatory remarks
 persistent name-calling
 making numerous sexist, racist, homophobic, anti-semitic or other discriminatory
comments about others
 circulating or displaying written materials or pictures, or other negative actions based on
an employee’s association with any of the category’s listed above
This list is not intended to be all-inclusive.
If an employee believes that he or she has been subject to unlawful harassment by a Town
employee or anyone who does business with the Town, he or she must follow the reporting steps
outlined below with regard to harassment. Employees should report any incidents or complaints
to their Department Head, Human Resources, Town Manager or Town Attorney whether or not
the victim requests the town to do so. Failure to address appropriately such unlawful harassment
complaints or suspected acts shall be considered to be in violation of this policy. The Town will
follow the procedures indicated below if it receives a complaint of unlawful harassment, or has
reason to know that such harassment is occurring.
Employee Responsibilities
Any employee who believes that she or he has been the target of unlawful discrimination or
harassment or who believes she or he has been subjected to retaliation for having brought or
supported a complaint of harassment, should first directly inform the offending person or persons
that such conduct is offensive and must stop. If the employee does not wish to communicate
directly with the alleged harasser(s) or discriminator(s) or if direct communication has been
ineffective, then the complaining party is encouraged to report the situation as soon as practical to
one of the Town officials listed, who are designated to receive such complaints or reports,
providing any information that will be helpful in the investigation.
Complaint Procedures and Employer Responsibilities
In order to ensure that any allegation of unlawful harassment or unlawful discrimination can be
properly investigated and reviewed in a timely fashion, the following procedures shall be
followed in circumstances when an employee feels he/she is the victim of harassment or
discrimination:
1) An employee who believes he or she has been unlawfully discriminated against,
unlawfully harassed or sexually harassed shall report the incident, as soon as practical, to
one of the following people within the organization- Department Head, Human
Resources, Town Manager, or the Town Attorney.
2) A reported allegation of unlawful harassment or discrimination will be promptly
investigated in an internal investigation. Care will be taken to protect the identity of the
complaining party and of the accused party or parties, except as may be reasonably
necessary to successfully complete the investigation.
3) Confidentiality cannot be guaranteed and action must be taken by the Town to investigate
each complaint, even if the complainant asks the Town not to pursue the matter. It shall
be a violation of the policy for any employee who learns of the investigation or complaint
to take any retaliatory action, which affects the investigation or the working environment
of any person involved in the investigation.
4) Human Resources or the Town Attorney shall review the results of the investigation and
shall notify the complaining employee and the accused of the findings of the
investigation. In cases where facts support the allegations, corrective action with regard
to the offending employee will be taken.
5) In the event that a violation of this policy has been found, disciplinary action, up to an
including termination may be taken, as deemed appropriate by the Town Manager.
6) In no case shall an employee reporting an incident of unlawful harassment or
discrimination be subject to adverse employment action based on such reporting except
that an employee found to have made an allegation that was maliciously intended or
knowingly false.
7) Retaliation against an employee for filing a complaint of unlawful harassment or
discrimination or for cooperating in an investigation of harassment or discrimination, is
unlawful except as set forth in #5 above.
If the complainant is dissatisfied with the employer’s action, she or he may file a complaint by
writing or calling any of the following state or federal agencies:
Vermont Attorney General’s office, Civil Rights Unit, 109 State Street, Montpelier, Vt. 05602.
Tel. 802.828.3171 (voice/TDD). Complaints should be filed within 300 days of the adverse
action.
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, John F. Kennedy Federal Building – 475
Government Center, Boston, MA 02203 – Phone 1-800-669-4000 – Fax: 617-565-3196 – TTY:
1-800-669-6820 Complaints must be filed within 300 days of the adverse action.
Copies of this policy will be provided to every employee. Additional copies will be available
through Human Resources.

SOCIAL MEDIA POLICY
The Town of Colchester endorses the secure use of social media to enhance communication,
collaboration, and information exchange; streamline processes; and foster productivity. By openly
sharing knowledge with other government entities, local partners, and the public, we can provide more
effective solutions and efficiencies to enhance excellence in serving the Town of Colchester.
This policy is not meant to address one particular form of social media; rather social media in general, as
advances in technology will occur and new tools will emerge. This policy identifies potential uses that
may be explored or expanded upon as deemed reasonable by administration.
The use of social media technology follows the same standards of professional practice and conduct
used in day-to-day interactions. As the name implies, social media involves the building of online
communities or network to encourage participation and engagement. To avoid mistakes that could
result in reputational or ethical misuse of a well-functioning social media relationship, it is important we
manage any potential risks through a common-sense approach as well as proactively monitoring the
development of such applications.
DEFINITIONS
Blog—a self-published diary or commentary on a particular topic that may allow visitors to post
responses, reactions, or comments. The term is short for web log.
Page—the specific portion of a social media website where content is displayed and managed by an
individual(s) with administrator rights.
Post—content an individual shares on a social media site or the act of publishing content on a site.
Profile—information that a user provides about him/herself on a social networking site.
Social media—a category of internet-based resources that integrate user-generated content and user
participation. This includes, but is not limited to, social networking site (Facebook, Tumblr, LinkedIn),
microblogging site (Twitter, Nixle), photo and video sharing sites (Flickr, YouTube, Snapchat), wikis
(Wikipedia), blogs and news sites (Digg, Reddit). This includes public facing content of new sites or other
forms of public commentary.
Social networks—online platforms where users can create profiles, share information, and socialize with
others using a range of technologies.
Speech—expression or communication of thoughts or opinions in spoken words, in writing, by
expressive conduct, symbols, photographs, video, or related forms of communication.
Web 2.0—the second generation of the World Wide Web focused on shareable, user-generated
content, rather than static web pages. Some use this term interchangeably with social media.
Wiki—web pages that can be edited collaboratively.
2
GUIDELINES FOR COMMENTING & POSTING
 Know and follow the conduct guidelines as mentioned in Section 1 of the Town of Colchester
Employee Handbook.
 Published content is persistent in the public domain. When you are representing the Town of
Colchester in an official capacity, the Town is responsible for the content you publish.
 Posting offensive, obscene, threatening or abusive content is strictly prohibited. The Town will
remove comments that contain abusive, vulgar, offensive, threatening or harassing language,
personal attacks of any kind, or offensive terms that target specific individuals or groups.
Individuals are fully responsible for libelous or defamatory comments.
 Hate-speech will not be tolerated. Posts containing racism, homophobia, sexism, or any other
form of hate-speech will be removed from the Town’s site.
 Spam and commercial content will be removed. The Town will remove posts or comments used
for political and commercial purposes or for soliciting funds. Gratuitous links to sites are viewed
as spam and will result in the comment being removed.
 Users may report concerns. Moderators will endeavor to review those concerns as soon as
possible. In some instances, we will not have the resources to review user comments and posts,
but we do reserve the right to edit or delete user comments and posts in a manner consistent
with our mission and policies. The Town cannot remove all posts that have been reported and
the Town cannot respond individually to every report.
 The Town of Colchester reserves the right to share or repost any information shared via social
media.
 If you publish content to any website outside of the Town’s official presence and it is
associated/related to the Town of Colchester, consider a disclaimer such as this: “The postings
are my own and do not necessarily represent the Town of Colchester’s positions, strategies, or
opinions.”
 Respect copyright, fair use, and financial disclosure laws. Always protect sensitive information.
Do not publish or report conversations that are meant to be pre-decisional or internal unless
given permission by management.
 Be aware of your Town of Colchester association in online social networks. If you identify
yourself as a Town employee or have a public facing position, ensure your profile and related
content (even if it is personal and not of an official nature) is consistent with how you wish to
present yourself as a Town professional, appropriate with public trust associated with your
position, and conforms to existing conduct standards. Have no expectation of privacy.
 Remain focused on customers, existing commitments, and achieving the Town’s mission. Your
use of social media tools should never interfere with your primary duties.
3
COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOL
Manager’s Office will:
 Assign a primary staff person to coordinate/facilitate communications and timing (presently,
Economic Development Director). This position is a facilitator and is not responsible for drafting
or editing content – each respective Department assumes responsibility for drafting, editing and
accuracy.
 Maintain a list of approved social media pages that have been recommended and/or reviewed
by the Social Media Committee
 Reinforce brand standards that are a representative of “Colchester, VT: What do you want to do
today” as described in the Heritage Plan
 Evaluate and approve all new social media with input from the Social Media Committee
 Have final authority to edit/remove content from a department’s social media pages.
Social Media Committee will:
 Recommend social media pages for use by departments, and review new types of social media
for effectiveness, efficiencies, and security.
 Work directly with departments to coordinate social media strategies and tactics, including
digital communications for specific events and programs.
 Keep up with trends in social media and provide training materials and workshops for
departments.
 Train employees on best practices and implementation on an ongoing basis.
 Manage the program for documenting authorized agents, account logins, and passwords for the
purpose of emergency management.
 Set standards for measuring effectiveness of social media, working with departments to
establish reporting techniques and success metrics.
 Consider records retention and public records issues whenever implementing social media.
Departments will:
 Assume responsibility for drafting, editing and accuracy of content and working with
Communications Director on timing of release.
 Oversee and manage social media pages in use by staff.
 Designate and train authorized staff in the proper use of social media and employee training
created by the Social Media Committee
 Provide the Social Media Committee with up-to-date lists of social media pages, account logins,
and passwords for the purpose of emergency management.
 Change social media passwords once per year, or immediately if authorized agents are removed
as administrators or leave Town of Colchester employment.
Authorized Staff will:
 Uphold brand standards and values when representing a department on social media.
 Answer questions and respond to inquiries in a timely manner, flag concerns when appropriate
(see Social Media Response Chart).
 Monitor and measure social media, analyze effectiveness and make recommendations to the
department for continuous improvement.
This policy is to be review annually by the Social Media Committee, Town Manager, and Selectboard.



























































































































































































































































































































