CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS



1-1	General Authority to Enact Ordinance

1-2	Purpose of Chapter

1-3	Code Supersedes Prior Ordinances

1-4	State and Federal Laws and Regulations  Supersede Ordinance 1-5	Reference Applies to Amendments
1-6	Waiver Fee - definition

1-7	Effective Date and Time

1-8	Copy of Ordinance on File

1-9	Amendments to Ordinance

1-10	Filing of Ordinance

1-11	Division of Ordinance

1-12	Ordinance Kept Up-To-Date

1-13	Sale of Ordinance

1-14	Altering or Tampering with Ordinance - penalties 1-15	Severability of Ordinance
1-16	Designation of Civil Violations and Criminal Violations 1-17	Penalties - general
1-18	Penalties - Civil Violations

1-19	Civil Violations - Waiver Fees

1-20	Penalties - Criminal Violations

1-21	Criminal Violations - Waiver Fees

1-22	Penalties - Criminal Violations (Incarceration) 1-23	Failure to Pay Fines - penalties
1-24	Collection of Fees and Interest for Late Payments

1-25	Returned Checks

1-26	Injunctive Abatement of Nuisances and Continuing Violations 1-27	Conflict of Interest
1-28	Enforcement
 
1-1	General Authority to Enact Ordinance


The Chapters contained herein, and collectively referred to as the Manchester Unified Ordinance, Ordinance or Ordinances, have been duly adopted by the Legislative Body of the Town, the Selectboard, in accordance with 24 VS.A. Chapter 59.

1-2	Purpose of Chapter


The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the orderly operation of Town government.


1-3	Code Supersedes Prior Ordinances


(1)	This Ordinance shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Ordinance, except such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or continued in force.

(2)	Whenever this Ordinance conflicts with Town policies, practices or procedures, this Ordinance shall supersede any policies, practices or procedures. Whenever two or more ordinances or sections conflict, the ordinance or section adopted later shall supersede the earlier adopted ordinance or section, and the more specific provision shall supersede the more general one.

1-4	State and Federal Laws and Regulations Supersede Ordinance


Whenever this Ordinance conflicts with the laws or regulations of the State of Vermont or the United States, the laws or regulations of the State of Vermont or the United States shall supersede this Ordinance.

1-5	Reference Applies to Amendments


Any reference to the Manchester Unified Ordinance or to any ordinance of the Town codified herein, shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions duly adopted heretofore or hereafter.

1-6	Waiver Fee - definition


The term waiver fee shall mean waiver of the right of appearance and right to contest by persons charged with a violation of this Ordinance by payment, received either 30 days after the date of issuance of the notice of violation or postmarked not more than 30 days after the date of such issuance .
 
1-7	Effective Date and Time


This Manchester Unified Ordinance  and each of the Chapters shall take effect, unless  otherwise noted herein, 60 days after approval by the Selectboard and subject to disapproval  as provided in 24 VS.A.  § 1973.

1-8	Copy of Ordinance on File


Upon adoption, a copy of the Ordinance shall be certified by the Clerk of the Town of Manchester by impressing thereon the Seal of the Town, as provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Town Clerk, to be made available as a public record to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.

1-9	Amendments to Ordinance


(1)	Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Ordinance, when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the legislative intent to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Ordinance so that reference to the "Manchester Unified Ordinance" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Ordinance shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the book containing said Ordinance as amendments and supplements thereto.

(2)	The Town Clerk shall be charged with the orderly codification of the Ordinance, and may make non-substantive modifications to the Ordinance in order to provide for the orderly codification and indexing of the Ordinance. Whenever the Town Clerk makes modifications to the Ordinance the Town Clerk shall notify the Selectboard in writing.

1-10	Filing of Ordinance


Sufficient copies of the Ordinance shall be maintained in the office of the Town Clerk for inspection by the public at all times during regular office hours. The Ordinance shall also be published on the Town's website.
 
1-11	Division of Ordinance


In order to provide for the orderly codification of this Ordinance, the Ordinance shall be divided into Chapters, which shall be assigned a chapter number. Each Chapter may be divided into sections, subsections, paragraphs and clauses.

1-12	Ordinance Kept Up-To-Date


The Town Clerk shall maintain an up-to-date, certified copy of the book containing the Ordinance in his or her office for the use of the public . All changes in the Ordinance and all Chapters adopted subsequent to the effective date of this codification shall be included in the Ordinance book by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are printed as supplements to the book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein .

1-13	Sale of Ordinance


Copies of the Ordinance may be purchased from the Town Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by the Selectboard, but not to exceed five cents per page.

1-14	Altering or Tampering with Ordinance - penalties


(1)	It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part  or portion of the Ordinance or to alter or tamper with such Ordinance in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Town of Manchester to be misrepresented thereby.

(2)	A violation of this section shall be punishable as a Second Degree civil violation.


1-15	Severability of Ordinance


Each chapter and section of this Ordinance and every part of each section is an independent section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof.
 
1-16	Designation of Civil Violations and Criminal Violations


(1)	Unless explicitly designated otherwise, all violations established and contained in the Ordinance are designated civil violations.

(2)	Prosecution of those violations contained in the Ordinance that are designated criminal violations may be brought on behalf of the State's Attorney, the Town by the Town Attorney or any other officer designated by the Selectboard .

1-17	Penalties - general


(1)	Where penalties are specified for violation of any chapter or provision thereof, they shall continue to apply unless and until amended . If a monetary fine is specified in any chapter or provision thereof which is greater than the penalty amount set forth in this Section and Sections 17, 18, 19 or 20 of this Chapter, the provision that provides for a greater penalty shall control.

(2)	Violations of this Ordinance shall be divided into civil violations and criminal violations.


(3)	The penalty for Civil Violations shall not exceed $800.00 per violation, and the penalty for Criminal Violations shall not exceed $500.00 per violation . Each day that this Ordinance is violated shall constitute a separate violation; provided nonetheless, that when the specific and separate actions of an individual violate this Ordinance each separate action shall constitute a separate violation.

(4)	Whenever this Ordinance does not specify if a violation is a First Degree Violation, Second Degree Violation or a Third Degree Violation, the violation shall be considered a civil, Third Degree Violation.

(5)	For the purposes of establishing the number of previous violations in order to determine if a violation is a "First Violation", "Second Violation", or "Third and Subsequent", any violation of a specific chapter of this Ordinance in the previous two calendar years (730 days) shall constitute a violation. The term "Third and Subsequent" shall mean three or more violations .

(6)	Anyone who commits five or more violations of any specific Chapter in a two-year period may be considered a habitual offender, punished as a First Degree criminal violation .
 
1-18	Penalties - Civil Violations


Fines for violations of this Ordinance that are classified as Civil Violations shall be established as follows:



Violation  Classification	
First Violation	
Second Violation	
			Third and Subsequent

First Degree Violation	
$400.00	
$600.00	
$800.00

Second Degree Violation	
$150.00	
$300.00	
$500.00

Third Degree Violation	
$100.00	
$200.00	
$300.00



1-19	Civil Violations - Waiver Fees


Waiver fees, as defined by Section 5 of this Chapter, for Civil Violations are established as follows:



Violation  Classification	
First Violation	
Second Violation	
Third and Subsequent

First Degree Violation	
$200.00	
$300.00	
$500.00

Second Degree Violation	
$75.00	
$150.00	
$300.00

Third Degree Violation	
$50.00	
$100.00	
$200.00



1-20	Penalties - Criminal Violations


Fines for violations of this Ordinance that are classified as Criminal Violations shall be established as follows:


Violation	
Classification	
First Violation	
Second Violation	
Third and Subsequent

First Degree Violation	
$300.00	
$400.00	
$500.00

Second Degree Violation	
$150.00	
$200.00	
$400.00

Third Degree Violation	
$100.00	
$150.00	
$300.00
 
1-21	Criminal Violations - Waiver Fees


Waiver fees, as defined by section 5 of this Chapter, for Criminal Violations are established as follows:



Violation Classification	
First Violation	
Second Violation	
Third and Subsequent

First Degree Violation	
$200.00	
$300.00	
$400.00

Second Degree Violation	
$75.00	
$100.00	
$300.00

Third Degree Violation	
$50.00	
$75.00	
$200.00



1-22	Penalties - Criminal Violations (Incarceration)


In addition to the penalties established in sections 20 and 21 of this Chapter for Criminal Violations, the following incarceration in a house of correction may apply for Criminal Violations of this Code:


Violation Classification	
First Violation	
Second Violation	
Third and Subsequent

First Degree Violation	
Not more than 10 days	
Not more than 20 days	
Not more than 30 days

Second Degree Viola tion	
Not more than 5 days	
Not more than 10 days	
Not more than 15 days

Third Degree Violation	
Not more than 1 day	
Not more than 5 days	
Not more than 10 days



1-23	Failure to Pay Fines - penalties


(1)	Interest Rate and Administrative Fee. Unless otherwise under appeal, after 15 days, all unpaid fines for violations of the Ordinance imposed by a Vermont court shall be subject to a $20 administrative collection fee, plus the following accruing interest: 1 percent interest for up to the first 30 days, and an additional 1percent for each 30 days thereafter, assessed on the first day of the 30 day period and not prorated .

(2)	Civil First Degree Violations. Unless otherwise under appeal, failure to pay a fine associated with a Civil First Degree Violation within 60 days of being found responsible by a Vermont court of jurisdiction shall be considered a First Degree Criminal Violation.
 
(3)	Civil Second Degree Violations . Unless otherwise under appeal, failure to pay a fine associated with a Civil Second Degree Violation within 60 days of being found responsible by a Vermont court of jurisdiction  shall be considered a Second Degree Criminal Violation.

(4)	Civil Third Degree Violations. Unless otherwise under appeal, failure to pay a fine associated with a Civil Third Degree Violation within 60 days of being found responsible by a Vermont court of jurisdiction shall be considered a Third Degree Criminal Violation.

(5)	Criminal Violations . Unless otherwise under appeal, failure to pay a fine associated with a criminal violation within 60 days of being found responsible by a Vermont court of jurisdiction  shall be considered a First Degree Criminal Violation.

(6)	Town Permits, Licenses and Other Government Actions. Any person or organization that fails to pay a fine associated with a civil violation or criminal violation within 30 days of being found responsible
by a Vermont court of jurisdiction shall not be eligible for pennits and licenses from the Town until all fines and fees are paid in full.

1-24	Collection of Fees and Interest for Late Payments


(1)	Unless otherwise provided for herein or otherwise impractical, payment for all senrices and goods provided by the Town shall be made before or at the time of senrice or delivery of goods. The Town may, at its sole discretion, decline to provide senrices or goods if payment is not made at the time of senrice or delivery of goods.

Any payments or portion of payments not received by the Town before or at the time of senrice or delivery of goods, or any payments or portion of payments not received or postmarked within seven calendar days shall be subject to the following interest:  1 percent interest for days 1 to 30 (with the day after the original payment due date used as the first day); an additional 1 percent interest for days 31 to 60; and an additional 1 percent for each 30 days thereafter.

In addition, due and unpaid balances more than 60 days old may be referred by the Town Manager to a . collection agency. Due and unpaid balances more than 90 days old may be subject to civil court proceedings at the discretion of the Town Manager.





8
 
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the Town Manager from approving a written payment plan; provided, that interest charges shall continue to accumulate during the term of the payment plan and payments shall
be first applied to late fees.  No criminal charge shall be brought for failure to pay a civil penalty during any period in which the violator is in compliance with a written repayment plan for such civil penalty.

This subsection shall not apply to property tax payments and water and sewer payments, which are governed by state law.

(2)	When and if the Town chooses to invoice for services or goods, payment shall be due thirty calendar days after the issuance of the invoic . Any unpaid balance shall be subject to the following interest after 30 days from mailing or delivery in hand of the invoice: 1 percent interest for days 1 to 30 (with the day after the original payment due date used as the first day); an additional 1 percent interest for days 31 to 60; and
an additional 1 percent for each 30 days thereafter.


In addition, due and unpaid balances more than 60 days old may be referred by the Town Manager to a collection agency. Due and unpaid balances more than 90 days old may be subject to civil court proceedings at the discretion of the Town Manager.

Nothing in this section shall prohibit the Town Manager from approving a written payment plan; provided, that interest charges shall continue to accumulate during the term of the payment plan and payments shall be first applied to late fees.

This subsection shall not apply to property tax payments and water and sewer payments, which are governed by state law.

(3)	The Town shall, whenever practical and allowable under state and federal laws and regulations, charge the user of a debit card and credit card any fees and charges related to the use of debit cards or credit cards.

(4)	Unless otherwise provided for herein or by the laws of the State of Vermont, whenever a document must be recorded with the Town Clerk's Office related to a service or good provided by the Town to another  party, the fee for recording the document shall be paid by the party for whom the Town provided
·	the service or good.







9
 
1-25	Returned Checks


(1)	Whenever a check is presented to the Town of Manchester for payment and the check is returned to the Town of Manchester for insufficient funds or other reasons, the Town shall assess the fee established in Addendum A, unless waived by the Town Manager.

(2)	Whenever a person, business or organization has had three or more checks returned to the Town of Manchester for insufficient funds or because an account has been closed, the Town may require subsequent payments to be made with cash or guaranteed instrument such as a bank check or cashier's check.

1-26	Injunctive Abatement of Nuisances and Continuing Violations


(1)	In an event where violation of the Ordinance may constitute a public nuisance, and when the nuisance is not abated, cured and discontinued by the violator, then, in addition to any other monetary penalty which may be applicable, the Town, through its Town Manager, may bring an action in Superior Court for abatement of the nuisance, may seek an order for abatement of the nuisance, and may exercise any other available legal or equitable remedy, including but not limited to damages, costs and attorneys' fees against violator (including the owner of any real property on which the claimed nuisance may exist if the violator and the owner are not the same person).

(2)	In the case of a continuing violation of any provision of any Ordinance, which continuing violation is not designated to be a nuisance or able to be construed as a nuisance under common law, state statute or other decisional law of the State of Vermont, and the claimed violation is not cured and remedied by the violator (including the owner of any real property on which the claimed continuing violation may exist if the violator and the owner are not the same person), then the Town, through its Town Manager, in addition to any other monetary fine provided in the ordinance in question, shall have the option of pursuing an action in Superior Court seeking an order compelling enforcement of the ordinance in question and cure or remedy of the claimed continuing violation. The Town shall be entitled to recovery of all damages and expenses, including court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees as may be incurred by the Town in such action.










10
 
1-27	Conflict of Interest


(1)	Definition . Conflict of interest for a Town employee, officer or appointee shall mean a direct or indirect personal or pecuniary (financial) interest of such employee, officer or appointee, his or her spouse or close relative, household member, business associate, employer or employee, in the outcome of a decision, cause, proceeding, application or any other matter pending before a Town employee, officer or appointee . For the purposes of this section, a close relative includes domestic partner or co-habitant, parent, stepparent, grandparent, child, stepchild, grandchild, sibling, aunt, uncle, niece or nephew, parent-in-law, sibling-in-law and other relatives within two degrees of consanguinity. A Conflict of Interest shall not arise in a case that the employee, officer or appointee has a personal or pecuniary interest in the outcome no greater than that of other persons generally affected by the decision. The Town Manager or the chair of the appropriate board or commission, shall be authorized to determine whether an individual should be considered disqualified with respect to any particular matter based on this section.

(2)	All employees (including full time employees, Police Department union employees, Fire Department employees, part-time employees, seasonal employees and employees of the Town Clerk's Office), and appointed and elected board and commission members shall be disqualified from participating as a representative of the Town in the decision-making process ifhe or she has a conflict of interest, as defined in the paragraph entitled "Definition," in a matter under consideration . Such persons shall submit a written statement or make a verbal statement that includes a brief explanation of the conflict. The statement shall be entered into or attached to the minutes or retained by the Town Manager.

(3)	Full time employees, including Police Department union employees, part-time and seasonal employees, shall not personally or through any member of his or her household, business associate, employer or employee represent, appear for, or negotiate in a private capacity on behalf of any person or organization in any decision, cause, proceeding, application or other matter pending before the employee if he or she has a conflict of interest, as defined in subsection 1 of this section, in a matter under consideration unless waived by the Town Manager.

(4)	No official action of the Town of Manchester shall be voidable or void as a result of the  participation of a "disqualified" person under this section if the action otherwise conformed to applicable law. However, the disqualified person may be subject to appropriate discipline, up to and including removal or dismissal, for violations of this section.


11
 
(5)	The enforcing authority for this section shall be the Municipal Compliance Officer, who shall confer with the Town Manager whenever a Town employee, except the Town Manager, may have violated this section; and the Selectboard whenever an appointed or elected official or the Town Manager may have violated this section.

(6)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.


1-28	Enforcement


The Municipal Compliance Officer is hereby designated as the enforcement authority of this Chapter.









 


Chair of the Selectboard




Attested, Town of Manchester Town Clerk:
a,·,tcr:cfl .J.Jv.ldo
Town Clerk
 
I	I
Date of Enactment by Selectboard
 
CHAPTER II

ORGANIZATION AND OPERATION OF TOWN GOVERNMENT



2-1	Authority to Enact Chapter

2-2	Purpose of Chapter

2-3	Division of Town Government into Departments, Offices and Divisions 2-4	Town Boards and Commissions - general
2-5	Appointment of Board and Commission Members 2-6	Student Appointments to Boards and Commissions
2-7	Town Board and Commission appointees - requirements

2-8	Robert's Rules of Order and Adoption of Rules by Boards and Commissions 2-9	Other Appointments  and Nominations  by the Selectboard
2-10	Other Duties of Selectboard

2-11	Designation of Town Legal Counsel by Selectboard 2-12	Designation of Town Engineer by Selectboard
2-13	Emergency  Management

2-14	Role of Assistants

2-15	Municipal Compliance Officers - appointment and powers 2-16	Prosecution of Municipal Violations
2-17	Public Records

2-18	Town Agent

2-19	Delinquency and Permits and Licenses

2-20	Issuance of Citation Books to Enforcement Officers and Record Keeping 2-21	Recording of Appointments with Town Clerk
2-22	Assault and Bribing of Town Officials - prohibitions 2-23	Aid To Other Municipalities
2-24	Conflicting Offices and Prohibitions

2-25	Enforcement
 
2-1	Authority to Enact Chapter


This Chapter was duly adopted by the Legislative Body of the Town, the Selectboard, in accordance with 24 V.S.A., Chapter 59.

2-2	Purpose of Chapter


The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the orderly operation of Town government.


2-3	Division of Town Government into Departments, Offices and Divisions


(1)	The Selectboard may appoint a Town Manager, pursuant to Title 24, Chapter 37, who shall have general supervision of the affairs of the Town, be the administrative head of all departments of Town government and shall be responsible for the efficient administration thereof; and be responsible for all the specific duties delegated in Title 24, Chapter 37, Section 1236 and any other duties delegated to the Town Manager by the laws of the State of Vermont. The Town Manager may appoint assistants to help ensure the efficient performance of duties.

(2)	The Town Manager shall serve as the Emergency Management Director; provided, that the Town Manager may appoint an Emergency Management Coordinator to assist with emergency management related duties.

(3)	The Selectboard hereby establishes the following Departments, Offices and Divisions:


Accounting and Finance Office, administered by the Director of Accounting and Finance, who shall be appointed by the Town Manager in consultation with the Town Treasurer.

Assessing Office, administered by the Municipal Assessor, who shall be appointed by the Selectboard and supervised by the Town Manager.

Human Resources and Operations Division, within the Office of the Town Manager, administered by the Human Resources and Operations Manager, who shall be appointed by the Town Manager.

Emergency Management Office, administered by the Town Manager with assistance from the Emergency Management Coordinator, who shall be appointed by the Town Manager.
 
Economic Development Office, administered by the Economic Development Officers, who shall be appointed by the Town Manager.

Fire Department, administered by the Fire Chief, who shall be appointed by the Town Manager.


Parks and Recreation Department, administered by the Director of Parks and Recreation, who shall be appointed by the Town Manager. The Parks and Recreation Department shall be responsible for managing, but not maintaining, Town parks and greens, and coordinating certain recreational and cultural events and festivals.
•	t
Planning Office, administered by the Planning Director, who shall be appointed by the Town

Manager in consultation with the Planning Commission .


Police Department, administered by the Chief of Police, who shall be appointed by the Town Manager. The Town Manager shall also appoint all police officers and special police officers . The Police Department shall be responsible for the duties assigned in state law, including but not limited to 24 VS .A. §1935, and any duties and responsibilities delegated in this Ordinance .

Depa rtment of Public Works, which shall include the Highway Division, Buildings and Grounds Division and Cemetery Division, administered by the Director of Public Works, who shall be appointed by the Town Manager. The Public Works Department shall be responsible for the maintenance of Town-owned buildings, parks and greens, swimming pool, municipal cemetery, property, bridges, roads and highways , rights of way, sidewalks and other similar infrastructure under the control of the Selectboard and Town Manager, but not property or facilities under the control of the Water Department and Sewer Department.

Sewer Department, administered by the Sewer Department Superintendent, who shall be appointed by the Town Manager in consultation with the Board of Sewer Commissioners . The Sewer Department shall be responsible for managing the Town-owned sewer system and related infrastructure . Funds related to the Sewer Department shall be designated as such and accounted for separately.

Water Department , administered by the Water Department Superintendent , who shall be appointed by the Town Manager in consultation with the Board of Water Commissioners . The Water Department shall be responsible for managing the Town-owned water system and related
 
infrastructure. Funds related to the Water Department shall be designated as such and accounted for separately.

Zoning Office, administered by the Zoning Administrator, who shall be appointed by the  Selectboard based on the recommendation of the planning commission, as authorized under State law. The management of the Zoning Administrator on issues such as attendance, compliance with Town administrative and personnel policies, financial matters and other administrative matters shall be performed by the Town Manager; provided, that the Town Manager shall not direct or otherwise supervise the Zoning Administrator on issues related to permitting and zoning.

(4)	Nothing in this section shall prohibit the Selectboard from creating additional offices, abolish an office or function, or hold vacant a position or office unless otherwise provided by the laws of the State of Vermont.

2-4	Town Boards and Commissions - general


(1)	The Town, through its Selectboard, shall maintain the following Boards and Commissions:


Advisory Committee on Cemeteries, which shall be responsible for advising the Selectboard on policy, planning , finance, operations and other matters related to the Facto1y Point Cemeteiy. The Co1mnittee shall consist of up to five members, who shall be appointed for three-year tenns.

Advisory Committee on Parks and Recreation, which shall serve as the advisory committee to the Selectboard, Town Manager and Parks and Recreation Depmiment on matters related to Town recreation programs and parks . The Committee shall consist of not more than fifteen members, who shall be appointed for two-year terms.

Conservation Commission, which shall be responsible for coordinating conservation-related projects, and providing advisory support to other boards related to a broad range of conservation related issues, including but not limited to land, water, forests, energy or other matters of interest.
The Co1mnission shall consist of not more than seven members, who shall be appointed for three-year terms .

Design Advisory Board, which shall be responsible for reviewing architectural plans and sign designs for new projects or renovations located within the Town's commercial and historic districts.
 
The Board shall consist of not more than five members, who shall be appointed for three-year terms .

Development Review Board, which shall be responsible for reviewing all design review applications, larger commercial or residential development projects, subdivisions, and cases involving unique aspects of law. The Board shall consist of not more than seven members, who shall be appointed for three-year terms .

Investment Advisory Committee, which shall be an advisory committee to the Selectboard for the purpose of overseeing the Town's investments anq advising the Selectboard and Town Treasurer on investments and related policies . The Committee shall include up to seven members, including the Town Treasurer, who shall serve as the chair, the Town Manager, elected Trustees of Public Funds and up to two members appointed by the Selectboard for three-year terms.

Planning Commission, which shall perform the duties assigned in 24 VS.A. §4325 and other duties provided for by the laws of the State ofVennont and the Chapter III of this Ordinance. The Commission shall include up to seven members, who shall be appointed to four-year terms.

Board of Water Commissioners, which shall act as the policy and decision-making commission for the Water Depaiiment , including but not limited to establishing water rates , approving capital plans and budgets , and promulgating rnles and regulations that provide for the efficient and effective operation of the Water Department. The Commission shall consist of up to three members, who shall serve until they resign or are otherwise removed for just cause after due notice and hearing by the Selectboard.

(2)	The Selectboard may, by vote,  establish other committees, pem1anent or temporary, and appoint members to provide for the effective planning of Town affairs, in order to study certain matters or for other purposes .

2-5	Appointment of Board and Commission Members


(1)	Unless othe1wise specified by the Selectboard or by law, tenns shall commence on July 1 of a given year and expire on June 30 of a given year, depending on the term of the Board or Commission.

(2)	The Selectboard shall record all appointments with the Town Clerk.
 
(3)	Unless othe1wise provided by law, upon the resignation or removal of a board or commission member, the Selectboard may appoint a new board or commission member to fill the remaining te1m of the member who resigned.

(4)	Unless otherwise provided for herein or by state law, a majo1ity of Selectboard members present and voting may appoint person to a Town board or commission or remove or suspend a person from a Town board or commission .

2-6	Student Appointments to Boards and Commissions
 


(1)
 

The Selectboard may appoint Manchester residents who are students emolled i•n a secondary
 

educational institution and under the age of 19 as advisory members of Town boards and commissions .


(2)	Student appointees to the Planning Commission and Development Review Board shall be non-voting members, but shall otherwise be allowed to participate in meetings.

(3)	Student appointments provided for in this section shall be for one-year terms.


2-7	Town Board and Commission Appointees - requirements


(1)	Appointees to boards and commissions shall attend at least eighty-five percent (85%) of warned meetings, unless otherwise excused by the Selectboard. Failure to attend at least eighty-five percent (85%) of warned meetings shall be grounds for removal or suspension at the discretion of the Selectboard.

(2)	Appointees to board and commissions shall pay, by the required deadlines, all property taxes due to the Town of Manchester, water and sewer utility fees and other fees. Failure to pay taxes and fees in a timely manner shall be grounds for removal or suspension at the discretion of the Selectboard.

2-8	Robert's Rules of Order and Adoption of Rules by Boards and Commissions


(1)	Town boards and c01mnissions established through Section 2 of this Chapter shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order, unless the laws of the State ofVennont establish procedures or rnles to the contrary, or unless a board or c01mnission adopts rules other than Robe1i's Rules.

(2)	Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit boards and commissions from organi zing and electing officers and establishing rules, provided, that such rules do not othe1wise supersede this Ordinance or the laws of
the State of Vennont.
 
2-9	Other Appointments and Nominations by the Selectboard


(1)	The Selectboard shall appoint the Zoning Administrator, Assistant Zoning Administrator (if any), Service Officer, Assistant Service Officer (if any), Tree Warden, Constable, Police Benevolent Fund represent and other appointments provided for in the law of th_e State of Vermont.

(2)	The Selectboard shall nominate the Health Officer and Fire Warden to the State of Vermont.


2-10	Other Duties of Selectboard


(1)	The Selectbpard shall serve as the local Board of Liquor Control.


(2)	The Selectboard shall serve as the Board of Sewer Commissioners.


(3)	The Selectboard, along with the Health Officer, shall serve as the local Board of Health.


2-11	Designation of Town Legal Counsel by Selectboard


(1)	The Selectboard may designate a qualified attorney, attorneys or law firm, licensed in the State of Vermont, to represent the Town in legal matters. Such designation shall be valid until otherwise repealed or superseded by a subsequent designation by the Selectboard.

(2)	Furthermore, the Selectboard may designate a qualified attorney, attorneys or law firm, licensed in the State of Vermont, to represent the Town in legal matters when the attorney, attorneys or law firm in the first paragraph has a conflict of interest or cannot otherwise provide legal services to the Town of Manchester. Such designation shall be valid until otherwise repealed or superseded by a subsequent designation by the Selectboard.

(3)	Nothing in this section shall prohibit the Town from obtaining legal services from other attorneys.


2-12	Designation of Town Engineer by Selectboard


(1)	The Selectboard may designate a qualified engineer or engineers, licensed in the State of Vermont, to represent the Town in engineering and other related matters. Such designation shall be valid until otherwise repealed or superseded by a subsequent designation by the Selectboard.

(2)	Furthermore, the Selectboard may designate a qualified engineer or engineers, licensed in the State of Vermont, to represent the Town in engineering and other related matters when the engineer or engineers
 
in the first paragraph has a conflict of interest or cannot otherwise provide engineering services to the Town of Manchester. Such designation shall be valid until otherwise repealed or superseded by a subsequent designation by the Selectboard.

(3)	Nothing in this section shall prohibit the Town from obtaining engineering services from other engrneers.

2-13	Emergency Management

(1)	During an emergency, as declared by the governor or president, the chair of the Selectboard may appoint on a temporary basis an interim or acting• town manager when the appointed town manager is

absent, dead, injured, inaccessible or otherwise unavailable, until such time as a meeting or emergency meeting of the Selectboard may be convened for the purpose of appointing a town manager or acting town manager under 24 VS .A. §1232. In the absence of the chair of the Selectboard, the authority under this subsection is designated to the vice-chair of the Selectboard, and in the absence of both the chair and
vice-chair, to members of the Selectboard in order of tenure beginning with the member with the longest tenure .

(2)	The Town Manager, through executive order, may establish a succession plan for the position of Emergency Management Director, effective whenever the Town Manager is absent, dead, injured, inaccessible or otherwise unavailable. Such executive order shall be filed with the Town Clerk.

2-14	Role of Assistants


(1)	Whenever the Selectboard or Town Manager appoints an acting or assistant to a position, any reference to the position in this Ordinance shall be interpreted to include the acting or assistant position unless specified otherwise in this Ordinance . The assistant position shall work under the direct supervision and control of the supervisor; provided however, the assistant may act independently whenever the supervisor is absent, incapacitated or otherwise unable to cany out his or her duties, the supervisor has a conflict of interest or the supervisor position is vacant.

(2)	Whenever the Selectboard appoints an acting or assistant Zoning Administrator, references to Zoning Administrator in this Ordinance shall be interpreted to include an acting or assistant Zoning Administrator unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance. The assistant Zoning Administrator shall work under the direct supervision and control of the Zoning Administrator ; provided however, the Assistant
 
Zoning Administrator may act independently whenever the Zoning Administrator is absent, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to carry out the duties of the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator has a conflict of interest, the position of Zoning Administrator is vacant or the Zoning Administrator is acting as the staff person to the Development Review Board during an appeal of an administrative pe1mit issued by the Assistant Zoning Administrator .

2-15	Municipal Compliance Officers - appointment and powers


(1)	The Town Manager shall appoint one or more "Municipal Compliance Officers ." Municipal Compliance Officers shall be responsible for enforcing the Chapters and sections of this Ordinance specifically referenced herein; provided, that the Town Manager may limit the powers of a Municipal Enforcement Officers to enforcement of ce1iain Chapters of this Ordinance.

(2)	Municipal Compliance Officers shall serve until the appointment is revoked by the Town Manager

or the Municipal Compliance Officer resigns.


2-16	Prosecution of Municipal Violations


The Selectboard hereby authorizes the following Town officials to prosecute municipal violations before the Vennont Judicial Bureau : Town Manager, any attorney appointed by the Selectboard under section 11 of this Chapter, the Chief of Police, Health Officer and Municipal Compliance Officer.

2-17	Public Records


(1)	The Town shall charge and collect from those requesting public records under 1 VS.A. § 316 the cost of providing the copy as well as the costs associated with mailing or transmitting the record by fax or other electronic means . The Town shall also charge and collect the cost of staff time, at a rate of $25.00 per hour in fifteen minute increments, associated with complying with a request for a copy of a public record when : (1) the time directly involved in complying with the request exceeds 30 minutes; (2) the Town agrees to create a public record; or (3) the Town agrees to provide the public record in a nonstandard format and
the time directly involved in complying with the request exceeds 30 minutes.


(2)	For the purposes of this section, the Zoning Administrator shall serve as the custodian of all public records for the Zoning Office and Planning Office.
 
(2)	For the purposes of this section, the Town Clerk shall serve as the custodian of public records that are produced , recorded or otherwise filed with the Town Clerk's office.

(3)	For the purposes of this section, the Chief of Police shall serve as the custodian of all public records for the Manchester Police Department.

(4)	For the purposes of this section, the Human Resources and Operations Manager shall serve as the custodian of public records for the Town Manager's Office, Accounting and Finance Office, Assessing Office, Economic Development Office, Fire Department, Emergency Management Office, Parks and Recreation Department , Health Officer, Sewer Department and Water Depa1iment and other such offices , divisions and departments .

(5)	For the purposes of this section, the Town Manager shall serve as the head of the agency as it relates to 1 VS .A.§ 318.

2-18	Town Agent


The Town Manager shall serve as the Town Agent, under 17 VS.A . § 2646(11) unless the Selectboard

votes othe1wise to appoint another individual as the Town Agent.


2-19	Delinquency and Permits and Licenses


No license or pennit, other than dog licenses issued under Chapter VI, shall be issued under this Ordinance or renewed under this Ordinance to any applicant who is delinquent in the payment of any property taxes, water, sewer, or related fees, costs or penalties applicable by law and due the Town of Manchester as of the date of application and/or renewal, or who is not in full compliance with a written payment plan approved by the Town Manager.

2-20	Issuance of Citation Books to Enforcement Officers and Record Keeping


(1)	The Chief of Police shall be responsible for ensuring that all enforcement officers have citation books, issued by the Vermont Judicial Bureau .

(2)	Whenever an enforcement officer issues a citation authorized under the Ordinance, the enforcement officer shall provide the Police Depa1iment a copy of the citation within 72 hours of issuing the citation.
 
The Police Department shall be responsible for maintaining records related to all citations issued under the Ordinances .

2-21	Recording of Appointments with Town Clerk


Whenever the Selectboard or Town Manager appoints an officer or revokes the appointment of an officer authorized in the Ordinance , the Selectboard or Town Manager shall file the appointment or revocation document with the Town Clerk, who shall record the document in the Town records.

2-22	Assault and Bribing of Town Officials - prohibitio ns


( 1)	It shall be unlawful to threaten with violence , assault, bribe or attempt to bribe a Town official, including Town employees , elected officials and appointed board and commission members .

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a First Degree criminal violation.


(3)	Enforcing officers authorized to enforce this Section shall be any sworn officer of the Manchester Police Department.

2-23	Aid To Other Municipalit ies


(1)	The Selectboard may enter into agreements with other municipalities to provide certain services or aid to other municipalities .

(2)	Whenever the Town of Manchester does not have an agreement or reciprocal relationship with another municipality, as authorized in state law and subsection 1 of this section, or the Selectboard does not specifically direct aid to another municipality at a public meeting, the Town Manager shall be required to invoice the municipality that caused the aid to be provided at a rate of 125% of the actual cost of the service or aid provided by the Town of Manchester .

2-24	Conflicting Offices and Prohibitions


(1)	Town employees may not use their official authority for the purpose of interfering with or affecting the nomination or election of any candidate for public office or endorse any candidate for office using a Town employment title or suggesting, directly or indirectly, the employee 's employment status with the Town.
 
(2)	In order to avoid the appearance or an actual conflict of interest, no Town employee may serve on the  Selectboard;  employees  of the Parks  and Recreation  Department  shall not  serve on the Parks  and Recreation  Committee;  employees  of  the  Planning  and  Zoning  Office  shall  not  serve  on  the  Design Advisory Board, Development Review Board or Planning Commission; employees of the Finance Office shall  not  serve  on  the  Investment  Advisory  Committee;  and,  employees  of  the  Water  and  Sewer departments  shall not  serve on the Board  of  Sewer Commissioners  or Board of Water Commissioners. Nothing  in this subsection shall prohibit  employees from seeking any elected public office or otherwise infringing on their right to seek elected public office. In order to avoid the appearance or an actual conflict of interest, employees shall• be required to resign from employment with the Town of Manchester before taking the oath of office for the Selectboard .

(3)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.


(4)	The enforcing authority for this section shall be the Municipal Compliance Officer.


(5)	This section is hereby established under the authority of section 20 of 24 VS.A § 2291.


2-25	Enforcement


The Municipal Compliance Officer is hereby designated as the enforcement authority of this Chapter.







 


Chair of the Selectboard
 
I	J
Date of Enactment by Selectboard
 



Attested, Town of Manchester Town Clerk:


C!uzJ&:'(/. ,.RAo2cJPJ
Town Clerk









12
 
 















































Manchester Land Use & Development Ordinance



CHAPTER 3 OF THE MANCHESTER UNIFIED ORDINANCE
ADOPTED BY THE SELECTBOARD MAY 29, 2018, EFFECTIVE JUNE 19, 2018 DEVELOPED WITH THE SUPPORT OF THE VERMONT DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT MUNICIPAL PLANNING GRANT PROGRAM (FY 2016)
 
MANCHESTER UNIFIED ORDINANCE
CHAPTER 3: MANCHESTER LAND USE & DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE




TABLE OF CONTENTS



 
Section 1	Zoning Districts	1
1.1	General Provisions	1
1.2	Downtown District (DN)	7
1.3	Town Center District (TC)	8
1.4	Mixed Use 1 District (MU1)	9
1.5	Mixed Use 2 District (MU2) 	10
1.6	Mixed Use 3 District (MU3) 	11
1.7	Office Industrial District (OI) 	12
1.8	Residential 10 District (R10) 	13
1.9	Residential 4 District (R4) 	14
1.10	Residential 1 District (R1) 	14
1.11	Rural Residential District (RR) 	15
1.12	Rural Agricultural District (RA) 	15
1.13	Forest Conservation District (FC) 	16
1.14	Use Table 	17
1.15	Dimensional Standards Table 	25
Section 2	Overlay Districts 	26
2.1	Design Review Overlay District (DRO) 	26
2.2	Aquifer Protection Overlay District (APO) 	28
2.3	Flood Hazard Overlay District (FHO) 	31
Section 3	Authority, Adoption and Applicability 	40
3.1	Authority 	40
3.2	Amendment and Adoption Procedures 	41
3.3	Exemptions and Limitations 	43
3.4	Change of Use 	46
3.5	Expansion of Use 	46
3.6	Discontinued Uses 	47
3.7	Abandoned Land Development 	47
3.8	Damaged or Destroyed Structures 	47
3.9	Nonconforming Structures, Uses and Lots 	48
Section 4	Administrative Mechanisms 	50
4.1	Roles and Responsibilities 	50
4.2	Zoning Permits 	51
4.3	Site Development Plan 	54
4.4	Fees and Filing Requirements 	56
4.5	Certificates of Compliance 	57
4.6	Violations and Penalties 	58
Section 5	Review Procedures 	60
5.1	Administrative Review 	60
5.2	Site Plan Review 	60
5.3	Conditional Use Review 	61
5.4	Design Review 	62
5.5	Subdivision Review 	65
5.6	Waivers 	67
5.7	Variances 	67
5.8	Consolidated Review 	69
5.9	Hearing Procedures 	69
5.10	Decisions 	70
5.11	Appeals 	71
Section 6	General Regulations 	73
6.1	Applicability 	73
6.2	Access 	73
6.3	Accessory Apartments 	74
6.4	ADA Compliant Structures 	74
6.5	Camping and Camping Units 	75
6.6	Child Care Facilities 	75
6.7	Customary Home Occupation 	76
6.8	Demolition 	77
6.9	Driveways 	78
6.10	Drive-Through Facilities 	79
6.11	Erosion Control 	79
6.12	Extraction Operations 	80
6.13	Fences and Walls 	81
6.14	Frontage Requirement 	82
6.15	Grading, Excavation or Fill 	82
6.16	Outdoor Display of Merchandise 	83
6.17	Ponds 	83
6.18	Public Toilet Facilities 	84
6.19	Stormwater 	84
6.20	Swimming Pools 	86
6.21	Temporary Construction-Related Structures and Activities 	86
6.22	Temporary Structures 	87
6.23	Trash Storage and Recycling Areas 	87
6.24	Undevelopable Land 	88
6.25	Vending Machines or Kiosks 	88
6.26	Water Resources Protection 	89
6.27	Water Supply and Wastewater Disposal 	90
Section 7	Utility Facilities 	91
7.1	Wireless Telecommunications Facilities 	91
7.2	Utility Facilities 	94
7.3	Energy Generation Facilities 	94
Section 8	Housing 	96
8.1	Adaptive Reuse 	96
8.2	Affordable Housing 	96
8.3	Dwelling Units 	98
8.4	Mobile Homes 	99
8.5	Mobile Home Parks 	99
8.6	Planned Residential Development 	100
8.7	Workforce Housing 	102
Section 9	Site Design Standards 	103
9.1	Purpose 	103
9.2	Applicability 	103
9.3	Performance Standards 	103
9.4	Landscaping 	106
9.5	Outdoor Lighting 	109
9.6	Parking and Loading Areas 	110
Section 10	Sign Regulations 	116
10.1	Purpose 	116
10.2	Administration and Interpretation 	116
10.3	Freestanding Signs 	117
10.4	Flush-Mounted Signs 	118
10.5	Projecting Signs 	118
10.6	Soffit Signs 	118
10.7	Lighting 	119
10.8	Special Categories of Signs 	119
10.9	Non-Operational Businesses 	121
10.10	Exempt Signs 	122
10.11	Prohibited Signs 	123
Section 11	Subdivision Standards 	124
11.1	Applicability 	124
11.2	Capacity of Community Facilities and Utilities 	124
11.3	Suitability of the Land 	124
11.4	Design and Configuration of Parcel Boundaries 	124
11.5	Design and Layout of Necessary Improvements 	125
11.6	Character of the Area or Settlement Pattern 	129
11.7	Soil Preservation 	129
11.8	Planned Unit Development 	129
Section 12	Definitions 	132
 
 



Section 1	Zoning Districts

1.1	General Provisions

1.1.1	Establishment of Base Zoning Districts

This ordinance establishes the following basic zoning districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map and described herein:

(1)	Downtown (DN)
(2)	Town Center (TC)
(3)	Mixed Use 1 (MU1)
(4)	Mixed Use 2 (MU2)
(5)	Mixed Use 3 (MU3)
(6)	Office Industrial (OI)
(7)	Residential 10 (R10)
(8)	Residential 4 (R4)
(9)	Residential 1 (R1) (10)Rural Residential (RR) (11)Rural Agricultural (RA) (12)Forest Conservation (FC)

1.1.2	Establishment of Overlay Zoning Districts

This ordinance establishes the following overlay zoning districts as described herein:

(1)	Design Review Overlay (DRO)
(2)	Flood Hazard Overlay (FHO)
(3)	Aquifer Protection Overlay (APO)

1.1.2	Official Zoning Map

Manchester’s Official Zoning Map delineates the boundaries of the twelve basic zoning districts. Boundaries of the Flood Hazard Overlay (FHO) are based on FEMA National Flood Hazard Layer map data. Boundaries of the Aquifer Protection Overlay (APO) are based on map data available from the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources (ANR) online Natural Resource Atlas depicting active source protection areas. Maps delineating the boundaries of the various base and overlay zoning districts established in this section are incorporated by reference into this ordinance and adopted as part of this ordinance.

The Official Zoning Map is on file in the town clerk’s office. Unofficial versions of the maps included in this ordinance and available from the town website are for convenience only. The Official Zoning Map must be used for all measurements and interpretations of the basic district boundaries. FEMA National Flood Hazard Layer map data must be used for all measurements and interpretations of the FHO boundaries. Measurements and interpretations of the APO boundaries must use active source protection area data as provided on the ANR Natural Resources Atlas.

If a specific distance or measurement is not shown on the map, the Zoning Administrator will interpret any Official Zoning Map boundaries indicated as approximately following:

(1)	Streets, railroad lines, power lines or rights-of-way to follow the centerlines of such streets, railroad lines, power lines or rights-of-way.
(2)	Lot lines or municipal boundaries to follow such lines or boundaries.
(3)	Rivers, streams or water bodies to follow the centerlines of such rivers, streams or water bodies. The Zoning Administrator will interpret any of the features listed above to be located where they exist on
 


the ground or as shown on a survey at the time of the interpretation if they vary from their depiction on the Official Zoning Map except that a boundary line adjustment or subdivision that changes the location of a lot line will not change the location of any zoning district boundary indicated as following that lot line.

1.1.4	Use Standards

(1)	Allowed Uses. An allowed land use must be shown on the use table (Section 1.14) as a permitted or conditional use in the applicable zoning district unless the subject use is a nonconformity and the proposed land development is in conformance with the requirements of Section 3.9.

(2)	Prohibited Uses. A use not specifically listed as permitted or conditional in a zoning district on the use table (Section 1.14) is prohibited unless the applicant demonstrates to the Zoning Administrator that the unlisted use:
(a)	Is materially similar to a listed use in the same zoning district in accordance with Section 1.14; or
(b)	Is required to be permitted in a zoning district by state or federal law.

(3)	Materially Similar Uses. The Zoning Administrator may make a written determination that a proposed use not shown on the use table (Section 1.14) is materially similar to a use listed as permitted or conditional in the applicable zoning district and that it should be allowed to the same extent and subject to the same standards as that permitted or conditional use if it has:
(a)	Similar impacts on the neighborhood such as traffic, noise, and lighting as that listed use; and
(b)	Similar characteristics such as building type, site arrangement, floor area, number of employees, customer traffic, equipment use, hours of operation, parking, vehicle trips, and signage as that permitted or conditional use.

(4)	Multiple and Mixed Uses. A landowner may use a lot or structure for any combination of uses allowed as permitted or conditional uses in the applicable zoning district.

(5)	Accessory Uses. A landowner must obtain a zoning permit to establish one or more accessory uses on a lot in accordance with the standards below:
(a)	The total area occupied by all the accessory uses on the lot must not exceed 40% of the total area occupied by the associated principal use. For principal uses conducted
primarily indoors, this calculation will be based on gross floor area occupied within the building(s) by each use. For principal uses conducted primarily outdoors, this calculation will be based on lot area occupied by each use.
(b)	An accessory use must be:
(i)	A permitted or conditional use in the applicable zoning district;
(ii)	Specifically authorized as an allowed accessory use to the applicable principal use in this ordinance; or
(iii)	Approved by the Development Review Board in accordance with the procedures for conditional use review.
(c)	Accessory retail sales must occur primarily within an enclosed structure and any outdoor display of goods for sale must conform to the standards of Section 6.15.
(d)	For service uses, accessory retail sales must be limited to products associated with the service (for example, sale of hair care products at a salon).
(e)	For manufacturing uses, accessory retail sales must be limited to products made or assembled on the premises.
(f)	A landowner must also obtain site plan approval for any accessory uses if the principal use of the lot is not a single- or two-family dwelling.
(g)	The standards of this subsection do not apply to accessory dwellings, home occupations, home businesses, and family childcare homes.
 


1.1.5	Dimensional Standards

A.	Applicability. Land development must conform to the dimensional standards for the applicable zoning district unless:

(1)	A subject lot or structure is a nonconformity and the proposed land development is in conformance with the requirements of Section 3.9;
(2)	The applicant obtains a waiver (Section 5.6) or variance (Section 5.7) from the Development Review Board; or
(3)	The proposed land development will be approved as a planned unit development (which includes planned residential development) in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
(4)	The proposed land development will be approved as an affordable housing project in accordance with Section 8.2.

B.	Principal Buildings. Landowners may locate more than one principal building on a lot in accordance with the following standards:

(1)	The total amount of development on the lot must not exceed the maximum density or coverage allowed in the district.

(2)	There must not be more than two detached single- or two-family dwellings on any lot unless approved as part of a planned unit development (which includes planned residential development) in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.

(3)	Each principal building must meet the applicable dimensional standards of the zoning district.

(4)	The distance between principal buildings must not be less than twice the side setback required in the zoning district, unless they are attached.

(5)	Approval of multiple principal buildings on a lot will not constitute a right to separately convey those structures unless:
(a)	The subject lot will be lawfully subdivided in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
(b)	The buildings will be lawfully converted to condominium ownership, which may include the subdivision of footprint lots.

C.	Accessory Structures. A landowner must obtain a zoning permit to locate one or more accessory structures on a lot in accordance with the standards below:

(1)	Accessory structures must meet the front setback requirements shown in the dimensional requirements table (Section 1.15) for the applicable zoning district except that accessory buildings with a footprint in excess of 400 square feet must be located no closer to the front lot line than an associated principal building.

(2)	Accessory structures with a footprint of not more than 120 square feet and a height of not more than 10 feet must be set back at least 5 feet from rear and side property lines, or the minimum setback requirements for the district they are located, whichever is less.

(3)	Accessory structures with a footprint in excess of 120 square feet or a height in excess of 10 feet must be set back at least 15 feet from rear and side property lines, or the minimum setback requirements for the district they are located, whichever is less.

(4)	Accessory structures must be located at least 5 feet from any other structure unless they are attached to that structure.

(5)	Accessory structures must not exceed a maximum height of 25 feet or the height of an associated
 


principal building, whichever is less, except as specifically authorized in this ordinance.


Figure 1-1	Dimensional Standards for Accessory Structures
	May encroach into
District Setback	
Minimum Setback*	
Maximum Height*
Structure Type	Front	Side	Rear		
Arbors	X	X	X	0 ft	15 ft
Berms	X	X	X	0 ft	10 ft
Detached decks and patios		X	X	10 ft	-
Detached garages and carports		X	X	10 ft	15 ft
Driveways	X	X	X	0 ft	-
Fences and gates	X	X	X	0 ft	See §6.12
Fire escapes, access ramps, and the like	X	X	X	0 ft	-
Flag poles	X	X	X	5 ft	30 ft
Freestanding signs	X	X		See §10	See §10
Heating, cooling units and other
mechanical equipment		X	X	10 ft	-
Mailboxes	X	X	X	0 ft	5 ft
Parking Areas				district min	-
Pools, hot tubs		X	X	10 ft	-
Retaining walls of up to 4 ft	X	X	X	0 ft	4 ft
Sheds, pool houses, saunas, playhouses or treehouses <200sf		X	X	5 ft	15 ft
Sidewalks	X	X	X	0 ft	-
Sports, exercise, or play structures	X	X	X	5 ft	15 ft
Stormwater Structures	X	X	X	5 ft	-
Vending machines, or kiosks				district min	15 ft

*  Lesser of the following or district minimum

D.	Lot Size. Lot size will be regulated in accordance with the following:

(1)	Any lot created under this ordinance must meet the minimum lot size requirement for the applicable zoning district unless approved as part of a planned unit development or planned residential development in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.

(2)	An existing nonconforming lot may be developed in accordance with Section 3.9.3 irrespective of whether it will comply with the minimum lot size standard for the applicable zoning district.

(3)	An existing nonconforming lot must not be reduced in size below the minimum lot size requirement for the applicable zoning district unless the reduction is the result of land being acquired for a public purpose by eminent domain (for example, due to street widening).

(4)	A lot that will include land in more than one zoning district must meet the minimum lot size requirement for the zoning district in which the portion of the lot with street frontage is located. If the lot has street frontage in more than one zoning district, the lot must meet the largest minimum lot size requirement for the multiple districts.

E.	Frontage. All lots must front on a public or private road as specified in each zoning district and in accordance with the following:

(1)	Existing Nonconforming Lots. An existing lot without the minimum required frontage on a maintained public or private street must have access to such a street over a permanent easement or right-of-way not less than 20 feet wide for single-and two-family residential lots and 40 feet  wide for all other lots. If the lot has more than 20 feet of frontage for single-and two-family residential use, or more than 40 feet for all other uses, an easement or right-of-way is not necessary.
 



(2)	Corner Lots. Lots that front on more than one street will only be required to meet minimum frontage requirements on one street.

(3)	New Lots. All new lots created under these regulations must have the minimum frontage on a maintained public or private street unless the Development Review Board:
(a)	Approves a lot with less frontage as part of a planned unit development in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance;
(b)	Approves a waiver to reduce the frontage requirement to not less than 20 feet for irregularly shaped lots or lots accessed by a shared driveway; or
(c)	Approves a waiver to reduce or eliminate the frontage requirement for lots restricted to agriculture, forestry or open spaces uses through a legally enforceable and permanent means such as a conservation easement.

F.	Setbacks. All land development and structures subject to this ordinance must be set back from streets and property lines as shown in the dimensional table (Section 1.15) unless otherwise specified in this ordinance. Lots with frontage on more than one street must meet front setback requirements on each street, and must meet side setback requirements on the remaining sides.

G.	Height. No structure subject to these regulations may exceed district height limits as specified below unless otherwise specified in these regulations:

(1)	When building height is measured, the measurement will be taken from the average finished grade around the building foundation or base of the structure to the roof deck for buildings with flat roofs, to the average height between the eaves and gable for sloped roofs, and to the highest point for other structures. This measurement will exclude the elements listed in G(4) below.
 
(2)	Minimum and maximum height requirements for principal structures are shown in the dimensional table (Section 1.15) for each zoning district.

(3)	Accessory structures must not exceed a height of 25 feet or the height of the associated principal structure, whichever is less.

(4)	Height limits do not apply to:
(a)	Belfries, spires, steeples, cupolas, domes or similar architectural features not used for human habitation; and
(b)	Skylights, parapet walls, cornices, chimneys, ventilators, bulkheads, or mechanical equipment usually located on the roof level, provided that such features are limited to the height necessary for their proper functioning.
(c)	Flag poles, light poles, antenna support structures and similar freestanding structures not located within public rights-of-way.

(5)	For buildings exceeding 35 feet in height, that portion of the building exceeding 30 feet from the average grade along the façade must be setback by at least 10 feet from the façade. This applies
 


to both façades on corner lots.

(6)	Where a minimum building height is specified:
(a)	Buildings with a footprint of 6,000 square feet or less must maintain that height along the entire façade and for a depth of at least 30 feet or depth of building, whichever is less.
(b)	Buildings with a footprint of more than 6,000 square feet must maintain that height along at least 30% of the façade and for a depth of at least 30 feet or depth of the building, whichever is less.

(7)	Where a functional second story is required, the following shall apply:
(a)	The functional second story must be a minimum of 30% of the first floor area of the primary structure.
(b)	The majority of the functional second story must be along the primary streetside façade.
(c)	The functional second story may be waived by the Development Review Board if one or more of the following conditions exist:
(i)	The footprint of the structure is less than 2,000 square feet.
(ii)	There is a primary structure on the lot that contains a functional second story and the footprint of the proposed structure is at least 50% less than that of the  primary structure.
(iii)	The primary first floor use is incompatible with a second story use.
(d)	If the requirement for a functional second story is waived, the building must provide a gable roof, parapet, dormer, or other architectural feature that adds verticality to the structure at the primary streetside façade.

1.1.6	Residential Density Standards

The number of dwelling units on a lot must not exceed the maximum density specified in Section 1.15 for the applicable zoning district except:

(1)	Accessory apartments approved under Section 6.2 will not count as a dwelling unit for the purposes of calculating density.

(2)	Any single-family dwelling on a conforming lot in the town core may be converted to a two-family dwelling irrespective of the district density standard provided that all other applicable standards of this ordinance are met.

(3)	A pre-existing small lot may be developed in accordance with Section 3.9 irrespective of whether it will comply with the residential density standard for the applicable district.

(4)	In the case of approved:
(a)	Adaptive reuse of an existing nonresidential structure according to Section 8.1;
(b)	Affordable housing development according to Section 8.2;
(c)	Planned Residential Development according to Section 8.6; and
(d)	Planned Unit Development according to Section 11.8.
 


1.2	Downtown District (DN)

1.2.1	Purpose. The Town of Manchester intends for the Downtown District to provide concentrated downtown retail, service, office, upper floor housing, and other compatible mixed uses in the town’s historic commercial center. Proposed land development must conform to design and historic preservation standards in order to maintain neighborhood commercial scale, pedestrian activity, architectural character and the traditional built pattern. The purpose of this district is to:

(1)	Promote of the long-term economic and social vitality of the historic downtown;
(2)	Provide for the daily needs and services of the community, as well as contributing to the town’s visitor-based economy;
(3)	Provide economic development opportunities through service, office, locally-oriented retail, dining and other compatible commercial and light industrial uses;
(4)	Provide housing opportunities within walking distance of employment, service and retail opportunities;
(5)	Ensure that new buildings and significant renovations are compatible with the historic architectural framework of the historic downtown; and
(6)	Promote a quality, urban streetscape and pedestrian-friendly environment.

1.2.2	Allowed Uses. Section 1.14 establishes the uses allowed in this district.

1.2.3	Drive Through Services: Food service drive-throughs are prohibited and all other drive-through service will require conditional use approval.

1.2.4	Dimensional Standards. Section 1.15 establishes the dimensional standards for this district.
New principal buildings must be constructed with a functional second story.

1.2.5	Density Standards. Section 1.15 establishes allowed residential density for this district.

1.2.6	Character Examples. The images below are intended to illustrate the form and character of development that is appropriate and desired in this district:
 


1.3	Town Center District (TC)

1.3.1	Purpose. The Town of Manchester intends for the Town Center District to provide an area for the most intensive commercial activity and mixed-use development in Manchester. Proposed land development must conform to design standards in order to enhance neighborhood commercial scale, pedestrian activity, and architectural character. The purpose of this district is to:

(1)	Promote the long-term economic and social vitality of Manchester’s town center;
(2)	Support the town’s visitor-based economy, as well as providing for the daily needs and services of the community;
(3)	Provide economic development opportunities through retail, dining, service, office and other compatible commercial and light industrial uses;
(4)	Encourage creation of housing within walking distance of employment, service and retail opportunities;
(5)	Encourage mixed-use infill and redevelopment that increases the value of buildings and property;
(6)	Ensure that new buildings are compatible with the architectural framework of Manchester’s town core and preserve a human scale; and
(7)	Promote a quality, urban streetscape and pedestrian-friendly environment.

1.3.2	Allowed Uses. Section 1.14 establishes the uses allowed in this district. In addition, industrial uses must include a retail space from which at least 50% of the products manufactured on the premises are sold direct to consumers.

1.3.3	Drive Through Services. All drive-through service will require conditional use approval in the Town Center District.

1.3.4	Dimensional Standards. Section 1.15 establishes the dimensional standards for this district. New principal buildings must be constructed with a functional second story.

1.3.5	Density Standards. Section 1.15 establishes allowed residential density for this district.

1.3.6	Character Examples. The images below are intended to illustrate the form and character of development that is appropriate and desired in this district:



 
 


1.4	Mixed Use 1 District (MU1)

1.4.1	Purpose. The Town of Manchester intends for the Mixed Use 1 District to provide a mix of uses within historic neighborhoods in the town core. Proposed land development must conform to design and historic preservation standards in order to maintain neighborhood scale, pedestrian-friendly connectivity, architectural character, and the traditional built pattern. The purpose of this district is to:

(1)	Promote the long-term economic and social vitality of Manchester’s historic neighborhoods;
(2)	Provide for the daily needs and services of the community, as well as contribute to the town’s visitor-based economy;
(3)	Provide economic development opportunities through small-scale, low-impact retail, service, office, and other business activities that are compatible with nearby residential uses;
(4)	Provide a broad range of housing opportunities within walking distance of employment, service, and retail opportunities;
(5)	Ensure that new buildings and significant renovations are compatible with the historic
architectural framework of Manchester’s neighborhoods; and
(6)	Promote a quality streetscape and pedestrian-friendly environment.

1.4.2	Allowed Uses. Section 1.14 establishes the uses allowed in this district.

1.4.3	Drive Through Services: Prohibited.

1.4.4	Dimensional Standards. Section 1.15 establishes the dimensional standards for this district. New principal buildings must be constructed with a functional second story.

1.4.5	Density Standards. Section 1.15 establishes allowed residential density for this district.

1.4.6	Character Examples. The images below are intended to illustrate the form and character of development that is appropriate and desired in this district:


 
 


1.5	Mixed Use 2 District (MU2)

1.5.1	Purpose. The Town of Manchester intends for the Mixed Use 2 District to provide an opportunity for growth in areas within or adjacent to the town core that are currently served by public infrastructure or where infrastructure could reasonably be provided. The purpose of this district is to:

(1)	Provide economic development opportunities through office, service, lodging, and other compatible, primarily non-retail commercial and light industrial uses;
(2)	Provide opportunities for new compact residential neighborhoods and a range of housing opportunities in proximity to the town core;
(3)	Ensure that proposed land development incorporates access management and avoids congestion; and
(4)	Promote a quality streetscape and pedestrian-friendly environment.

1.5.2	Allowed Uses. Section 1.14 establishes the uses allowed in this district.

1.5.3	Drive Thru Services. Food service drive-throughs are prohibited and all other drive-through service requires conditional use approval.

1.5.4	Dimensional Standards. Section 1.15 establishes the dimensional standards for this district.

1.5.5	Density Standards. Section 1.15 establishes allowed residential density for this district.

1.5.6	Character Examples. The images below are intended to illustrate the form and character of development that is appropriate and desired in this district:
 


1.6	Mixed Use 3 District (MU3)

1.6.1	Purpose. The Town of Manchester intends for the Mixed Use 3 District to provide visitor-serving, primarily non-retail uses such as dining, lodging and recreation, and other compatible uses along the main highways. Proposed land development must conform to design standards in order to maintain and enhance community character. The purpose of this district is to:

(1)	Support the town’s visitor-based economy, as well as providing amenities that enhance quality of life in the community;
(2)	Ensure that proposed land development incorporates access management and avoids congestion; and
(3)	Promote quality site and building design to mitigate the effects of linear commercial development, and maintain community character and limit sprawl.

1.6.2	Allowed Uses. Section 1.14 establishes the uses allowed in this district.

1.6.3	Drive Through Services. Require conditional use approval.

1.6.4	Dimensional Standards. Section 1.15 establishes the dimensional standards for this district.

1.6.5	Density Standards. Section 1.15 establishes allowed residential density for this district.

1.6.6	Character Examples. The images below are intended to illustrate the form and character of development that is appropriate and desired in this district:
 


1.7	Office Industrial District (OI)

1.7.1	Purpose. The Town of Manchester intends for the Office Industrial District to provide opportunities for diversifying the town’s economy and accommodating the growth of local businesses. The purpose of this district is to promote Manchester’s long-term economic vitality by providing locations for primarily non-retail, non-visitor-based office, service, and light industrial uses.

1.7.2	Allowed Uses. Section 1.14 establishes the uses allowed in this district.

1.7.3	Drive-Through Services. Require conditional use approval.

1.7.4	Dimensional Standards. Section 1.15 establishes dimensional standards for this district.

1.7.5	Character Examples. The images below are intended to illustrate the form and character of development that is appropriate and desired in this district:
 


1.8	Residential 10 District (R10)

1.8.1	Purpose. The Town of Manchester intends for the Residential 10 District to provide opportunities for high-density and multi-family housing within the town core. Proposed land development must conform to design standards in order to maintain and enhance neighborhood character. The purpose of this district is to:

(1)	Provide a broad range of housing opportunities within walking distance of employment, service, and retail opportunities;
(2)	Ensure that new buildings are compatible with the architectural framework of Manchester’s neighborhoods and preserve a human scale; and
(3)	Promote a quality streetscape and pedestrian-friendly environment.

1.8.2	Allowed Uses. Section 1.14 establishes the uses allowed in this district.

1.8.3	Drive-Through Services. Prohibited.

1.8.4	Dimensional Standards. Section 1.15 establishes the dimensional standards for this district.

1.8.5	Character Examples. The images below are intended to illustrate the form and character of development that is appropriate and desired in this district:
 


1.9	Residential 4 District (R4)

1.9.1	Purpose. The Town of Manchester intends for the Residential 4 District to provide opportunities for high-density, primarily single-family residential neighborhoods within the town core. The purpose of this district is to provide a broad range of housing opportunities in quality neighborhoods.

1.9.2	Allowed Uses. Section 1.14 establishes the uses allowed in this district.

1.9.3	Drive-Through Services. Prohibited.

1.9.4	Dimensional Standards. Section 1.15 establishes the dimensional standards for this district.

1.9.5	Density Standards. Section 1.15 establishes allowed residential density for this district.

1.9.6	Character Examples. The images below are intended to illustrate the form and character of development that is appropriate and desired in this district:











1.10	Residential 1 District (R1)

1.10.1	Purpose. The Town of Manchester intends for the Residential 1 District to provide opportunities for moderate density, primarily single-family housing within and adjacent to the town core.

1.10.2	Allowed Uses. Section 1.14 establishes the uses allowed in this district.

1.10.3	Drive-Through Services. Prohibited.

1.10.4	Dimensional Standards. Section 1.15 establishes the dimensional standards for this district.

1.10.5	Density Standards. Section 1.15 establishes allowed residential density for this district.

1.10.6	Character Examples. The images below are intended to illustrate the form and character of development that is appropriate and desired in this district:
 


1.11	Rural Residential District (RR)

1.11.1	Purpose. The Town of Manchester intends for the Rural Residential District to provide opportunities for low density housing in a rural setting.

1.11.2	Allowed Uses. Section 1.14 establishes the uses allowed in this district.

1.11.3	Drive-Through Services. Prohibited.

1.11.4	Dimensional Standards. Section 1.15 establishes the dimensional standards for this district.

1.11.5	Density Standards. Section 1.15 establishes allowed residential density for this district.

1.11.6	Character Examples. The images below are intended to illustrate the form and character of development that is appropriate and desired in this district:

 


1.12	Rural Agricultural District (RA)

1.12.1	Purpose. The Town of Manchester intends for the Rural Agricultural District to provide opportunities for agriculture, as well as associated agricultural enterprises and housing for people engaged in agriculture.

1.12.2	Allowed Uses. Section 1.14 establishes the uses allowed in this district.

1.12.3	Drive-Through Services. Prohibited.

1.12.4	Dimensional Standards. Section 1.15 establishes the dimensional standards for this district.

1.12.5	Density Standards. Section 1.15 establishes allowed residential density for this district.

1.12.6	Character Examples. The images below are intended to illustrate the form and character of development that is appropriate and desired in this district:
 


1.13	Forest Conservation District (FC)

1.13.1	Purpose. The Town of Manchester intends for the Forest Conservation District to protect the public and private forested slopes that define the eastern and western sides of town and maintain opportunities for recreation uses and properly managed forestry operations.

1.13.2	Allowed Uses. Section 1.14 establishes the uses allowed in this district.

1.13.3	Dimensional Standards. Section 1.15 establishes the dimensional standards for this district.

1.13.4	Character Examples. The images below are intended to illustrate the form and character of development that is appropriate and desired in this district:
 





1.14	Use Table



USE & DEFINITION	P = Permitted Use	C = Conditional Use	– = Use Not Allowed	

DN	

TC	

MU1	

MU2	

MU3	

OI	

R10	

R4	

R1	

RR	

RA	

FC
RESIDENTIAL 													
Single-family dwelling
A detached, single-unit structure for habitation by one household that provides complete independent living facilities including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.	–	–	P	P	P	–	P	P	P	P	P	–
Two-family dwelling
A two-unit structure for habitation by two households each in a unit that provides complete independent living facilities including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, and with each unit having a separate entrance from the outside or through a common vestibule (also known as a duplex).	–	–	P	P	P	–	P	P	P	P	–	–
Attached dwelling
A single-unit dwelling for habitation by one household that provides complete independent living facilities including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, which is attached to another single-unit dwelling in a row of at least three such dwellings with one or more common walls and with each dwelling having its own front and rear access to the outside (also known as a townhouse).	–	–	P	P	C	–	P	P	C	C	–	–
Multi-family dwelling (3+ units)
Use of a structure or part of a structure for habitation by three or more households each in a unit that provides complete independent living facilities including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, or any dwelling unit in a mixed-use building.	P	P	P	P	–	–	P	–	–	–	–	–
Accessory dwelling
Accessory use of single-family residential property for a second dwelling unit that provides complete independent living facilities including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.	–	–	P	P	P	–	P	P	P	P	P	–
Home occupation
Accessory use of single-family residential property for a small business that does not alter the residential character of the property.	–	–	P	P	P	–	P	P	P	P	P	–
Family childcare home
Accessory use of single-family residential property for a small daycare business operated by a resident of the dwelling under state license or registration.	–	–	P	P	P	–	P	P	P	P	P	–
Retirement housing
Use of one or more structures to primarily house people age 55 or older that: (a) Contains multiple dwelling units each intended for habitation by one household and providing complete independent living facilities including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation; and (b) may offer minimum convenience services to residents as an accessory use.	–	C	P	P	C	–	P	P	P	P	–	–
Assisted living
Use of one or more structures to provide housing, board and care to residents who need assistance with daily activities such as dressing, grooming, bathing, etc. and that operates under state license (includes residential care homes).	–	C	C	C	C	–	C	C	–	–	–	–
Skilled nursing service
Use of one or more structures to provide housing and 24-hour skilled nursing care to residents and that operates under state license (includes nursing and convalescent homes, and hospice facilities).	–	C	–	C	C	–	–	C	–	–	–	–
Group home
Use of single-family residential property to provide housing to people with a handicap or disability that operates under state license or registration.	–	–	P	P	P	–	P	P	P	P	P	–
Residential treatment facility
Use of one or more structures to provide housing and 24-hour supervision and care of patients receiving therapy for substance abuse, mental illness or other behavioral problems.	–	–	–	C	C	–	–	–	–	–	–	–

 





USE & DEFINITION	P = Permitted Use	C = Conditional Use	– = Use Not Allowed	

DN	

TC	

MU1	

MU2	

MU3	

OI	

R10	

R4	

R1	

RR	

RA	

FC
LODGING												
Bed-and-breakfast
Accessory use of single-family residential property to provide short-term accommodations for travelers that may have not more than five guestrooms.	–	–	P	P	P	–	P	P	P	C	C	–
Inn
Owner occupied use of one or more structures to provide short-term accommodations for travelers. May include a restaurant, bar, event facility, spa or fitness club as an accessory use. Inns must not exceed 25 guest rooms.	–	–	P	P	P	–	C	–	–	C	C	–
Rooming and boarding house
Accessory use of a single-family residential property to provide accommodations that will typically serve as the boarder’s principal residence, and that commonly includes meals, housekeeping, or laundry services.	–	–	P	P	P	–	P	P	P	–	–	–
Hotel or motel
Use of one or more structures to provide short-term accommodations for travelers. It may also include accessory uses such as food services, recreational services, convention hosting, laundry services, etc.	P	P	P	P	P	–	–	–	–	–	–	–
Resort
Use of one or more structures to provide short-term accommodations for transient guests where the primary attraction is recreational amenities or activities. It may also include accessory uses such as food services, recreational services, convention hosting, laundry services, etc.	–	P	–	P	P	–	–	–	–	C	C	–
COMMERCIAL 													
Retail sales
An establishment that sells goods to the general public for personal or household consumption primarily from within an enclosed structure, excluding any use specifically defined in this section. It may also provide installation, repair or maintenance services as an accessory use.	P	P	C	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–
Fueling station
A specialized establishment for selling gasoline or other vehicle fuels. Commonly combined with other retail uses such as a carwash or convenience store, or with an auto repair and service garage. This definition specifically excludes truck or freight transportation.	–	C	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–
Carwash
A specialized establishment for washing, waxing, polishing and general cleaning of vehicles. This definition specifically excludes truck or freight transportation.	–	C	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–
Repair service
An establishment that maintains, services, repairs or paints goods such as appliances, vehicles, boats, equipment or machinery. This definition specifically excludes truck or freight transportation.	–	C	C	C	C	C	–	–	–	–	–	–
Sales lot
An establishment that sells large items such as vehicles, boats, equipment, machinery, manufactured homes or prefabricated buildings primarily from an open lot. It may also provide installation, repair or maintenance services as an accessory use.	–	C	–	–	–	C	–	–	–	–	–	–
Lawn, garden and farm supply sales
An establishment that sells goods to the general public for personal or household consumption primarily from outdoor areas or open air structures (excluding any use specifically defined in this section) that sells specialized products and services for lawn, garden, or farm use. It may: (a) sell farm supplies such as feed and seed; (b) sell nursery and garden products, such as trees, shrubs, plants, seeds, bulbs, soil, compost, mulch, or sod; (c) sell lawn, garden or farm equipment or machinery as an accessory use; and (d) provide installation, repair or maintenance services as an accessory use.	–	P	–	C	C	C	–	–	–	C	C	–
Lumberyard and building supply sales
An establishment that sells lumber and heavy building materials, and that typically stores stock outdoors or under open-air structures.	–	P	–	–	–	P	–	–	–	–	–	–
Grocery store
An establishment that sells food or beverage items to the general public primarily not for immediate consumption. It may offer prepared foods or drinks for immediate consumption either on-site or for take-out as an accessory use.	P	P	P	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–

 





USE & DEFINITION	P = Permitted Use	C = Conditional Use	– = Use Not Allowed	

DN	

TC	

MU1	

MU2	

MU3	

OI	

R10	

R4	

R1	

RR	

RA	

FC
Convenience store
An establishment occupying no more than 3,000 sq. ft. that sells a limited line of staple food, packaged food, and convenience items primarily for off-site consumption. It may offer prepared foods or drinks for immediate consumption either on-site or for take-out as an accessory use.	P	P	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–
Beer, wine or liquor store
An establishment that sells packaged alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption.	P	P	C	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–
Specialty food store
An establishment that sells a limited line of specialty, locally-produced or gourmet food or beverage items primarily for off-site consumption. It may offer prepared foods or drinks for immediate consumption either on-site or for take-out as an accessory use.	P	P	P	–	C	–	–	–	–	–	–	–
Open market
An establishment or site where goods are brought to be immediately sold to the general public for personal or household consumption often from outdoor areas or open air structures, excluding any use specifically defined in this section.	C	C	–	C	C	–	–	–	–	–	–	–
Pharmacy
An establishment that sells prescription and over-the-counter medication and personal care products, Pharmacies may sell additional products such as food, beverages, office supplies, greeting cards, gifts and other goods.	P	P	P	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–
Professional or business office
An establishment that: (a) is used to conduct the affairs of a business, organization or profession; or (b) provides services that are reliant on the specialized training, expertise, skills or knowledge of practitioners. This definition specifically excludes services provided by licensed medical or veterinary practitioners.	P	P	P	P	P	P	–	–	–	–	–	–
Personal or business service
An establishment that provides: (a) services on or closely related to the physical person including, but not limited to, laundry, tailoring, shoe repair, hair salon, nail salon, tanning salon, spa, massage parlor or tattoo parlor; or (b) support services primarily to other businesses such as billing, collection, advertising, telemarketing, copying, mailing, etc. It may include sales of related products as an accessory use. This definition specifically excludes services provided by licensed medical or veterinary practitioners.	P	P	P	C	C	C	–	–	–	–	–	–
Veterinary office
An establishment where licensed practitioners of veterinary medicine, dentistry, or surgery treat animals. It may include grooming, boarding, or other pet services as an accessory use. It may include sales of pet food, medicines, or supplies as an accessory use.	C	C	C	C	C	P	–	–	–	C	C	–
Domestic animal service
An establishment that: (a) provides domestic animal and pet care services other than veterinary service such as boarding, grooming, sitting, and training; or
(b) breeds, sells, or manages adoption of domestic animals. It may include sales of pet food or supplies as an accessory use.	C	C	C	C	C	C	–	–	–	C	C	–
Bank
An establishment that engages in financial transactions that create, liquidate, or change ownership of financial assets such as accepting deposits, making loans, and issuing currency.	P	P	P	–	–	P	–	–	–	–	–	–
Recreation equipment rental
An establishment that rents recreational goods such as skis, canoes, kayaks, or bicycles. It may also provide repair or maintenance services as an accessory use.	P	P	C	P	P	P	–	–	–	C	C	C
Restaurant, eat-in
An establishment that prepares and serves meals, snacks, and beverages that are primarily served to seated patrons for immediate consumption on the premises. It may prepare and serve meals, snacks and beverages for consumption off the premises (take-out) provided that the area devoted to patron seating (exclusive of any outdoor dining area) is not less than 40% of the gross floor area of the restaurant (exclusive of any outdoor dining area). Any restaurant with drive-through or drive-in service will be considered a take-out restaurant under this ordinance.	P	P	C	–	P	–	–	–	–	–	–	–
Restaurant, take-out
An establishment with no or limited seating that prepares and serves meals, snacks and beverages primarily for consumption off the premises. Any restaurant with drive-through or drive-in service will be considered a take-out restaurant under this ordinance. This definition includes a retail bakery that sells 40% or more of its products on the premises.	C	C	C	C	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–
 





USE & DEFINITION	P = Permitted Use	C = Conditional Use	– = Use Not Allowed	

DN	

TC	

MU1	

MU2	

MU3	

OI	

R10	

R4	

R1	

RR	

RA	

FC
Mobile food unit
An establishment that prepares and serves meals, snacks and beverages primarily for immediate consumption from motorized vehicles or non-motorized carts.	C	C	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–
Tavern
An establishment that primarily prepares and serves alcoholic beverages for immediate consumption. It may include food service as an accessory use. This definition includes a brewpub that produces less than 15,000 barrels of beer per year and sells 25% or more of its beer on the premises.	C	C	C	–	C	–	–	–	–	–	–	–
Nightclub
An establishment that operates as a place of entertainment with music, dancing, or similar live or recorded performances, and where food and drink are served for immediate consumption on the premises.	C	C	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–
Catering or commercial kitchen
A state-licensed establishment that prepares: (a) meals, snacks and beverages to be served at off-premise events; or (b) food or beverage products for wholesale or retail sale provided that the operator does not require a state food processing establishment license (such uses will be considered food or beverage manufacturing under this ordinance).	C	C	C	C	C	P	–	–	–	C	C	–
Parking lot or structure
An establishment that provides short-term storage for registered, operable passenger vehicles as its primary function.	C	C	C	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–
INDUSTRIAL 													
Light industry
An establishment that produces new products, materials or parts in a facility that generally does not rely on specialized power, water or waste disposal systems for operation. All light industrial operations must occur within an enclosed building, which is typically similar to an office building in its size, appearance and impacts. It may include a retail shop as an accessory use that primarily sells products produced on the premises. This definition excludes any use specifically defined in this section.	C	C	C	C	C	P	–	–	–	–	–	–
Artisanal or handcrafted manufacturing
An establishment that produces artisanal or handcrafted goods from within an enclosed building that are custom-designed and produced in small quantities, which typically is characterized by minimal automation, little division of labor and a small number of skilled craftspeople. It may include a retail shop as an accessory use that primarily sells products produced on the premises. This definition excludes any use specifically defined in this section.	C	C	C	C	C	P	–	–	–	–	C	–
Food or beverage manufacturing
A state licensed establishment that produces food or beverage products that are typically sold to wholesalers or retailers. It may include a retail shop, restaurant or bar as an accessory use that primarily sells products produced on the premises. This definition includes, but is not limited to, microbrewery, distillery, winery, and commercial bakery.	C	C	C	C	C	P	–	–	–	–	C	–
Wood products, cabinet or furniture manufacturing
An establishment that produces finished wood products from logs or sawed lumber such as cabinets, furniture, decorative items, containers, flooring, trusses, or pre-fabricated buildings or building components from within an enclosed building. It may include a retail shop as an accessory use that primarily sells products produced on the premises.	C	C	C	C	C	P	–	–	–	–	C	–
Warehouse and storage
An establishment that stores, but does not sell, goods and may provide a range of services related to the distribution of goods. This definition specifically excludes any use specifically defined in this section.	–	–	–	–	–	P	–	–	–	–	–	–
Self-storage facility
An establishment that provides individual storage spaces for lease to either commercial or wholesale customers for storage of business goods, or to the general public for storage of household goods.	–	–	–	–	–	P	–	–	–	–	–	–
Tank farm or fuel storage and distribution services
An establishment with one or more tanks that typically store fuels, oils and similar liquid products. It may include sale and distribution of such products.	–	–	–	–	–	C	–	–	–	–	–	–

 





USE & DEFINITION	P = Permitted Use	C = Conditional Use	– = Use Not Allowed	

DN	

TC	

MU1	

MU2	

MU3	

OI	

R10	

R4	

R1	

RR	

RA	

FC
Wholesale trade
An establishment that sells or arranges the purchase of goods primarily to other businesses that is set up as a warehouse or office with little to no display of merchandise and where customers do not have direct access to the primary merchandise being sold.	–	C	–	–	–	P	–	–	–	–	–	–
Contractor’s yard
An establishment that provides storage for vehicles, machinery, equipment and materials used by a contractor in the construction-related trades, which may include a shop for maintaining or repairing the contractor’s vehicles, machinery or equipment or the contractor’s business office.	–	–	–	C	C	P	–	–	–	–	C	–
Air transportation services
A site or structure intended to accommodate or support air transportation such as a runway, hangar, terminal, control tower or heliport.	–	–	–	–	–	C	–	–	–	–	–	–
Rail transportation services
A site or structure intended to accommodate or support rail transportation such as a train station, depot, rail yard, or siding.	–	–	–	–	–	C	–	–	–	–	–	–
Transit or passenger transportation services
An establishment that provides public or ground transportation services such as van or bus transportation, and taxi or limousine services.	–	C	C	C	C	C	–	–	–	–	–	–
Truck or freight transportation services
An establishment that provides: (a) over-the-road transportation of cargo using trucks and tractor trailers; or (b) services such as storage, maintenance, repair or fuel primarily for heavy vehicles, including trucks, tractor trailers or buses.	–	–	–	–	–	C	–	–	–	–	–	–
Printing or publishing
An establishment that issues copies of works that are usually protected by copyright and that may print, reproduce, distribute, or offer direct access to works such as newspapers, magazines, periodicals, books, databases, calendars, greeting cards, maps, posters, software, sound recordings or video recordings. This definition specifically excludes retail copy shops, which will be considered retail sales under this ordinance.	–	–	–	–	–	P	–	–	–	–	–	–
Media recording or broadcasting studio
An establishment that is used to produce, distribute or broadcast radio, television, movie, sound, video or similar media products, programs or recordings.	C	C	C	–	–	P	–	–	–	–	–	–
Communications antenna
A device used to transmit or receive radio, television or other wireless communications and related structures and equipment. This definition specifically excludes a communication tower.	P	P	P	P	P	P	–	–	–	P	P	C
Communications tower
A structure used to support one or more communication antennas and related structures and equipment.	–	–	–	–	–	C	–	–	–	–	C	C
Information services or data center
An establishment used to house computer systems and associated components such as telecommunications and storage systems, to provide electronic data processing services, or to supply digital information. It generally includes redundant or back-up power supplies and communications connections, environmental controls and security devices.	–	–	–	–	–	P	–	–	–	–	–	–
Laboratory or research facility
An establishment used for research or analysis in the physical, engineering, cognitive or life sciences.	–	C	–	C	–	C	–	–	–	–	–	–
Composting facility
An establishment used primarily used for the composting of food and other biodegradable wastes.	–	–	–	–	–	C	–	–	–	–	C	–
ART, ENTERTAINMENT AND RECREATION 													
Performance theater
An establishment that presents live entertainment by actors, singers, dancers, musicians or other performing artists to an audience.	P	P	C	C	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–
Movie theater
An establishment that shows movies or other recorded entertainment to an audience.	P	P	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–

 





USE & DEFINITION	P = Permitted Use	C = Conditional Use	– = Use Not Allowed	

DN	

TC	

MU1	

MU2	

MU3	

OI	

R10	

R4	

R1	

RR	

RA	

FC
Art gallery or studio
An establishment used to produce, display, or sell works of art or handcrafted jewelry, pottery, or glassware, or similar decorative objects or handcrafted goods.	P	P	P	P	P	P	–	–	–	–	–	–
Museum
An establishment that preserves and exhibits objects, sites and natural wonders of historical, cultural or educational value.	P	P	P	P	P	–	–	–	–	C	C	–
Indoor recreation
An establishment that offers physical fitness, sports, games and other leisure-time activities to the general public primarily from within an enclosed building. This definition specifically excludes any use defined in this section.	P	P	C	P	P	P	–	–	–	–	–	–
Fitness center or health club
An establishment that offers fitness or recreational sports facilities and services to members and their guests primarily from within an enclosed building.	C	P	–	P	P	P	–	–	–	–	–	–
Spa
An establishment that offers health, beauty, weight loss and relaxation treatments and therapies through means such as massage, facials, steam and sauna facilities, waxing, electrolysis, and exercise facilities and instruction. It may offer food and beverages to clients for immediate consumption on the premises.  It may offer personal services such as hair salons, make-up consultations, manicures or pedicures as additional services.	P	P	P	P	P	–	–	–	–	–	–	–
Event facility
An establishment used to host conventions, trade shows, corporate meetings, weddings, receptions, reunions and similar special events that typically includes large open spaces such as auditoriums, banquet halls, exhibition halls and meeting rooms	P	P	C	P	P	–	–	–	–	C	C	–
Outdoor recreation
An establishment that offers physical fitness, sports, games and other leisure-time activities primarily outside an enclosed building. This definition specifically excludes any use defined in this section.	–	C	–	P	P	C	–	–	C	C	C	C
Golf course or country club
An establishment laid out with at least nine holes for playing the game of golf and improved with trees, greens, fairways and hazards. It may include a clubhouse that offers food and beverages to members and guests, restrooms, driving range and shelters. It may provide additional recreational activities or retail sales of golf-related merchandise as an accessory use.	–	–	–	C	P	–	–	–	–	C	C	–
Campground
An establishment designed to accommodate campers and their equipment including tents, tent trailers, and recreational vehicles, or to provide overnight recreation camping or outdoor adventure retreats. It may provide additional facilities and services such as cabins, sanitary facilities, food services, recreational facilities, and organized recreational or educational activities.	–	–	–	–	C	–	–	–	–	C	C	C
Summer camp
An establishment that offers accommodations in tents, cabins or similar rustic structures and organized, group recreational or educational activities for specified periods of time typically not less than one week. It may be used on a limited basis to provide meeting, recreation or social facilities for a private association or group as an accessory use.	–	–	–	–	C	–	–	–	–	C	C	C
Primitive camp
A seasonal dwelling used for a limited period of time each year that lacks complete kitchen and indoor sanitation facilities.	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	P	P	P
Recreation path
A pathway dedicated to non-motorized recreational use.	P	P	P	P	P	C	C	C	C	C	P	P
Park or nature preserve
A site maintained in a primarily unimproved natural state for passive recreation or conservation purposes.	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P
CIVIC AND COMMUNITY 													
Grade school
A state-recognized institution used to educate children from pre-school through grade 12.	P	P	P	P	–	–	P	P	P	–	–	–
College or university
An accredited institution of higher learning that grants undergraduate or graduate degrees.	P	P	C	P	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–
 





USE & DEFINITION	P = Permitted Use	C = Conditional Use	– = Use Not Allowed	

DN	

TC	

MU1	

MU2	

MU3	

OI	

R10	

R4	

R1	

RR	

RA	

FC
Technical or trade school
An establishment that offers vocational and technical training typically required for specific trades or occupations, and often leading to job-specific certification.	C	C	–	C	–	P	–	–	–	–	–	–
Specialty school
A commercial establishment that offers instruction, classes or training on a specific topic such as cooking, arts, crafts, dance, music, sports or fitness.	C	C	C	C	C	C	–	–	–	–	–	–
Government office or courthouse
An establishment used by federal, state or local government agencies to administer, oversee and manage public programs, and to carry-out government functions. This definition specifically excludes public safety facility and highway maintenance facility	P	P	P	P	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–
Community center
A public or non-profit establishment used as a place of meeting for civic, recreational and social activities that is generally open to the public.	P	P	C	P	C	–	–	–	–	–	–	–
Public safety facility
An establishment that provides fire, rescue, police, or emergency response services.	P	P	P	P	–	P	–	–	–	–	–	–
Highway maintenance facility
An establishment used to store, maintain and repair the vehicles, machinery, equipment and materials necessary for public highway repair and maintenance, or to provide municipal infrastructure and services such as water or sewer.	–	–	–	C	–	P	–	–	–	–	–	–
Medical clinic or office
An establishment from which one or more licensed practitioners provide healthcare services to people primarily as outpatients.	P	P	C	P	–	P	–	–	–	–	–	–
Child day care facility
An establishment that cares primarily for infants and preschool-age children, as well as older children when school is not in session.	P	P	P	P	–	C	–	–	–	–	–	–
Social assistance and charitable services
An establishment that provides social assistance services directly to individuals, and that does not offer residential or accommodation services.	P	P	C	P	–	P	–	–	–	–	–	–
Religious institution
An establishment that is primarily designed for worship and religious congregations. It may also include classrooms, residential quarters, and spaces to accommodate social activities as an accessory use.	P	P	P	P	–	–	–	–	C	C	–	–
Funeral and cremation services
An establishment that prepares deceased people for burial or cremation, cremates the remains of deceased people, or holds funeral services.	P	P	C	P	–	P	–	–	–	–	–	–
Cemetery
A site designed to inter or otherwise store the remains of deceased people or pets.	–	–	–	C	–	–	–	–	C	P	P	–
Social or membership club
A private establishment that is the premises of an organization that meets periodically to promote some social, service, educational, athletic or recreational objectives and that caters exclusively to members and their guests.	P	P	C	P	P	–	–	–	–	–	–	–
NATURAL RESOURCE BASED 													
Agriculture or forestry
An establishment that grows crops, raises animals, harvests timber, or harvests plants or animals from their natural habitats.	–	–	–	P	P	–	–	–	–	P	P	P
Greenhouse or nursery
A commercial establishment that grows nursery products, nursery stock, trees, shrubs or flowers. It may include retail sale of products grown on-site as an accessory use.	–	–	–	P	–	P	–	–	–	C	C	–
Agriculture support services
An establishment that performs support activities related to raising livestock such as breeding services, livestock sales or auctions, and slaughterhouses or slaughtering services.	–	–	–	–	–	P	–	–	–	C	C	–
Stable or riding facility
An establishment intended to house, train or care for horses.	–	–	–	C	C	–	–	–	–	P	P	C
 





USE & DEFINITION	P = Permitted Use	C = Conditional Use	– = Use Not Allowed	

DN	

TC	

MU1	

MU2	

MU3	

OI	

R10	

R4	

R1	

RR	

RA	

FC
Forestry operations (except sawmill and wood pellet production)
An establishment that processes trees and logs or manufactures forest products.	–	–	–	–	–	P	–	–	–	C	C	C
Sawmill or wood pellet production
An establishment that processes timber harvested off-site into wood construction and manufacturing materials such as  lumber, veneer, stud wood, plywood, poles, pilings, and wood chips, or an establishment that manufactures wood pellets.	–	–	–	–	–	P	–	–	–	–	C	C
Fishing or game preserves
An establishment that is used for commercial hunting or trapping, or as a commercial or recreational game or hunting preserve.	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	P	P	P
Mining or quarrying
An establishment that dredges, quarries, mines, or develops mine sites for crushed and broken stones, limestone, sand, gravel, clay, topsoil, or other stones and nonmetallic minerals. It may include on-site processing such as crushing, grinding, washing or screening.	–	–	–	–	–	P	–	–	–	–	C	C
On-farm business
An establishment that engages in agri-tourism, agri-education, direct marketing of locally-produced farm or forest products, or that adds value to locally- produced farm or forest products.	–	–	–	C	C	–	–	–	–	–	C	C
 


1.15	Dimensional Standards Table

	DN	TC	MU1	MU2	MU3	OI	R10	R4	R1	RR	RA	FC
LOTS 													
Minimum lot size	3,000 sf	15,000 sf	4,000 sf	12,000 sf	1 acre	20,000 sf	8,000 sf	10,000 sf	1 acre	5 acre	10 acre	25 acre
Minimum lot frontage	30 ft	120 ft	45 ft	90 ft	150 ft	120 ft	45 ft	60 ft	120 ft	300 ft	300 ft	300 ft
Maximum lot coverage	100%	75%	85%	75%	50%	70%	80%	60%	Lesser of 50%
or 1 acre	Lesser of 10%
or 1 acre	Lesser of 5%
or 1 acre	Lesser of 1%
or 1 acre
DENSITY 													
Maximum residential density
(DU = dwelling unit)	no max	no max	1 DU per
4,000
sf of lot area	1 DU per
4,000
sf of lot area	1 DU per 1 acre of lot area	n/a	1 DU per
4,000
sf of lot area	1 DU per 10,000 sf of lot area	1 DU per 1 acre of lot area	1 DU per 5 acres of lot area	1 DU per 10 acres of lot area	n/a
Residential density bonus (in addition to maximum residential density)	n/a	n/a	n/a	50% bonus for
75% under- building parking	50% bonus for
50%
protection	n/a	n/a	n/a	n/a	3 DU per 5 acres with 50%
protection	3 DU per 10 acres with 70%
protection	n/a
Net Zero density bonus	n/a	n/a	no max	no max	no max with 50%
protection	n/a	no max	no max	no max	no max with 50%
protection	no max with 70%
protection	n/a
SETBACKS 													
Minimum front setback	0 ft	15 ft	10 ft	15 ft	30 ft	20 ft	15 ft	15 ft	30 ft	30 ft	30 ft	30 ft
Maximum front setback	15 ft	30 ft	30 ft	no max	no max	no max	no max	no max	no max	no max	no max	no max
Minimum side setback	0 ft	10 ft	10 ft	20 ft	20 ft	15 ft	10 ft	10 ft	15 ft	20 ft	20 ft	20 ft
Minimum rear setback	0 ft or
10 ft if abutting residential or mixed use district	10 ft or
20 ft if abutting residential district	10 ft or
20 ft if abutting residential district	10 ft or
20 ft if abutting residential use or district	20 ft	20 ft	20 ft	20 ft	20 ft	20 ft	20 ft	20 ft
Minimum Water Resources setback	10 ft	20 ft	20 ft	50 ft	50 ft	50 ft	30 ft	50 ft	50 ft	50 ft	50 ft	50 ft
BUILDINGS 													
Maximum building footprint	no max	no max	6,000 sf	no max	6,000 sf	no max	6,000 sf	no max	no max	no max	no max	no max
Maximum building coverage	no max	40%	no max	40%	no max	no max	no max	no max	15%	no max	no max	no max
Minimum building height	2 stories	2 stories	2 stories	20 ft for nonresidential buildings	no min	no min	no min	no min	no min	no min	no min	no min
Maximum building height
Measured as average between eaves and ridge for pitched roofs and to roof deck for flat roofs	40 ft	40 ft	30 ft	30 ft or
40 ft w/ 75% under-building parking	30 ft	30 ft	30 ft	30 ft	30 ft	30 ft	30 ft	30 ft
 


Section 2	Overlay Districts

2.1	Design Review Overlay District (DRO)

2.1.1	Purpose. The purpose of the Design Review Overlay District is to:

(1)	Preserve, maintain, and enhance the architectural integrity, historic character, quality of design and construction, aesthetics of streetscapes and buildings, and walkability that support Manchester’s visitor-based economy and the vitality of the town core.
(2)	Preserve, maintain, and enhance the physical qualities of Manchester’s historic districts by regulating exterior modifications to contributing historic structures and by requiring new structures to be compatible with and respond to their historic setting and context in accordance with the principles summarized below:
(a)	Buildings should function to meet today’s needs just as they met certain needs at the time they were built. The changes required to meet new demands should be a compromise between the existing integrity of the structure and new functions. Good preservation seeks both of these goals.
(b)	Every attempt should be made to preserve as much of a historic building’s original design, architectural details and building materials as is feasible. When it is necessary to introduce modern elements to a historic building exterior, every effort should be made to maintain the building’s overall architectural character.
(c)	New construction should be a product of its own time and not be a copy of an older architectural style with associated details no longer practical. The unity of an existing street or block should be a major consideration in the design of any new construction. Rather than copying a particular style, the new building should relate in materials, form, massing, proportion and rhythm of common elements to those present on the street or block.

2.1.2	Applicability. The Design Review Overlay District includes lands in the Downtown (DN), Town Center (TC), Mixed Use 1 (MU1), Mixed Use 2 (MU2), and Mixed Use 3 (MU3) zoning districts, as well as all lands falling in the town’s four historic districts as defined in the Manchester Town Plan.

2.1.3	Allowed Uses. Within this Design Review Overlay District, all land uses and development allowed (permitted or conditional use) in the base zoning district are allowed and require design approval from the Development Review Board or Zoning Administrator, after review and comment by the Design Advisory Committee, and must conform to the standards of this section except for the following:

(1)	Subdivision of land.
(2)	Interior alteration or a change in use that will not result in any exterior modifications.
(3)	Normal repair and maintenance with materials of similar composition, type and appearance.
(a)	This includes any repainting of previously painted surfaces, irrespective of color, but does not include painting of existing, unpainted surfaces.
(b)	For contributing historic structures, normal repair and maintenance must be undertaken
in accordance with the practices recommended in the Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings developed by the U.S. Department of Interior’s Technical Preservation Services.
(4)	Exterior modifications to a noncontributing structure that will not be visible from the street.
(5)	Demolition of a noncontributing structure within a historic district.
(6)	The removal of a sign provided that no evidence of the sign’s installation remains.
 


(7)	The replacement of a lawful sign provided that the replacement sign is no larger than the previously approved sign.
(8)	Construction of a freestanding accessory structure with a footprint of no more than 200 square feet in area and a height of no more than 15 feet.
(9)	Non-substantial alterations as determined by the Zoning Administrator.

2.1.4	Dimensional Standards. The dimensional standards within this overlay district will be as specified for the base zoning district.

2.1.5	Design Review Standards. Design review criteria that must be met by land development in this overlay district are found in Section 5.4. All proposed land development within this overlay district must incorporate frontage and facade elements that will contribute to a pedestrian-oriented streetscape, and must be compatible in form, massing, proportion and rhythm with its historic context. More specific, detailed guidance may be found in the Design Guidelines for Manchester’s Commercial and Historic Districts (as most recently amended and incorporated into this ordinance by reference).
 


2.2	Aquifer Protection Overlay District (APO)

2.2.1	Purpose. The purpose of the APO is to protect public health and safety by preventing contamination, promoting recharge and maintaining the supply of community groundwater drinking water sources within the town.

2.2.2	Protection Areas. The Aquifer Protection Overlay District includes the following zones for active source protection areas as depicted on the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources online Natural Resources Atlas:

(1)	Zone A. Zone A, the Drinking Water Critical Impact Zone, is the area within Zones 1 and 2 identified in a water system’s Source Protection Plan.

(2)	Zone B. Zone B, the Drinking Water Potential Impact Zone, is the area within Zone 3 identified in a water system’s Source Protection Plan.

2.2.3	Uses. The uses allowed within this overlay district will be as allowed in the underlying zoning district except the following uses are prohibited within Zone A, but may be allowed as conditional uses within Zone B to the extent allowed in the underlying zoning district:

(1)	Funeral home or cemetery
(2)	Golf course
(3)	Pesticide, herbicide and fungicide applications, with the exception of those reviewed and approved by the Vermont Department of Health
(4)	Light industry or manufacturing use
(5)	Automobile repair
(6)	Transportation services
(7)	Laboratory or research facility
(8)	On-site wastewater disposal system or wastewater treatment facility
(9)	Stormwater management facility (10)Highway maintenance facility (11)Contractor’s yard
(12)	Salvage yard
(13)	Extracting, quarrying or stone cutting (14)Composting facility
(15)Storage of snow brought in from outside the overlay district (16)Underground storage tanks, for liquid propane only
(17)Extraction or use of more than 10,000 gallons of water per day for purposes other than supplying the water system associated with the protection area.

2.2.4	Prohibited Uses. The following uses are expressly prohibited anywhere in the Aquifer Protection Overlay District:

(1)	Fueling station or carwash.
(2)	Landfill or waste management facility.
(3)	Printing facility.
(4)	Bulk storage of flammable, combustible, toxic or hazardous materials, including but not limited to petroleum products, road salt and de-icing chemicals.
(5)	Any use which involves as a principal activity the generation, storage, use, treatment, transportation, or disposal of hazardous materials.
(6)	Open lagoons or ponds containing materials or wastes that have the potential to contaminate the drinking water supply if released into the environment.
(7)	Underground storage tanks, of fuels other than liquid propane.
 


2.2.5	Nonconforming Uses. The Development Review Board may approve the extension or expansion of an existing prohibited use within the APO provided the following conditions are satisfied:

(1)	The requirements of Section 3.9 are satisfied;
(2)	The applicant demonstrates that all hazardous waste generated on the site is contained and transported from the site in a manner approved by the State of Vermont for the containment and transportation of such waste; and
(3)	Wastewater disposal is accomplished via connection to the municipal sewer system, or the extension or expansion does not result in the generation of any additional wastewater.

2.2.6	Performance Standards. Property owners must undertake land use and development within this overlay district as follows:

(1)	All new development must be connected to the Town of Manchester sewer system. All sewer lines must be constructed in conformance with applicable public works standards.

(2)	Applicants must locate proposed development outside the overlay district to the maximum extent feasible if the subject lot includes land outside the overlay district.

(3)	For any proposed activity, with the exception of a one or two family dwelling on an individual lot, which will render more than 20% of the total lot area impervious, the application shall be accompanied by drainage calculations utilizing U.S. Soil Conservation Service methodology, demonstrating that any increase in the volume of runoff shall be recharged on-site and diverted toward areas with vegetation for surface infiltration to the maximum extent possible. No more than 50% of the total lot area shall be made impervious.

(4)	For any use, with the exception of a one or two family dwelling on an individual lot, retaining less than 30% of the total lot area in its natural vegetative state, the application shall be accompanied by evidence to demonstrate that such removal of vegetative cover shall not result in decreased recharge of the ground water deposit, or increased sedimentation of surface waters. The application shall indicate any restoration and erosion control measures proposed for the site.

(5)	All facilities must adhere to applicable federal and state standards for the storage, handling, use and disposal of materials or wastes that have the potential to contaminate the drinking water supply if released into the environment.

(6)	Floor drains may only be allowed if they drain into approved sewer systems. On-site discharge from floor drains is prohibited.

(7)	Any above ground facility involving the collection, handling, production, manufacture, use, storage, transfer or disposal of materials or wastes that have the potential to contaminate the drinking water supply if released into the environment must have a secondary containment system that:

(a)	Is designed to intercept any leak or spill from the primary containment vessel or structure;
(b)	Is provided with an overflow recovery catchment area (sump).
(c)	Is easily inspected.
(d)	Capable of containing 150% of the largest volume of storage (a larger volume of storage may be necessary if precipitation will be able to collect in the secondary containment system).
(e)	Any below ground facility (including storage tanks and pipes) containing or carrying of materials or wastes that have the potential to contaminate the drinking water supply if released into the environment must have double walls and inspectable sumps and include a monitoring system and secondary standpipe for monitoring and recovery.

(8)	All facilities involving the collection, handling, production, manufacture, use, storage, transfer or
 


disposal of materials or wastes that have the potential to contaminate the drinking water supply if released into the environment must maintain an up-to-date contingency plan for preventing contamination of the drinking water supply should floods, fires, other natural catastrophes, equipment failure or other releases occur.

(9)	All necessary precautions shall be taken during the application of pesticides, herbicides, or fungicides to prevent the accumulation of hazardous concentrations of these materials in the water or on the land within the APO.

(10)	Special care shall be taken during construction and maintenance to avoid spills of oil, grease, fuel, solvents, or other hazardous materials.

(11)	All releases of materials or wastes that have the potential to contaminate the drinking water supply must be reported to the Town of Manchester.
 


2.3	Flood Hazard Overlay District (FHO)

2.3.1	Authority

In accordance with 10 VSA Chapter 32, 24 VSA Chapter 59, and 24 VSA Chapter 117 §4424, §4411 and
§4414, this section of the ordinance is hereby established for areas at risk of flood damage. Except as additionally described below, all administrative procedures follow municipal procedures under 24 VSA Chapter 117. This section of the ordinance shall be known and referred to herein as these flood hazard regulations.

2.3.2	Purpose

The purpose of these flood hazard regulations is to:

(1)	Avoid and minimize the loss of life and property, the disruption of commerce, the impairment of the tax base, and the extraordinary public expenditures and demands on public services that result from flooding related inundation and erosion;
(2)	Ensure that the selection, design, creation, and use of development in flood hazard areas is reasonably safe and accomplished in a manner that is consistent with public wellbeing, does not impair stream equilibrium, floodplain services, or the stream corridor;
(3)	Manage all flood hazard areas designated pursuant to 10 VSA Chapter 32 §753; and
(4)	Make the Town of Manchester, its citizens, and businesses eligible for federal flood insurance, federal disaster recovery funds, and hazard mitigation funds as may be available.

2.3.3	Precedence

The provisions of these flood hazard regulations shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any other local, state, or federal laws or regulations. Where this flood hazard regulation imposes a greater restriction, the provisions here shall take precedence.

2.3.4	Disclaimer of Liability

These flood hazard regulations do not imply that land outside of the areas covered by this section will be free from flood or erosion damages. These regulations shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Manchester, or any municipal official or employee thereof, for any flood or erosion damages that result from reliance on these regulations, or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.

2.3.5	Lands to Which These Regulations Apply - Regulated Flood Hazard Areas

These regulations shall apply to development in all areas in the Town of Manchester identified in the FEMA Flood Insurance Study of 2015 for Bennington County, Vermont, as well as areas of special flood hazard on the National Flood Insurance Program maps, dated 2015 or as may be superseded when updated by the state or federal government and received for use by the Town of Manchester, which are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this zoning bylaw.

These regulations shall apply to the river corridors and special flood hazard areas (hereafter called “flood hazard areas”) in the Town of Manchester as described below. These flood hazard areas overlay any other existing zoning districts and the regulations herein are the minimum standards that must be met before meeting the additional standards applicable in the underlying district. These flood hazard areas include:

(1)	The river corridors as published by the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources including mapped Statewide River Corridors and refinements to that data based on field-based assessments which
 


are hereby adopted by reference. Where river corridors are not mapped, the standards of subsection 2.3.9.3 shall apply to the area measured as 50 feet from the top of bank or slope.
(2)	The special flood hazard area in and on the most current flood insurance study and maps published by the Department of Homeland Security, Federal Emergency Management Agency, National Flood Insurance Program, as provided by the Secretary of the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources pursuant to 10 VSA Chapter 32 §753, which are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of these regulations.

2.3.6	Base Flood Elevations and Floodway Limits in Special Flood Hazard Areas

Where available, base flood elevations and floodway limits provided by the National Flood Insurance Program and in the flood insurance study and accompanying maps shall be used to administer and enforce these regulations. In special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations or floodway limits have not been provided by the National Flood Insurance Program in the flood insurance study and accompanying maps, it is the applicant’s responsibility to develop the necessary data. Where available, the applicant shall use data provided by FEMA, state, or other federal agencies.

2.3.7	Interpretation

The information presented on any maps, or contained in any studies, adopted by reference, is presumed accurate.

(1)	If uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the special flood hazard area or the floodway, the location of the boundary shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator. If the applicant disagrees with such a determination, a letter of map amendment from FEMA shall constitute proof of boundary.
(2)	If uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the river corridor, the location of the boundary shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator. If the applicant disagrees with such determination, a letter of determination from the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources shall constitute proof of boundary.

2.3.8	Land Uses in Flood Hazard Areas

2.3.8.1	Prohibited Development

The following development activities or uses are prohibited in flood hazard areas:

(1)	New primary structures, including the placement of manufactured homes or mobile homes, within the floodway;
(2)	Storage yards or junk yards;
(3)	New fill except as necessary to elevate structures above the base flood elevation;
(4)	Accessory structures in the floodway;
(5)	Critical facilities; and
(6)	All development not exempted, permitted, or conditionally permitted.

2.3.8.2	Permitted Development

The following uses or development activities are permitted in flood hazard areas:

(1)	Recreational uses;
(2)	Non-substantial improvements to existing structures;
(3)	Construction of accessory structures;
(4)	Development related to on-site wastewater or water supply systems;
(5)	Utilities for existing buildings;
 


(6)	At-grade parking for existing buildings and uses; and
(7)	Storage or parking of recreational vehicles.

2.3.8.3	Conditional Uses

Conditional use review and approval by the Development Review Board is required prior to the issuance of a permit for the following proposed uses or development activities:

(1)	New construction outside of the floodway;
(2)	Substantial improvement, elevation, relocation, or flood proofing of existing structures;
(3)	New or replacement storage tanks for existing structures;
(4)	Improvements to existing structures in the floodway;
(5)	Grading, excavation; or the creation of a pond;
(6)	Improvements to existing roads;
(7)	Bridges, culverts, channel management activities, or public projects that are functionally dependent on stream access or stream crossing;
(8)	Public utilities;
(9)	Improvements to existing primary structures in the river corridor that do not expand the footprint of the existing structure more than 500 square feet;
(10)	Accessory structures in the river corridor, of 500 square feet or less, that represent a minimal investment;
(11)	Building utilities in the river corridor; and
(12)	At-grade parking for existing buildings in the river corridor.

2.3.8.4	Exempted Development

The following uses or activities are exempt from regulation under these flood hazard regulations:

(1)	The removal of a building or structure in whole or in part;
(2)	Maintenance of roads and stormwater facilities;
(3)	Agricultural activities conducted in accordance with the Vermont Department of Agriculture’s Accepted Agricultural Practices (AAP); and
(4)	Silvicultural activities conducted in accordance with the Vermont Department of Forests, Parks
and Recreation’s Acceptable Management Practices (AMP).

2.3.8.5	Variances

Variances may be granted by the Development Review Board only in accordance with all the criteria in 24 VSA §4469, and Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Section 60.6.

(1)	A variance for development within the river corridor may be allowed if, based on a review by the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources, it is determined that the proposed development will not obstruct the establishment and maintenance of fluvial geomorphic equilibrium for the watercourse.
(2)	Any variance issued in the special flood hazard area will not increase flood heights, and will
inform the applicant in writing over the signature of a community official that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation increases risk to life and property and will result in increased flood insurance premiums up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of coverage. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions.
 


2.3.8.6	Nonconforming Structures and Uses

The Development Review Board may approve the repair, relocation, replacement, or enlargement of a nonconforming structure within a flood hazard area provided that:

(1)	The proposed development is in compliance with the standards in Section 2.3.9 of this ordinance;
(2)	A nonconforming structure that is substantially damaged or destroyed may be reconstructed only in circumstances when the structure cannot be relocated to a less hazardous location on the parcel. The lowest floor of the reconstructed structure must be rebuilt to one foot or more above the base flood elevation, and the structure must otherwise comply with all requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program;
(3)	Nonconforming structures or uses shall be considered abandoned where such structures or uses
are discontinued for more than 12 months; and
(4)	An individual manufactured or mobile home lot in an existing manufactured or mobile home park that is vacated shall not be considered a discontinuance or abandonment of nonconformity. Replacement manufactured or mobile homes must be placed so as to meet the development standards in Section 2.3.9 of this ordinance.

2.3.9	Development Standards

2.3.9.1 Special Flood Hazard Area

Development within the Special Flood Hazard Area shall meet the following standards based on type of
development and the location of that development within the Special Flood Hazard Area:

(1)	All development within the Special Flood Hazard Area shall be:
(a)	Reasonably safe from flooding;
(b)	Designed, operated, maintained, modified, and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, release, or lateral movement of the structure;
(c)	Constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
(d)	Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
(e)	Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;
(f)	Adequately drained to reduce exposure to flood hazards;
(g)	Located so as to minimize conflict with changes in channel location over time and the need to intervene with such changes; and,
(h)	Required to locate any fuel storage tanks (as needed to serve an existing building in the Special Flood Hazard Area) a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to prevent flotation; or storage tanks may be placed underground, if securely anchored as certified by a qualified professional.
(2)	In Zones AE, AH, and A1 through A30 where base flood elevations or floodway limits have not been determined, development shall not be permitted unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated encroachment, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one foot at any point within the community. The demonstration must be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles and certified by a licensed professional engineer.
(3)	Structures to be substantially improved in Zones A, A1-30, AE, and AH shall be located such that
the lowest floor is at least one foot above base flood elevation, this must be documented, in as- built condition, with a FEMA Elevation Certificate;
 


(4)	Structures to be substantially improved for non-residential use shall:
(a)	Meet the standards in subsection 2.3.9.3; or,
(b)	Have the lowest floor, including basement, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that up to two feet above the base flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of  buoyancy. (A permit for flood proofing shall not be issued until a licensed professional engineer or architect has reviewed the structural design, specifications and plans, and has certified that the design and proposed methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this subsection.)
(5)	Fully enclosed areas below grade on all sides (including below grade crawlspaces and basements) are prohibited;
(6)	Fully enclosed areas that are above grade, below the lowest floor, below BFE and subject to flooding, shall:
(a)	Be solely used for parking of vehicles, storage, or building access, and such a condition shall
clearly be stated on any permits; and,
(b)	Be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Such designs must be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings on two walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(7)	Recreational vehicles must be fully licensed and ready for highway use;
(8)	A small accessory structure of 500 square feet or less that represents a minimal investment need not be elevated to the base flood elevation in this area, provided the structure is placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters and shall meet the criteria in subsection 2.3.9.6.
(9)	Water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.
(10)	Sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
(11)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(12)	The flood carrying and sediment transport capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse shall be maintained, and any alteration or relocation shall not result in any decrease of stream stability;
(13)	Bridges and culverts, which by their nature must be placed in or over the stream, must have a stream alteration permit from the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources where applicable.
(14)	Subdivisions and Planned Unit Developments must be accessible by dry land access outside the special flood hazard area.
(15)	Existing buildings, including manufactured or mobile homes, to be substantially improved in Zone AO shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade, at least as high as the depth number specified on the community’s FIRM, or at least two feet if no depth number is specified.

2.3.9.2	Floodway Areas

Within designated floodway areas, development shall conform to the following standards:
 


(1)	Encroachments or development above grade and less than one foot above the base flood elevation, are prohibited unless hydrologic and hydraulic analyses are performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, by a licensed professional engineer, certifying that the proposed development will:
(a)	Not result in any increase in flood levels (0.00 feet) during the occurrence of the base flood;
(b)	Not increase any risk to surrounding properties, facilities, or structures from erosion or flooding.
(2)	Public utilities may be placed underground, and the analyses may be waived, where a licensed
professional engineer certifies that there will be no change in grade and the utilities will be adequately protected from scour.

2.3.9.3	River Corridors

Within designated river corridors development shall conform to the following standards:

(1)	Accessory structures may be located within 50 feet of the existing primary building provided that the location does not decrease the distance between the existing primary structure and the top of bank.
(2)	Development shall not increase the susceptibility of the subject property or other properties to
fluvial erosion damage;
(3)	Development shall not increase the potential of materials being swept onto other lands or into the stream and causing damage to other properties from fluvial erosion;
(4)	Development shall not cause an undue burden on public services and facilities including roads,
bridges, culverts, and emergency service providers during and after fluvial erosion events.
(5)	Bridge and culvert projects must have a stream alteration permit; and
(6)	Channel management activities must be authorized by the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources.

2.3.10	Administration

2.3.10.1	Application Submission Requirements

Applications for land use or development within the regulated flood hazard area shall include a site plan that includes the following:

(1)	Depiction of the proposed land use or development;
(2)	All water bodies on the subject property;
(3)	Boundaries of special flood hazard areas, floodways, and river corridors on the subject property;
(4)	The shortest horizontal distance from the proposed land use or development to the top of bank of any stream;
(5)	Any existing and proposed drainage;
(6)	Any proposed fill, and pre and post development grades; and
(7)	The elevation of the proposed lowest floor, as referenced to the same vertical datum as the elevation on the current Flood Insurance Rate Maps.

Applications for land use or development within the regulated flood hazard area shall also include a Vermont Agency of Natural Resources Project Review Sheet for the proposal. The Project Review Sheet shall identify all state and federal agencies from which permit approval is required for the proposal, and shall be submitted as a required attachment to the municipal permit application. All required state and federal permits, or letters indicating that such permits are not required, shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator before work can begin.
 


2.3.10.2	Referral

Upon receipt of a complete application for substantial improvement or new construction within the regulated flood hazard area, the Zoning Administrator shall submit a copy of the application and supporting information to the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) Coordinator at the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources (ANR) in accordance with 24 VSA §4424. A permit may be issued only following receipt of comments from the ANR NFIP Coordinator, or the expiration of 30 days from the date the application was mailed to the ANR, whichever is sooner.

If the applicant is seeking a permit for the alteration or relocation of a watercourse, the Zoning Administrator shall provide copies of the application to the town clerk of any abutting municipality downstream from the proposed alteration or relocation, the ANR Stream Alteration Engineer, and the Army Corps of Engineers. The Zoning Administrator shall also provide a copy of the application for alteration or relocation of a watercourse to the ANR NFIP Coordinator. A permit may be issued only following receipt of comments from the ANR NFIP Coordinator, or the expiration of 30 days from the date the application was mailed to the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources, whichever is sooner.

2.3.10.3	Decision

The Zoning Administrator and Development Review Board shall consider comments from the ANR NFIP Coordinator prior to deciding on an application for land use or development within the regulated flood hazard area. The Development Review Board may recess the proceedings on any application pending submission of additional information.

2.3.10.4	Records

The Zoning Administrator shall properly file and maintain a record of:

(1)	All permits issued for development in the regulated flood hazard area;
(2)	An elevation certificate with the as-built elevation (consistent with the datum of the elevation on the current Flood Insurance Rate Maps for the community) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new, substantially improved, or flood proofed buildings (not including accessory structures) in the Special Flood Hazard Area;
(3)	All flood proofing and other certifications required under this regulation; and
(4)	All decisions of the Development Review Board (including regarding variances and violations) and all supporting findings of fact, conclusions of law, decision and order with any conditions.

2.3.10.5	Certificate of Compliance

In accordance with 24 VSA §4449, it shall be unlawful to use or occupy, or permit the use or occupancy  of any land or structure, or part thereof, created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure within the regulated flood hazard area until a certificate of compliance is issued by the Zoning Administrator, certifying that the proposed use of the structure or land conforms to the requirements of this ordinance.

A certificate of compliance is not required for structures that were built in compliance with the ordinance  at the time of construction and have not been improved since the adoption of this bylaw. Within 14 days  of the receipt of the application for a certificate of compliance, the Zoning Administrator shall inspect the premises to ensure that all permits identified on the Project Review Sheet have been acquired and all that all work has been completed in conformance with the zoning permit and associated approvals. If the Zoning Administrator fails to grant or deny the certificate of compliance within 14 days of the submission  of the application, the certificate shall be deemed issued on the 15th day. If a certificate of compliance cannot be issued, notice will be sent to the owner and copied to any lender of record.
 


2.3.10.6	Enforcement and Penalties

These flood hazard area regulations shall be enforced under this ordinance in accordance with 24 VSA Chapter 117 §4451, §4452 and 24 VSA Chapter 59 §1974(a). The Zoning Administrator shall provide a copy of any notice of violation involving lands falling within the flood hazard areas to the ANR NFIP Coordinator.

If any appeals have been resolved, but a violation remains, the Zoning Administrator shall submit a declaration to the administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program requesting a denial of flood insurance to the violator. The declaration shall consist of:

(1)	The name of the property owner and address or legal description of the property sufficient to confirm its identity or location;
(2)	A clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation of a cited state or local law,
regulation, or ordinance;
(3)	A clear statement that the Zoning Administrator making the declaration has authority to do so and a citation of that authority;
(4)	Evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the violation and the prospective
denial of insurance; and
(5)	A clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended.

To assure that agriculture minimizes adverse impacts on water quality, violations of required agricultural practices pursuant to 6 VSA §4810(a) shall be considered violations of these flood hazard regulations. Upon learning of such violations, the Zoning Administrator shall immediately report them to the Vermont Secretary of Agriculture, Food and Markets for enforcement.

2.3.11  Flood Hazard Area Definitions

The definitions provided in Section 12 apply throughout this ordinance, including to these flood hazard regulations. The definitions provided in this section are specific to these flood hazard regulations and are indicated in italics above.

Development means any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials.

Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.

Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water.

New construction under the flood hazard regulations means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulation adopted by the community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

Structure means, for regulatory purposes under this bylaw, a walled and roofed building, as well as a manufactured home, and any related built systems, including gas or liquid storage tanks.
 


Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with these flood hazard regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3 is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. Agriculture within flood hazard areas not conducted according to required agricultural practices shall constitute a violation of these flood hazard regulations.
 


Section 3	Authority, Adoption and Applicability

3.1	Authority

3.1.1	Title

This chapter of the Manchester Unified Ordinance is the Manchester Land Use and Development Ordinance and constitutes the town’s zoning and subdivision regulations.

3.1.2	Authority

The Town of Manchester has adopted this ordinance in accordance with and as authorized by the
Vermont Municipal and Regional Planning and Development Act, 24 VSA Chapter 117.

3.1.3	Purpose

This ordinance implements the goals and policies of the Manchester Town Plan and the Vermont Municipal and Regional Planning and Development Act. It is intended to:

(1)	Encourage the appropriate development of all lands within the Town of Manchester in a manner that will promote public health, safety, prosperity, comfort, convenience, efficiency, economy and general welfare;
(2)	Prevent and minimize future development problems;
(3)	Provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for forests and agriculture, for residential, recreational, commercial, and industrial development, and for public facilities, in light of their respective environmental needs and in light of the needs of the residents of Manchester;
(4)	Encourage the healthful and convenient distribution of population, employment opportunities, and land uses; and
(5)	Encourage the most desirable and appropriate use of land and to minimize the adverse impact of one land use upon another.

3.1.4	Jurisdiction

This ordinance shall be effective for all land within the Town of Manchester except for that land within the Village of Manchester, a separate municipality with its own zoning regulations.

3.1.5	Applicability

Unless specifically exempted in this ordinance (see Section 3.3) all land development within the Town of Manchester requires a zoning permit issued in accordance with this ordinance.

3.1.6	Effective Date

Upon adoption by the Town of Manchester, this ordinance and any subsequent amendments will take effect in accordance with the procedures established in the Vermont Municipal and Regional Planning and Development Act.

3.1.7	Relationship to Previously Adopted Regulations

To the extent that the provisions of this ordinance and any subsequent amendments are the same in substance as the previously adopted provisions they replace, they will be considered continuations of the prior ordinance and not as new enactments unless specifically stated otherwise.

3.1.8	Relationship with Other Laws or Regulations

(1)	If any provision of this ordinance is more restrictive than any other law or regulation, the provision of this ordinance will apply and take precedence.
 


(2)	If any provision of another law or regulation is more restrictive than this ordinance, the provision of this ordinance will be superseded and the more restrictive provision will apply.
(3)	The provisions regulating development within the Flood Hazard Overlay District (Section 2.3) will take precedence over any other provision of this ordinance.

3.1.9	Severability

If a court of competent jurisdiction invalidates any provision of this ordinance, that decision will not affect the validity, application or enforcement of the remaining provisions of this ordinance.

3.1.10	Disclaimer of Liability

This ordinance does not create any liability on the part of the town, its officials, agents, employees, or representatives for alleged damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any lawful administrative action or decision taken under this ordinance.

3.2	Amendment and Adoption Procedures

3.2.1	Amendment Preparation.

Any amendment to this ordinance, including any proposed provision or bylaw, amended provision, proposed district boundary, or repeal of any provision, shall be prepared by or at the direction of the Planning Commission and shall have the purpose of implementing the Manchester Town Plan as the same may be amended from time to time or as otherwise authorized by statute. An amendment of this ordinance may be prepared by the Planning Commission, or any other person or body pursuant to Section 3.2.2 below.

3.2.2	Amendment by Others

Proposed amendments prepared by a person or body other than the Planning Commission shall be submitted in writing along with any supporting documents to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may then proceed under this section as if the amendment had been prepared by the commission.

3.2.3	Amendment by Petition

If a proposed amendment is supported by a petition signed by not less than 5% of Manchester voters, the Planning Commission shall correct any technical deficiency and shall, without otherwise substantively changing the meaning or intent of the amendment, promptly proceed in accordance with this section as if it had been prepared by the Planning Commission.

3.2.4	Planning Commission Report

When considering an amendment to this ordinance, the Planning Commission shall prepare and approve a written report on the proposal. The report shall provide a brief explanation of the proposed amendment and shall include a statement of purpose as required for notice under 24 VSA §4444, and shall explain how the proposal:

(1)	Conforms with or furthers the goals and policies contained in the town plan, including the effect of the proposal on the availability of safe and affordable housing;
(2)	Is compatible with the proposed future land uses and densities of the town plan; and
(3)	Carries out, as applicable, any specific proposals for any planned community facilities.
 


3.2.5	Public Hearing by Planning Commission

The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing within the municipality after public notice on any amendment proposed by the Planning Commission or by petition.

3.2.6	Notice to Municipalities and Agencies

At least 15 days prior to the first public hearing, a copy of the proposed amendment and any written  report shall be delivered with proof of receipt, or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to each of the following:

(1)	The chairpersons of the Planning Commissions of Dorset, Winhall, Sunderland, Arlington, Sandgate, Rupert, and the Village of Manchester, or in the absence of any Planning Commission in a municipality, the clerk of the abutting municipality;
(2)	The executive director of the Bennington County Regional Commission; and
(3)	The commissioner of the Department of Housing and Community Affairs within the Vermont Agency of Commerce and Community Development.

Any of these bodies may submit comments on the proposed bylaw or amendment to the commission, or may be heard in any proceeding with respect to the adoption of the proposed amendment.

3.2.7	Public Hearing Notice

Where a public hearing is called concerning an amendment to this ordinance, the Planning Commission shall publish and post either the full text of the proposed material or a notice including:

(1)	A statement of purpose;
(2)	The geographic areas affected;
(3)	A table of contents or list of section headings; and
(4)	A description of a place within the municipality where the full text may be examined.

No defect in the form or substance of any public hearing notice shall invalidate an amendment to this ordinance. However, the action shall be invalidated if the notice is materially misleading in content or fails to include one of the elements required by this section or if the defect was the result of a deliberate or intentional act.

3.2.8	Submission to the Selectboard

After holding a public hearing, the Planning Commission may then make revisions before submitting the proposed amendment and the written report to the Selectboard. If a proposed amendment is supported by a petition as outlined in Section 3.2.3 above, the Planning Commission shall promptly submit the amendment, with changes only to correct technical deficiencies, to the Selectboard, together with any recommendation or opinion it considers appropriate. Simultaneously with the submission, the Planning Commission shall file with the town clerk a copy of the proposed bylaw or amendment and the written report for public review.

3.2.9	Public Hearing by Selectboard

Not less than 15 nor more than 120 days after a proposed amendment or bylaw is submitted to the Selectboard, the Selectboard shall hold the first of one or more public hearings, after public notice, on the proposed amendment and shall make copies of the proposal and any written report of the Planning Commission available to the public upon request. Notwithstanding the above, failure to hold a public hearing within 120 days shall not invalidate the adoption of the amendment or the validity of any repeal.


3.2.10	Changes by Selectboard

The Selectboard may change the proposed amendment, but shall not do so less than 14 days prior to the final public hearing. If the Selectboard at any time makes substantial changes in the concept, meaning, or extent of the proposed amendment, it shall warn a new public hearing or hearings under Section 3.2.9. If any part of the proposal is changed, the Selectboard, at least ten days prior to the hearing, shall file a
 


copy of the changed proposal with the town clerk and with the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall amend the report pursuant to Section 3.2.4 to reflect the changes made by the Selectboard and shall submit that amended report at or prior to the public hearing.

3.2.11	Routine Adoption

Except as provided in sections 3.2.12 and 3.2.13 below, an amendment shall be adopted by a majority of the members of the Selectboard at a meeting that is held after the final public hearing, and shall be effective 21 days after the vote.

3.2.12	Popular Vote

Notwithstanding Section 3.2.4 above, a vote by the Selectboard on an amendment shall not take effect if 5% of Manchester voters petition for a meeting of the municipality to consider the amendment, and the petition is filed within 20 days of the Selectboard vote. In that case, a meeting of the municipality shall be duly warned for the purpose of acting upon the amendment by Australian ballot. The majority of votes for or against the amendment shall prevail.

3.2.13	Time Limit for Adoption

If the proposed amendment is not approved or rejected within one year of the date of the final public hearing of the Planning Commission, it shall be considered disapproved unless 5% of Manchester voters petition for a meeting of the municipality to consider the amendment and the petition is filed within 60 days of the end of that year. In that case, a meeting of the municipality shall be duly warned for the purpose of acting upon the amendment by Australian ballot. A majority of votes for or against the amendment shall prevail.

3.3	Exemptions and Limitations

Except within the Flood Hazard Overlay District (see Section 2.3) or Design Review Overlay District (see Section 2.1), landowners do not need to obtain a zoning permit for:

3.3.1	Emergency Repair. Emergency repair and stabilization of a structure damaged by any cause to the extent necessary to protect public health and safety, and to protect the structure from the elements. Landowners must obtain a zoning permit for repair, reconstruction or demolition beyond the minimum necessary to stabilize and secure the structure.

3.3.2	Property Maintenance. Normal maintenance and repair of an existing structure that does not change the:
(1)	Structure’s exterior dimensions or use;
(2)	Amount of floor area associated with an existing non-residential use; or
(3)	Number of tenant spaces or dwelling units in the structure.

3.3.3	Service Maintenance. Normal maintenance and repair of essential services.

3.3.4	Landscape Work. Landscaping, grading and excavating associated with:
(1)	Normal maintenance and repair of roads, driveways, parking areas, stormwater facilities or essential services; and
(2)	Yard improvements on one- or two-family residential lots that do not result in more than  50 cubic yards of clean material being removed from or brought into the site (typically 3 to 4 dump truck loads) within any calendar year.

3.3.5	Accessory Structure. Not more than 3 accessory structures not otherwise exempted under this section on any one- or two-family residential lot, each of which:
(1)	Has a footprint that does not exceed 120 square feet;
(2)	Is not more than 12 feet tall;
(3)	Does not have a permanent foundation;
(4)	Is located at least 5 feet from any other structure; and
 


(5)	Meets setback requirements for the zoning district as dictated by Section 1.15 (Dimensional Standards).

3.3.6	Fuel Tank. A fuel tank on a one- or two-family residential lot that:
(1)	Holds not more than 500 gallons;
(2)	Meets applicable setback requirements for the zoning district; and
(3)	Is sited, installed and secured in accordance with state and federal regulations.

3.3.7	Mechanical Equipment. Any ground-mounted HVAC system, back-up generator or similar mechanical equipment on a one- or two-family residential lot that:
(1)	Has a footprint that does not exceed 30 square feet;
(2)	Meets applicable setback requirements for the zoning district; and
(3)	Is sited, installed and secured in accordance with state and federal requirements.
(4)	Does not cause noise that exceeds 60 dB at the property line.

3.3.8	Above-ground Pool. An above-ground swimming pool on a one- or two-family residential lot that:
(1)	Does not exceed a horizontal width of 20 feet in any dimension or a depth of 5 feet;
(2)	Does not have a permanent foundation;
(3)	Meets applicable setback requirements for the zoning district; and
(4)	That is installed and secured to prevent unauthorized access.

3.3.9	Patio or Deck. An at-grade patio or unroofed, detached deck on a one-or two-family residential lot that:
(1)	Has a footprint that does not exceed 200 square feet; and
(2)	Meets applicable setback and lot coverage requirements for the zoning district.

3.3.10	ADA Compliant Structures. Wheelchair ramps, uncovered entry stairs, or walkways on a one- or two-family residential lot that do not:
(1)	Exceed 6 feet in width;
(2)	Extend into or obstruct a public right-of-way;
(3)	Interfere with corner visibility or sight distance for vehicular traffic; and
(4)	Result in flooding or ponding of water on abutting property or public rights-of-way.

3.3.11	Fence or Wall. A fence or wall on a one- or two-family residential lot that:
(1)	Is not more than 4 feet tall, if functioning as a retaining wall;
(2)	Is not more than 4 feet tall, if located in the front yard;
(3)	Is not more than 8 feet tall, if located in the side or rear yard;
(4)	Does not extend into or obstruct a public right-of-way;
(5)	Does not interfere with corner visibility or sight distance for vehicular traffic;
(6)	Does not result in flooding or ponding of water on abutting property or public rights-of- way;
(7)	Does not pose a safety hazard or is not designed to inflict physical harm; and
(8)	Is installed so that any support posts are to the inside and the “finished” side faces out if the fence falls within the primary setback for the underlying district.

3.3.12	Exterior Lighting. Outdoor light fixtures on a one- or two-family residential lot that:
(1)	Have an initial output that does not exceed 3,000 lumens; and
(2)	Are downward directed and shielded as necessary to prevent glare or light trespass beyond the property line.

3.3.13	Solar Energy. A solar energy device that:
(1)	Will be installed on a sloped roof and project not more than 2 feet above its surface; or
(2)	Will be installed on a flat roof (any roof with a slope of 5% or less).
 


3.3.14	Telecommunications Antenna. A television antenna, radio antenna, satellite dish or similar device used to provide on-site telecommunication service that:
(1)	Is not more than 5 square feet in area, if a dish antenna;
(2)	Does not extend more than 12 feet above the roofline, if attached to a building;
(3)	Does not extend more than 50 feet above the ground, if a freestanding amateur radio antenna (including any support structure);
(4)	Meets applicable setback requirements for the zoning district; and
(5)	Is installed in the least visible location where it can reasonably function.

3.3.15	Dispatch Antenna. An antenna mounted on an existing structure used for single-use local business radio dispatch purposes or for police, fire, ambulance or similar emergency dispatch purposes.

3.3.16	Telecommunications Development. Telecommunications equipment and related site development that does not exceed a footprint of 300 square feet and a height of 10 feet.

3.3.17	Public Art. Public art that does not:
(1)	Extend into or obstruct a public right-of-way unless otherwise approved by the Town of Manchester Department of Public Works or the Vermont Agency of Transportation, as applicable;
(2)	Interfere with corner visibility or sight distance for vehicular traffic;
(3)	Result in flooding or ponding of water on abutting property or public rights-of-way; and
(4)	Pose a safety hazard.

3.3.18	Exempted Sign. Signs listed in Section 10.10.

3.3.19	Short Term Sales Events. Garage sales, yard sales, tent sales, auctions or similar activities that do not occur on the lot for longer than three consecutive days and for more than 15 days in any calendar year.

3.3.20	Sale of Personal Goods. Sales of vehicles, equipment or similar used personal or business goods owned by the landowner or tenant that do not occur on the lot for more than 60 days in any calendar year.

3.3.21	Hunting and Fishing. Use of public or private land for hunting, fishing or trapping in accordance with state regulations (any structures with permanent foundations associated with such use will still require a zoning permit).

3.3.22	Passive Recreation. Use of public or private land for noncommercial passive outdoor recreation or gardening (any structures with permanent foundations associated with such use will still require a zoning permit).

3.3.23	Public Rights of Way. Land development within public road rights-of-way that is governed by Chapter 14 of the Manchester Unified Ordinance.

3.3.24	Certificate of Public Good. Landowners do not need to obtain a zoning permit for land development associated with utility, energy, or telecommunications infrastructure that receives a Certificate of Public Good from the Vermont Public Utilities Commission.

3.3.25	Agriculture and Silviculture.

Landowners do not need to obtain a zoning permit to conduct required agricultural practices or accepted silvicultural practices as defined by the State of Vermont Agency of Agriculture, Food and Markets or Department of Forests, Parks and Recreation. The Zoning Administrator may require a landowner to submit a written determination from the applicable state agency as to whether the subject land use activity is a required agricultural or accepted silvicultural practice.
 


Landowners do not need to obtain a zoning permit to build a farm structure in accordance with state regulations and the following:
(1)	Landowners must complete a zoning permit application demonstrating that the proposed land development qualifies as an exempt farm structure, but they do not have to pay the associated application fee.
(2)	The Zoning Administrator may require landowners to provide a written determination from the Vermont Agency of Agriculture, Food and Markets as to whether proposed land development qualifies as an exempt farm structure.
(3)	Farm structures, other than walls or fences used for farming purposes, must meet the setback requirements for the district unless the applicant provides the Zoning Administrator with a written waiver from the Vermont Agency of Agriculture, Food and Markets. Farm structures are not required to meet bulk or height requirements for the district.
(4)	Upon concluding that the proposed land development qualifies as an exempt farm structure, the Zoning Administrator will issue the landowner a letter informing the landowner that he/she may build and use the structure for farming purposes in accordance with the state’s required agricultural practices without a zoning permit, but that he/she must obtain a zoning permit before using the structure for any other purpose.

3.3.26	Group Home.

Landowners do not need to obtain a zoning permit to use a lawful single-family dwelling as a group home that will:
(1)	Not serve more than 8 residents who have a disability;
(2)	Not be located closer than 1,000 feet from another existing or permitted group home as measured from property line to property line; and
(3)	Be operated under state licensing or registration.

Landowners of group homes must obtain a zoning permit for construction or other associated land development to the same extent as would be required if the property was occupied by any household.

3.4	Change of Use

3.4.1	Change from One Use Category to Another. A landowner must obtain a zoning permit, and any development approvals as applicable, for a change of use if the two uses do not fall under the same category as listed in Section 1.14 (Use Table).

3.4.2	Change within a Use Category. A landowner will not need to obtain a zoning permit or development approval for a change of use if both uses fall under the same category as listed in Section
1.14 (Use Table), unless the two uses have different parking requirements as listed in the Minimum Parking Tables (Figure 9-2 and Figure 9-3). If the proposed use requires more parking than the previous
approved use, a zoning permit will be required. For example, a retail use like a home furnishings store to a retail use like a clothing store. If no permit is required, other land development associated with the change of use may require a permit (e.g., new or modified signage).

3.5	Expansion of Use

3.5.1	Nonresidential Uses. A landowner must obtain a zoning permit, and any development approvals as applicable, to expand a nonresidential use to occupy additional space in a building or on a lot.

3.5.2	Residential Uses. A landowner will not need to obtain a zoning permit to expand a residential use to occupy existing space in the building provided the number of dwelling units or bedrooms will not change (e.g., converting an unfinished basement or attic to habitable space). The landowner must obtain a zoning permit, and any development approvals as applicable, to change the number of dwelling units or bedrooms.
 


3.6	Discontinued Uses

3.6.1	Nonresidential Uses. A landowner must obtain a zoning permit, and any development approvals as applicable, to use property previously used for a nonresidential purpose for the same or another nonresidential purpose if the prior nonresidential purpose has been discontinued for more than 18 months except:

(1)	If the landowner has had to discontinue a nonresidential use as result of damage to the structure in which it is housed, the owner may re-establish the use once the structure has been repaired or rebuilt.
(2)	The Zoning Administrator may extend the period of discontinuance for a conforming use to a total of not more than 2 years if the landowner demonstrates that he/she is actively marketing the property or business for sale or lease. If the use is nonconforming, see Section 3.9.

3.6.2	Residential Uses. A landowner will not need to obtain a zoning permit to resume the use of a vacant residential structure or unit provided there is no change in the total number of dwelling units or bedrooms in the structure or on the lot.

3.7	Abandoned Land Development

3.7.1	If the land development authorized by a zoning permit is abandoned without being completed, a landowner must demolish or secure any partially completed structures, remove all structural materials from the site, restore the site to a natural grade, and re-establish groundcover to prevent erosion prior to or within 6 months after the zoning permit expires.

3.8	Damaged or Destroyed Structures

3.8.1	Action Required Immediately. A landowner must act promptly to stabilize and secure a structure that was damaged or destroyed by any cause as necessary to protect public health and safety.

3.8.2	Action Required within 6 Months. Within 6 months of a structure being damaged or destroyed by any cause, a landowner must either:

(1)	Stabilize and secure the structure as necessary to protect the structure from the elements and to protect public health and safety, if the structure will be reconstructed; or
(2)	Demolish the structure, remove all structural materials and debris from the site, restore the site to a natural grade, and re-establish groundcover to prevent erosion.

3.8.3	Extension. The Zoning Administrator may grant one or more extensions to the 6-month deadline for a total of not more than 36 months from the date the structure was damaged or destroyed upon the landowner demonstrating that:

(1)	The structure does not pose a hazard to public health or safety; and
(2)	The landowner has been unable to meet the deadline due to factors beyond his/her control.

3.8.4	Zoning Permit Required. Landowners must obtain a zoning permit to reconstruct a damaged or destroyed structure, but they do not have to pay the associated application fee if a complete application for reconstruction is filed within 12 months of structure being damaged or destroyed. For nonconforming structures see Section 3.9.1. For structures in the Flood Hazard Overlay District, see Section 2.3.

3.8.5	Redevelopment Projects. As part of any redevelopment project requiring approval from the Development Review Board, a landowner must rehabilitate, stabilize, remove or demolish any damaged or destroyed structures located on the subject property.
 


3.9	Nonconforming Structures, Uses and Lots

3.9.1	Nonconforming Structures

(1)	A nonconforming structure that lawfully existed when the Town of Manchester adopted or amended this ordinance may continue to exist unchanged indefinitely.
(2)	A landowner may obtain a zoning permit, and any applicable development approvals, to use a nonconforming structure for any land use allowed in the zoning district.
(3)	The Zoning Administrator may issue a zoning permit for land development that would change the exterior dimensions of a nonconforming residential structure provided that the proposed development:
(a)	Will not result in any portion of the nonconforming structure encroaching further beyond the existing nonconforming building line or height;
(b)	Will not convert a nonconforming porch, deck or similar feature to enclosed or conditioned building space;
(c)	Is not subject to conditions from prior approvals or permits that would otherwise restrict the proposed development; and
(d)	Would not otherwise require a development approval from the Development Review Board.
(4)	The Development Review Board may approve a waiver to allow a change in the exterior dimensions of a nonconforming nonresidential structure upon the applicant demonstrating that
the proposed development:
(a)	Will not result in any portion of the nonconforming structure encroaching further beyond the existing nonconforming building line or height than is necessary to accomplish the intended goal (e.g., an expanded, improved entry deck);
(b)	Will improve the property and will be helpful or necessary to allow for the continued reasonable use of the property; and
(c)	Will not alter the character of the neighborhood, impair reasonable or appropriate use of adjoining properties, nor cause harm to the public welfare.
(5)	Except within the special flood hazard area (see Section 2.3), a landowner may obtain a zoning
permit to repair or reconstruct a nonconforming structure that has been unintentionally damaged or destroyed by any cause provided that:
(a)	The owner submits a complete zoning permit application or a request for an extension within 12 months of the damage or destruction occurring. The Development Review Board may grant an extension upon the applicant demonstrating that factors beyond his/her control have created an unanticipated delay (e.g., insurance claim or litigation).
(b)	The repair or reconstruction does not change the exterior dimensions of the structure in a manner that would result in the repaired or reconstructed structure or portion of the
structure encroaching further beyond the previous nonconforming building line or height.

3.9.2	Nonconforming Uses

(1)	A nonconforming use that lawfully existed when the Town of Manchester adopted or amended this ordinance may continue to exist in its current location and configuration unchanged indefinitely.
(2)	A landowner must not move a nonconforming use from one location to another where it would also be a nonconforming use.
(3)	A landowner must not resume a nonconforming use that he/she abandoned, discontinued or
replaced with another use for more than 18 months.
(4)	The Zoning Administrator may issue a zoning permit to allow a landowner to extend or expand a nonconforming use to fully occupy space within the associated structure as that structure existed when the use became nonconforming. The Development Review Board may approve a greater extension or expansion of a nonconforming use as a conditional use.
(5)	The Development Review Board may approve the change of one nonconforming use to another nonconforming use as a conditional use upon the applicant demonstrating that the proposed nonconforming use will be less intensive in nature and more compatible with the character of the
 


area than the existing nonconforming use.

3.9.3	Nonconforming Lots

(1)	A nonconforming lot may continue to exist unchanged indefinitely. If a nonconforming lot comes into common ownership with one or more contiguous lots, the Town of Manchester will not deem the lot merged with the contiguous lot(s) for the purposes of this ordinance (a property owner may choose to merge contiguous lots in accordance with Section 11).
(2)	A landowner may develop a lot that does not meet the minimum lot size for the zoning district in accordance with all other applicable provisions of this ordinance provided that the lot:
(a)	Is legally subdivided and able to be conveyed separate from any other lot;
(b)	Existed as of the effective date of this ordinance;
(c)	Is at least 1⁄8 acre (5,445 square feet) in area; and
(d)	Is not less than 40 feet wide or deep.
(3)	A landowner with a lot that does not meet the minimum lot frontage for the zoning district:
(a)	May develop that lot in accordance with all other applicable provisions of this ordinance provided that the lot has access to a road over a permanent easement or right-of-way at least 20 feet in width.
(b)	Must not subdivide that lot unless the lot has access to a road over a permanent easement or right-of-way at least 50 feet in width.

3.9.4	Creation of Nonconformity

(1)	The Town of Manchester prohibits any land development that would create a nonconformity except as specifically authorized in this ordinance.
(2)	The transfer or taking by eminent domain of land for a public purpose (e.g., road widening) may create nonconformity.
(3)	When land is transferred or taken by eminent domain for a public purpose, the Development Review Board may approve as a conditional use the relocation of affected structures or uses on the parcel or to an adjacent parcel in a manner that would create a nonconformity upon the
applicant demonstrating that the relocated structures or uses:
(a)	Will be in reasonable proximity to any associated unaffected buildings or uses; and
(b)	Conform to the applicable provisions of this ordinance to the maximum extent feasible given site-specific conditions.
 


Section 4	Administrative Mechanisms

4.1	Roles and Responsibilities

4.1.1	Zoning Administrator

The provisions of this bylaw shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning Administrator, or ZA. The Zoning Administrator shall be nominated by the Planning Commission and appointed by the Selectboard for a term of three years. The Zoning Administrator is also referred to as the administrative officer. An acting or Assistant Zoning Administrator may also be appointed by the Selectboard to act under the supervision of the Zoning Administrator, or in the absence of the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall administer this ordinance strictly and shall not have the power to permit any land use or development that is not in conformance with this ordinance.

4.1.2	Planning Commission

The Selectboard appoints members to the Planning Commission in accordance with state statute. The Planning Commission does not perform any development review functions under this ordinance, but may make recommendations on planning and land development issues in the Town of Manchester generally. The Planning Commission may prepare amendments to this ordinance and make recommendations to the Selectboard on the amendment of this ordinance.

4.1.3	Development Review Board

The Selectboard appoints members to the Development Review Board in accordance with state statute. The Development Review Board performs development review functions as specified in this ordinance and in accordance with its adopted rules of procedure, and with 24 VSA Chapter 117 Subchapter 10.

4.1.4	Design Advisory Committee

The Selectboard appoints members to the Design Advisory Committee in accordance with state statute. In accordance with the provisions of Section 5.4, the Design Advisory Committee reviews applications for land development within the Design Review Overlay District as follows:
(1)	The Design Advisory Committee will provide written comments and recommendations to the Zoning Administrator or Development Review Board regarding design modifications that would further the purposes of this ordinance.
(2)	The Design Advisory Committee’s comments and recommendations are intended to provide general direction to the applicant, Zoning Administrator, or Development Review Board, but will not be deemed binding on the applicant unless they are incorporated into the zoning permit or conditions of approval.

4.1.5	Administrative Advisory Group

The Administrative Advisory Group is composed of the Town Manager and representatives from the police, fire, public works, and planning and zoning departments. The Zoning Administrator may request that the Administrative Advisory Group review applications for projects that due to their size, nature or location have the potential to affect provision of municipal services as follows:
(1)	The group will provide written comments and recommendations on the anticipated impacts of
proposed land development on municipal services and how those impacts should be addressed, which the Zoning Administrator will send to the applicant and Development Review Board, as applicable.
(2)	The group’s comments and recommendations are intended to provide general direction to the applicant, Zoning Administrator, and Development Review Board, but will not be deemed binding on the applicant unless they are incorporated into the zoning permit or conditions of approval.
 


4.2	Zoning Permits

4.2.1	Permit Required

Before any land use or development -- including the division of a parcel into two or more parcels or a boundary line adjustment between parcels; the construction, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure; or of any mining, excavation or landfill; or any change of use of any building or other structure or land, or any extension of the use of the land -- it is the responsibility of the landowner or person performing such land use or development to obtain a zoning permit from the Zoning Administrator. Exemptions from this requirement are listed in Section 3.3.

4.2.2	Application

An application for a zoning permit may be obtained from the town offices or the town website, and shall  be submitted to the Zoning Administrator along with any fees, maps, plans, or other documents needed to demonstrate conformance with this ordinance.

4.2.3	Pre Application Conference.

A prospective applicant may request a pre-application conference with the Zoning Administrator or  Design Advisory Committee prior to submitting a complete application. A pre-application conference is an informal meeting that provides the prospective applicant with an opportunity to consult with and receive advice in order to save time and expense in the preparation of the application. Any comments or recommendations made are intended to provide general direction to the prospective applicant, but will not be deemed binding in the preparation or review of any subsequent application for development approval.

4.2.4	Assistance.

The Zoning Administrator will assist prospective applicants by:

(1)	Determining whether a project will require one or more types of review under this ordinance.
(2)	Providing applicants with any necessary form to apply for the required types of review.
(3)	Notifying applicants of the applicable fees or other charges that the town may charge in relation to the application or proposed development.
(4)	Providing applicants information about state energy standards for residential or commercial buildings, as applicable.

4.2.5	Determination of Completeness.

The Zoning Administrator will:

(1)	Determine whether an application is complete promptly after the applicant submits it.
(2)	If the application is incomplete, inform the applicant in writing of what additional information is required.
(3)	Take no action until all relevant permit fees are paid to the Town of Manchester and until the
application is deemed complete.

4.2.6	Application Requirements.

(1)	The Zoning Administrator may waive an application requirement upon concluding the information is not necessary to determine compliance with this ordinance. The Design Advisory Committee or Development Review Board may determine that a waived application requirement is necessary to determine compliance with this ordinance during the development review process and require an applicant to provide the information.
 


(2)	The Zoning Administrator, Design Advisory Committee, or Development Review Board may determine that additional information is necessary to determine compliance with this ordinance during the development review process and require an applicant to provide it.
(3)	The Zoning Administrator must keep written documentation of any application requirement waived or additional material requested and submit that information to the Design Advisory Committee or Development Review Board with the application as applicable.

4.2.7	Time to Act.

Once the Zoning Administrator determines that an application for a zoning permit is complete, the Zoning Administrator must act within 30 days to approve, deny, or refer it to the Development Review Board, except that the time period within which the Zoning Administrator must act will not commence for a zoning permit application that requires:

(1)	One or more types of review under this ordinance until the reviews are complete for the proposed land use or development.
(2)	Notification to a state agency until the agency comments or the comment period elapses,
whichever occurs first.

4.2.8	Deemed Approval

If the Zoning Administrator fails to act with regard to a complete application for a permit within 30 days, whether by issuing a decision or by making a referral to the Development Review Board, a permit shall be deemed issued on the 31st day.

4.2.9	Referral to State

The Zoning Administrator will inform any person applying for a zoning permit that the person should contact the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources Permit Assistance Specialist in order to assure timely action on any related state permits. It remains the applicant’s obligation to identify, apply for, and obtain any relevant state permits.

4.2.10	Permit Takes Effect

A zoning permit takes effect on the 16th day after the Zoning Administrator issues it, provided that no appeal is filed during the previous 15 days or that the applicant has not requested a delay. If an interested person files an appeal, the zoning permit will not take effect until the appeal is decided.

4.2.11	Delay in Effect

Upon request in writing by the applicant, the Zoning Administrator may delay the effective date of a permit and any associated development approvals for no more than 18 months unless the Development Review Board approves a longer delay due to factors beyond the applicant’s control.

For projects that also require Act 250 review, and where an applicant either demonstrates good faith efforts to acquire that permit in a timely manner, or, where an applicant ends up in extended or contested proceedings through no cause or fault of their own, then the timeframe for the local permit will be deemed to commence with the issuance of the Act 250 permit, or in the case of contested proceedings, the timeframe shall commence at the conclusion of such proceedings.

It is not the intent of this section to allow a permittee to have an indefinite or infinite amount of time to proceed with the approved land use or development.
 


4.2.12	Permit Expiration

A zoning permit shall expire after two years, except:

(1)	A permit issued only for installation of signage or change of use shall expire after one year of the date of issuance.
(2)	A permit issued for a boundary line adjustment or subdivision shall expire after 180 days from the date of issuance unless a final plat is recorded in the land records of the town within 180 days. If an applicant lawfully recorded an approved subdivision plat in the Town of Manchester’s land records, that plat will remain valid and will not expire irrespective of any change in this ordinance.
(3)	The Development Review Board or Zoning Administrator may set a permit expiration date that may differ from the two year timeframe for site- or project-specific reasons.

If the land development permitted by any zoning permit has not been completed, or if the land use permitted has not been commenced by the permit expiration date, then the permit shall expire without further action by the town. If a zoning permit expires before the applicant substantially completes the construction or commences the use authorized by the permit, the applicant must apply for a new zoning permit and any other associated development approvals under this ordinance.

4.2.13	Extensions of Permits

Upon request by a permittee and payment of any required fees, the Zoning Administrator may grant only one extension of up to two years for any permit where neither this ordinance nor external circumstances have changed in ways that would have caused a material change in the outcome of the original application. For administrative permits, any further extensions will require reapplication with payment of the basic administrative permit fee. For permits issued in conformance with Development Review Board approvals, any further extensions shall require application to the Development Review Board with payment of the required basic hearing fee for review of the project for conformance with the regulations in effect at that time. Unless otherwise limited by the Development Review Board for good cause, any extensions granted by the Development Review Board will then start the extension process anew.

4.2.14	Zoning Permits Issued Prior to Amendment or Adoption of these Regulations.

If the Zoning Administrator lawfully issued a zoning permit before the Town of Manchester adopted or amended this ordinance, an applicant will not need a new or amended permit for the project. If such an applicant does not substantially complete the land development or receive an extension before that permit expires, the applicant will need to apply for a new zoning permit, including any development approvals as applicable, under the ordinance as in effect at the time of the new application.

4.2.15	Amending Permits or Approvals

(1)	An applicant may submit a written request for the Zoning Administrator to amend a zoning permit, and any associated development approval, prior to the permit’s expiration. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed changes to the land development:
(a)	Are minor modifications that conform to all applicable provisions of this ordinance, including the special flood hazard area provisions in Section 2.3;
(b)	Are not material or substantial changes that would have affected the decision on the original
application;
(c)	Do not change the type, character or intensity of the approved land development or use to a greater extent than specified below:
(i)	Any proposed modification must not result in an increased requirement for parking or loading spaces.
(ii)	Any proposed increase in building footprint must not exceed 10% or 500 square feet, whichever is less.
 


(iii)	Any proposed substitution of plant materials must not change the overall landscape design concept.
(2)	The scope of the review will be limited to those aspects of the land development affected by the proposed changes.
(3)	The Zoning Administrator may decline to amend a permit, and any associated development
approval, and refer the request to the Development Review Board.
(4)	The approval of an amendment will not affect the expiration date of the original permit and any associated development approvals.
(5)	The Development Review Board may determine that the proposed amendment would change the approved development to such an extent that it needs to be reviewed as a new application, and may deny the amendment request and require the applicant to apply for a new zoning permit and any associated requirements.

4.2.16	Revoking Permits or Approvals

The Zoning Administrator may take appropriate action to revoke a zoning permit, and any associated development approvals, in accordance with state law if an applicant omitted or misrepresented a material fact on an application or at a hearing.

4.2.17	Transfer of Permit.

Zoning permits and any associated development approvals remain in effect as specified in this ordinance irrespective of any change in ownership of the subject property. All subsequent landowners are subject to the requirements and conditions of any zoning permit and associated development approvals.

4.2.18	Inspecting Land Development During Construction

The Zoning Administrator and Development Review Board may inspect any land development during construction as necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance and any permit or approval conditions.

4.3	Site Development Plan

All applicants for a zoning permit must submit a site development plan. The site development plan must conform to the specifications and include all required elements listed below, unless a specific requirement is waived in accordance with Section 4.2.6, or the proposed development is for a single-family or two- family use. For single-family or two-family use, the site plan need only provide dimensions of proposed development and adequately demonstrate compliance with applicable provisions of this ordinance and any previous development approvals or permits for the site, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.

4.3.1	Required Elements

(A)	Location Map. The map must clearly identify the location of the proposed land development and be scaled to show the area within 1⁄2 mile of the boundaries of the project site.
(B)	Scale and Sheet Size. The applicant must submit an overall site development plan that shows
the full extent of the parcel(s) subject to proposed development on a sheet that does not exceed 24 x 36 inches. If the scale of the overall site development plan is greater than 1 inch = 20 feet, the applicant must submit additional detail plans of the portion(s) of the site subject to proposed development at a scale of 1 inch = 20 feet or less.
(C)	Copies and Format. The applicant must submit a full-size original and six 11 x 17 copies of the
site development plan. Unless it is hand drawn, an electronic copy of the site development plan as Adobe PDF file must be submitted via email to the Zoning Administrator.
(D)	Title Block. Each plan sheet must have a title block that at a minimum includes:
 


(1)	Project name;
(2)	Plan title and sheet number;
(3)	Initial date the plan was prepared and the date of any subsequent revisions;
(4)	Project site address and Tax Map IDs;
(5)	Name of the landowner and the applicant, if different; and
(6)	Name and title of the person who prepared the plan.
(E)	North Arrow. Each plan and map must have a north arrow, and should be oriented with north being the top of the page, whenever feasible.
(F)	Zoning Information. The plan must include a chart (either as a separate page or included on the
same sheet as the overall site plan) identifying the applicable zoning districts and each district’s requirements for:
(1)	Lot size, frontage, and coverage;
(2)	Front, side, rear and any water resources setbacks;
(3)	Residential density and floor area ratio;
(4)	Building footprint, coverage and height; and
(5)	Number of required parking spaces.
(G)	Area and Dimensions. The site development plan must clearly show via tables or charts all relevant site statistics, including but not limited to:
(1)	Total project acreage;
(2)	Undevelopable land calculations;
(3)	Total greenspace;
(4)	Required and proposed parking;
(5)	Building coverage percentage;
(6)	Building heights; and
(7)	Gross square footage and active floor area of buildings.
(H)	Topography. The site development plan must show existing and proposed contours at a 2-foot interval for those portions of the site subject to proposed development and at not more than a 10- foot interval for the remainder of the site. For large sites, the two-foot contours may be shown on a detail rather than overall site development plan.
(I)	Existing Features. The site development plan must show all existing built and natural
components of the site including, but not limited to, streams, wetlands, tree lines and specimen trees, structures, water supply and wastewater infrastructure, walls and fences, utilities, roads and drives, and parking areas.
(J)	Proposed Development. The site development plan must show all improvements (both on- and off-site) associated with the proposed development including, but not limited to, structures, roads and drives, parking areas, utilities, landscaping, signs, tanks, water supply and wastewater infrastructure, stormwater facilities and outdoor lighting. To demonstrate conformance with this ordinance, applicants may need to provide the following specialized plans:
(1)	Utility Plan that shows the location of water and wastewater improvements, and gas, electric, telephone, cable, and other utilities.
(2)	Grading and Erosion Control Plan that shows how runoff will be managed and sediment trapped to avoid off-site impacts (see Section 6.10).
(3)	Stormwater Management Plan that provides detail on the collection, retention, infiltration and treatment of stormwater (see Section 6.18).
(4)	Road and Utility Profile that depicts existing and proposed grades for the installation of
roads, drives, and utilities.
(5)	Specifications that show detailed drawings and notes on specific components of the plans.
 


(6)	Landscaping Plan that shows the location of existing and proposed vegetation, including a description that includes the name, size and height at planting and when mature, and quantity of each species to be planted.
(7)	Lighting Plan that shows the location of exterior lights including cut sheets for each fixture that includes the initial light output in lumens.
(8)	Architectural Elevations that are renderings of the project’s physical appearance as seen from specified viewpoints that include information about building massing, fenestration, height, colors, materials and other features.
(K)	Development Envelopes and Designated Open Space. The site development plan must show and describe all existing and proposed development envelopes and designated open space.
(L)	Rights-of-Way and Easements. The site development plan must show and describe all existing
and proposed rights-of-way and easements that traverse or border the proposed development.

4.3.2	Additional Requirements.

An applicant for site plan approval may be required to provide written commitments for any required town services, including where applicable:

(1)	Water service;
(2)	Sewer service;
(3)	Educational service;
(4)	Police service;
(5)	Fire service; and
(6)	Rescue Squad service.

4.4	Fees and Filing Requirements

4.4.1	Permit Fees

The Selectboard will establish fees for the Zoning Administrator or other town employees to charge for administering this ordinance. These fees may include the cost of posting and publishing notices, holding public hearings, recording documents, and conducting periodic inspections during construction.

An applicant must pay the applicable fees when submitting an application. The Zoning Administrator must not deem an application complete until the applicable fees are paid in full.

4.4.2	Impact Fees

The Town of Manchester may require applicants to pay impact fees in accordance with any duly adopted impact fee ordinance.

4.4.3	Technical or Legal Review Costs

The Zoning Administrator or Development Review Board may hire qualified professionals to provide an independent technical or legal review of an application when deemed necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance, the cost of which will be paid by the applicant.

4.4.4	Performance Bonds or Sureties

The Zoning Administrator or Development Review Board may require an applicant to provide a performance bond or similar surety as a condition of approval to insure the completion of required improvements.
 


For performance bonds, the applicant will provide a quote prepared by a qualified professional for the full project cost or for the particular improvements being insured. The Zoning Administrator or Development Review Board will base the amount of any bond or surety on that quote.

The Town of Manchester will only release the bond or surety after certification by the applicant and determination by the Zoning Administrator that the required improvements have been satisfactorily completed.

4.4.5	Monitoring or Inspection Costs

To ensure compliance with this ordinance and when deemed necessary, the Zoning Administrator or Development Review Board may condition approval upon monitoring and inspection by a qualified professional during construction or once the use has commenced, the cost of which will be paid the applicant.

4.4.6	As-Built Drawings

The Zoning Administrator or Development Review Board may require an applicant to submit as-built drawings as a condition of approval.

The Town of Manchester will require as-built drawings for any infrastructure to be built within public rights- of-way or to be turned over to the town.

The Zoning Administrator may require an applicant to submit as-built drawings when approved plans are amended under Section 4.2.15 or when minor adjustments to approved plans are necessary to respond to unforeseen conditions that arise during construction.

4.4.7	Other Permits, Approvals and Certifications

The Zoning Administrator or Development Review Board may condition approval upon the applicant filing other permits, approvals or certifications required by the Town of Manchester or other regulatory entities prior to the issuance of a zoning permit, the start of construction, or the issuance of a certificate of compliance.

4.5	Certificates of Compliance

4.5.1	Required. An applicant must request a certificate of compliance from the Zoning Administrator before occupying or commencing the use of any land development.

4.5.2	Application. The Zoning Administrator will provide applicants with the necessary form to apply for a certificate of compliance.

4.5.3	Time to Act. The Zoning Administrator must act on a complete application for a certificate of compliance promptly and in all cases within 30 days. The Zoning Administrator may:

(1)	Require the applicant to submit documentation from a qualified professional certifying that the land development as constructed conforms to the approved plans;
(2)	Inspect the subject property and consult with other town or state personnel as necessary to determine compliance; and
(3)	Require the applicant to perform corrective actions to bring the land development into conformance.

4.5.5	Deemed Approval. If the Zoning Administrator does not act on a complete application for a certificate of compliance within 30 days, the applicant may file an appeal to the Development Review Board to allege that the Zoning Administrator’s failure to act within the 30-day period resulted in a
 


“deemed approval” of the application.

4.5.6	Criteria. Before receiving a final certificate of compliance, the applicant must demonstrate to the Zoning Administrator that:

(1)	The land development is complete and conforms to the requirements of the zoning permit, and any associated development approvals, the filed plans, and the applicable provisions of this ordinance;
(2)	All commonly-owned or shared improvements and infrastructure connections are complete and conform to any applicable town specifications, the requirements of the zoning permit, and any associated development approvals, the filed plans, and the applicable provisions of this ordinance;
(3)	All enhanced 9-1-1 addresses are prominently posted on the property visible from the road;
(4)	The applicant has recorded all required documents with the town including, but not limited to, building energy standards certificate, as-built drawings, floodplain elevation certificate, flood proofing certificate, wastewater and potable water supply permit, access permit, or stormwater permit; and
(5)	The applicant has paid all required fees.

4.5.7	Temporary Certificate. The Zoning Administrator may issue a temporary certificate of compliance that conditions use or occupancy on full completion of all required improvements within not more than 1 year as follows:

(1)	The Zoning Administrator may require the applicant to submit a performance bond in accordance with Section 4.4.4 to insure full completion of the outstanding work.
(2)	The Zoning Administrator will require the applicant to submit a performance bond in accordance with Section 4.4.4 if any commonly-owned or shared improvements or infrastructure connections remain incomplete.
(3)	The applicant must apply for a final certificate of compliance prior to the expiration of the temporary certificate.

4.5.8	Decisions. The Zoning Administrator must approve or deny applications for a certificate of compliance in writing. When denying an application, the Zoning Administrator must:

(1)	State the reasons for the denial;
(2)	Inform the applicant that he/she may appeal the denial to the Development Review Board within 15 days of the date of the decision; and
(3)	Refer the applicant to Section 5.11, which explains the appeal process.

4.5.9	Denials. If the Zoning Administrator denies an application for a certificate of compliance:

(1)	The Zoning Administrator must commence appropriate enforcement action under Section 4.12 if he/she determines a violation of these regulations exists.
(2)	The applicant may reapply after remedying any conditions identified as the reason for the denial.

4.6	Violations and Penalties

4.6.1	Civil Offense. A violation of this ordinance shall constitute a civil offense enforced in accordance with the provisions of 24 VSA §1974(a) or 24 VSA §4451. If a violation is alleged to exist, a formal notification shall be issued in the form of a municipal civil complaint ticket or a notice of violation as described below.
 


4.6.2	Municipal Civil Complaint Ticket

The Zoning Administrator may issue a municipal complaint ticket for violations of provisions of this ordinance. Two copies of said ticket shall be served either in person or by first class mail to the defendant. The Zoning Administrator shall retain one copy and the original shall be filed with the Vermont Judicial Bureau. Upon the fourth offense, the town may request that the case be transferred from the Judicial Bureau to the Vermont Environmental Court, or any other court of competent jurisdiction.

Fines associated with municipal complaint tickets shall be imposed in accordance with Chapter 1   Sections 16 and 17 of the Manchester Unified Ordinance. As per statute, in cases where a violation is not contested, a waiver fee shall be paid in accordance with the schedule established in Chapter 1 Section 18 of the Manchester Unified Ordinance. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation of this ordinance. A violation shall be considered a third degree offense, unless it is committed deliberately or poses an imminent threat to public safety and welfare, in which case it shall be considered a second degree offense. If a violation is committed deliberately and poses an imminent threat to public safety and welfare, it shall be considered a first-degree offense.

4.6.3	Notice of Violation

The Zoning Administrator may pursue an enforcement action for any violation of this ordinance by issuing a notice of violation. No enforcement action may be brought unless the alleged offender has had at least seven days' warning notice by certified mail. After that seven-day notice, each day that the violation continues shall be considered a separate violation of this ordinance. An action may be brought without  the seven-day notice and opportunity to correct if the alleged offender repeats the violation of the ordinance after the seven-day notice period and within the next succeeding 12 months.

The seven-day notice shall state that a violation exists, that the alleged offender has an opportunity to correct the violation within the seven days, and that the alleged offender will not be entitled to an additional warning notice for a violation occurring after the seven days. The notice of violation shall also state the regulation or permit condition alleged to have been violated, the facts giving rise to said violation, that appeal to the Development Review Board may be made within 15 days of the date of the notice, and that failure to appeal within 15 days will render the notice of violation the final decision on the violation addressed in the notice.
 


Section 5	Review Procedures

5.1	Administrative Review

5.1.1	Applicability

The Zoning Administrator may render an administrative decision on applications for:

(1)	Single- and two-family uses, including dwellings and accessory structures;
(2)	Signs as outlined in Section 10.2.3;
(3)	Sign lighting;
(4)	Replacement windows and doors with no change in size or number;
(5)	Accessory apartments according to Section 6.2.1;
(6)	Up to 3 camping units as an accessory use of residential property according to Section 6.4.2;
(7)	Small residential fill operations according to Section 6.14;
(8)	Changes of use in existing buildings where no new impacts as compared with existing uses may reasonably be anticipated;
(9)	Amendments to administrative permits where conformance with this ordinance is found; and
(10)	Minor amendments to approvals issued by the Development Review Board (or Planning Commission or Zoning Board of Adjustment if a project predates the Development Review Board), where no material changes or impacts are expected, and where conformance with this ordinance is found.

5.1.2	Authority for Referral

The authority to render an administrative decision does not mean that the Zoning Administrator is required to do so. The Zoning Administrator may refer any application to the Development Review Board where board review or interpretation is appropriate or necessary. In such cases, the applicant shall be responsible for any additional fees or submittals needed for board review.

5.1.3	Referral to Design Advisory Committee.

The Zoning Administrator must refer any application for proposed land development within the Design Review Overlay District that meets the criteria of Section 5.1.1 to the Design Advisory Committee for design review in accordance with Section 5.4 before acting on a complete application.

5.1.4	Referral to Development Review Board.

Once the Zoning Administrator determines that an application is complete, and if the application does not meet the criteria for Administrative Review in Section 5.1.1, he/she must warn a public hearing on the application by the Development Review Board at its next available regularly scheduled meeting following the warning period required by statute.

5.2	Site Plan Review

5.2.1	Applicability. All land development other than that listed in Section 5.1.1 above requires site plan approval by the Development Review Board before the Zoning Administrator may issue a zoning permit.

5.2.2	Purpose. The purpose of site plan review is to ensure that:

(1)	The physical aspects of proposed land development comply with all applicable provisions of this ordinance and are consistent with the goals of the Manchester Town Plan.
(2)	Proposed land development is designed to be visually compatible with its setting.
 


(3)	Proposed land development is appropriately sited, and is complimentary to and functionally integrated with surrounding development to the greatest extent feasible.
(4)	Streets, access, driveways, parking facilities, utilities and other infrastructure, both on-site and off- site, are adequate and available to support the proposed land development.
(5)	Proposed land development is energy efficient.
(6)	Proposed land development avoids, mitigates, or minimizes adverse environmental effects to the greatest extent feasible.

5.2.4	Review Procedure.

The Development Review Board will review site plans referred to it by the Zoning Administrator as follows:

(1)	The Development Review Board must hold a public hearing and issue a decision on a site plan application in accordance with Section 5.9 and Section 5.10.
(2)	To approve a site plan application, the Development Review Board must conclude that the proposed land development meets all of the applicable criteria specified in Section 9.
(3)	The Development Review Board may approve a site plan application with conditions as necessary to ensure compliance with these regulations.

In the case of administrative review, The Zoning Administrator will review a site plan as follows:

(1)	To approve a site plan application, the Zoning Administrator must conclude that the proposed land development meets all of the applicable criteria specified in Section 9.
(2)	The Zoning Administrator may approve a site plan application with conditions as necessary to ensure compliance with these regulations.

5.2.5	Project Phasing.

A development project shall not cause undue impacts on the community with respect to the performance standards listed in Section 9. Accordingly, the Development Review Board may impose conditions to limit the impact of projects and require the time phasing of projects in total or in part, to mitigate undue impact as determined by the board.

5.2.6	State Highways. The applicant must submit a letter of intent from the Vermont Agency of Transportation with any application for proposed land development that involves new access to a state highway.

5.3	Conditional Use Review

5.3.1	Applicability

The commencement or expansion of a conditional use as identified in Section 1.14 (Use Table) requires approval from the Development Review Board before the Zoning Administrator may issue a zoning permit.

5.3.2	Application Requirements

Applicants must submit a narrative description of the proposed use that includes expected traffic generation, expected use of town services, and a site development plan if new construction or other exterior alterations are proposed for the site.
 


5.3.3	Review Criteria

A conditional use may be approved by the Development Review Board only after a public hearing and upon a conclusion by the board that the use shall not cause an undue adverse effect upon:

(1)	The capacity of existing or planned community facilities;
(2)	The character of the area affected;
(3)	Traffic on roads and highways in the vicinity;
(4)	Other provisions of ordinances, regulations, and bylaws of the town applicable thereto; or
(5)	The utilization of renewable energy resources.

The Development Review Board may impose conditions of approval to ensure that the use will not cause undue adverse effects and otherwise conforms to the provisions of this ordinance.

5.4	Design Review

5.4.1	Applicability

Land development within the Design Review Overlay District that involves exterior construction, modification or demolition of a building, sign, fence or wall, or modifications to the landscaping, exterior lighting, or on-site parking requires design review under this section before the Zoning Administrator may issue a zoning permit or the Development Review Board may grant a development approval, as applicable.

5.4.2	Application Requirements

In addition to the Site Development Plan requirements found in Section 5.2, applicants must submit illustrations in sufficient detail to show the proposed construction or alteration, and a clear description of all proposed materials and colors in the form of specifications or material samples. It is the applicant’s responsibility to provide the information necessary to demonstrate conformance with the standards of this ordinance.

5.4.3	Review Procedures

The Design Advisory Committee will review applications as follows:

(1)	The Design Advisory Committee must review applications at an open meeting. The meeting must comply with Vermont’s open meeting law. Accordingly, the meeting agenda must be posted at least 48 hours in advance on the town’s website, at the town office, and at least two other designated public places in Manchester. Such a meeting is not a public hearing that must be noticed and conducted in accordance with Section 5.9.
(2)	The Design Advisory Committee must allow the applicant and interested parties to comment on the application at the meeting.
(3)	The Design Advisory Committee may conduct a site visit to assess whether review criteria are met by the proposal.
(4)	The Design Advisory Committee must make any recommendations to the Zoning Administrator or Development Review Board in writing. For land development subject to administrative approval
under this ordinance, the Zoning Administrator must include any recommendations made by the Design Advisory Committee as conditions of approval on the zoning permit.
(5)	If the Design Advisory Committee concludes that the application fails to comply with the standards of this ordinance, the committee must provide the applicant with a copy of its written conclusions prior to any subsequent public hearing on the application before the Development
Review Board.
 


5.4.4	Design Criteria

Before granting design plan approval, the Development Review Board or Zoning Administrator, with assistance from the Design Advisory Committee, shall conclude that the proposed development conforms substantially to the relevant goals and policies described in the Manchester Town Plan, as illustrated and described in Design Guidelines for Manchester’s Commercial and Historic Districts, and the following design criteria:

A.	Architectural Design Criteria. Architectural design must be of a form, style, and scale that maintains and enhances those qualities noted in the underlying zoning district as outlined in Section 1, and the following:

(1)	Height. Applicants must demonstrate that the height of a new or renovated building is appropriate in relation to the average height of existing adjacent buildings or is in keeping with the purposes and dimensional requirements of the underlying zoning district as established in this ordinance.

(2)	Proportion. Applicants must demonstrate that:
(a)	The width and height of the front elevation of a new or renovated building is appropriate in relation to the width and height of the front elevations of existing adjacent buildings or is in keeping with the purposes and dimensional requirements of the underlying zoning district.
(b)	The fenestration pattern (the arrangement of windows and door openings) of the front elevation of a new or renovated building is appropriate in relation to the fenestration pattern of the front elevation of existing adjacent buildings, or is in keeping with the purposes and dimensional requirements of the underlying zoning district, and resulting in a compatible rhythm of alternating solids and openings (wall to windows/doors) along the street.

(3)	Roofs. Applicants must demonstrate that the shape, pitch, and direction of the roof on a new or renovated building is appropriate in relation to the design of roofs of existing buildings in the immediate area or in keeping with the purposes of the underlying zoning district as established in this ordinance.

(4)	Materials, Textures and Colors. Applicants must demonstrate that the proposed exterior materials, textures and colors on a new or renovated building are high quality, durable and appropriate in relation to the materials, textures and colors of existing buildings in the area.

(5)	Architectural Features. Applicants must demonstrate that new or renovated buildings incorporate architectural features such as cornices, entablatures, doors, windows, shutters, and fanlights that are compatible with the architectural features of existing buildings in the area or is in keeping with the purposes and dimensional requirements of the underlying zoning district. It is not intended that the details of existing buildings be duplicated precisely, but those features should  be regarded as suggestive of the extent, nature, and scale of details that would be appropriate on new buildings or alterations.

B.	Site Design Criteria. Site design must enhance the streetscape, provide pedestrian amenities, and meet the following standards:

(1)	Location of Buildings. Applicants must demonstrate that new buildings are sited and designed to be compatible with a pedestrian oriented streetscape.

(2)	Site Organization. Applicants must demonstrate that the organization of new buildings, drives, parking areas, walkways, signs, lights, fences and other structures on the site are designed to be
 


pedestrian oriented, functional, safe and in keeping with the purposes of the underlying zoning district.

(3)	Landscape and Plantings. Applicants must demonstrate that:
(a)	The proposed site design preserves the landscape in its natural state to the greatest extent feasible by minimizing tree and soil removal and alteration of existing grades; and
(b)	The proposed plant species and landscaping plan complement the scale and style of the building and are appropriate in relation to the existing landscape and plantings in the area.
(c)	The landscape plan meets the standards of Section 9.4.

(4)	Drives, Parking, and Circulation. Applicants must demonstrate that the proposed vehicular and pedestrian circulation is designed to:
(a)	Limit the number and minimize the width of access points to the street;
(b)	Separate vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian traffic;
(c)	Minimize the visual impact of parking by avoiding large expanses of pavement, and screening surface parking with berms, fencing or landscaping; and
(d)	Not detract from the design of buildings and neighboring properties.

(5)	Utility Service. Applicants must demonstrate that electric, telephone and other utility lines will be installed underground whenever feasible given site conditions, and that any above ground utilities have been located and screened to minimize their visual impact on the site and from neighboring properties.

(6)	Site Structures. Applicants must demonstrate that the materials, scale, design, and placement of accessory structures on the site is complementary to the building and neighboring properties.

(7)	Signs. Applicants must demonstrate that the size, location, design, color, texture, lighting, and materials of all exterior signs is complementary to buildings and structures on the site and neighboring properties, and that such signage conforms to the standards of Section 10.

(8)	Lighting. Applicants must demonstrate that:
(a)	The amount, intensity, type, location and design of all exterior lighting is complementary to buildings and structures on the site and neighboring properties;
(b)	Proposed exterior lighting meets standards of Section 9.5.

C.	Historic Preservation Standards. Applicants must demonstrate that any proposed land development involving a contributing historic structure will implement the practices recommended by the U.S. Department of Interior’s Technical Preservation Services in the Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings. The Secretary’s Standards for Rehabilitation are listed below and detailed recommendations
on appropriate rehabilitation practices are available online. The applicant must:
(1)	Make minimal change to a contributing structure’s defining characteristics.
(2)	Retain and preserve the historic character of a building or property, and avoid removing historic materials or altering the historic features and spaces that characterize a building or property.
(3)	Recognize that each building or property is a physical record of its time, place, and use, and not undertake changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural features or architectural elements from other buildings
(4)	Recognize that most buildings or properties change over time, and retain or preserve those changes that have acquired historic significance in their own right.
 


(5)	Preserve distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a historic property or building.
(6)	Repair rather than replace deteriorated historic features whenever feasible. If a feature is deteriorated to an extent that makes repair unfeasible, the replacement should match the original in design, color, texture, and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials.
(7)	Not use treatments or techniques that cause damage to historic materials.
(8)	Not destroy historic features that characterize the property or building as a result of new additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction. The new work may be differentiated from the old but must be compatible with the massing, size, scale, and architectural features of the historic property or building.
(9)	Design and construct any new additions and adjacent or related new construction in such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property or building would be unimpaired.

5.5	Subdivision Review

5.5.1	Applicability. A landowner:

(1)	Must not subdivide land or alter property boundaries without first recording an approved subdivision plat in the town’s land records in full conformance with this ordinance.
(2)	May file boundary surveys or corrective deeds in the town’s land records to repair boundary metes and bounds or to correct technical errors with previously recorded surveys or deeds for existing parcels with known boundaries without obtaining subdivision approval under this ordinance.

5.5.2	Application Requirements. In addition to relevant fees, subdivision applicants shall submit a completed application for a zoning permit, a narrative describing all aspects of the proposal, and one full- sized and one reduced (11” x17”) copy of a stamped survey prepared by a licensed surveyor or engineer in accordance with Section 5.2 showing the proposed lot lines, existing and proposed infrastructure, natural features of the land, and proposed building sites. All applications shall include supporting documentation demonstrating conformance with Section 11 of this ordinance. Detailed engineering drawings may be required to satisfy the design standards enumerated in Section 11. Proposed lot lines shall be shown on plans; however, internal metes and bounds need not be shown or described until preliminary review is concluded.

5.5.3	Classification of Subdivisions. Subdivisions involving four or fewer lots shall be classified as minor subdivisions. Subdivisions involving five or more lots shall be classified as major subdivisions. Planned Residential Developments and Planned Unit Developments shall be classified as major subdivisions. Lot line adjustments between two or more lots that do not result in an increase in the number of lots shall be classified as Boundary Line Adjustments and may receive administrative approval by the Zoning Administrator.

5.5.4	Boundary Line Adjustment

(1)	The Zoning Administrator may approve the realignment, relocation or elimination of a boundary line between adjoining lots provided that the proposed change:
(a)	Will not result in an increase in the number of lots.
(b)	Will not create a new nonconforming lot or structure (it may involve a pre-existing nonconformity).
 


(c)	Will not increase the degree of nonconformity of a pre-existing nonconforming lot or structure.
(d)	Will not violate any conditions of a prior permit or approval.
(2)	The Zoning Administrator may refer boundary line adjustment applications to the Development Review Board for review as a minor subdivision.

5.5.5	Preliminary Plat Review. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete application, minor subdivisions shall receive preliminary review by the Zoning Administrator for conformance with the subdivision criteria in Section 11 and other applicable provisions of this ordinance. Within 30 days of a complete application, major subdivisions involving five or more lots shall receive preliminary review by the Development Review Board for conformance with the subdivision criteria in Section 11 and other applicable provisions of this ordinance.

5.5.6	Final Plat Submissions. Once preliminary review has been conducted and the applicant has addressed any concerns raised by the review, the applicant shall submit one full-sized and six reduced (11”x17”) copies of the proposed final plat, the narrative demonstrating conformance with the subdivision standards outlined in this ordinance, and any additional supporting documentation demonstrating conformance with the design standards enumerated in Section 11.

The final plat submission shall include a draft of all restrictions or covenants of all types which will run with the land. All proposed deeds conveying property or easements to the town shall also accompany the final plat application. In addition, when applicable, the final plat shall be accompanied by a certificate of title showing the ownership of all property and easements to be dedicated to the town. The Development Review Board may require the submission of such other legal data as it deems necessary in the enforcement of these regulations.

5.5.7	Public Hearing. Once the final plat submission is deemed complete by the Zoning Administrator, the Development Review Board must hold a public hearing and act on the subdivision application in accordance with Section 5.9. If the proposed subdivision is within 500 feet of a municipal boundary,  notice of the hearing must also be sent to the clerk of the adjacent municipality.

5.5.8	Decision. Upon review of the application for conformance with Section 11, the Development Review Board must issue a decision on the final plat application according to Section 5.10.

5.5.9	Recording of Plats. Pursuant to 24 VSA §4463, an approved, signed plat must be filed or recorded with the town clerk within 180 days of approval, or approval expires without further action by the town. Upon written request, the Zoning Administrator may grant an extension up to an additional 90 days, if other final local or state permits are still pending. Prior to the submission of the final plat to the town clerk, the subdivider shall obtain the endorsement of the chair of the Development Review Board, or of  the Zoning Administrator in the case of a boundary line adjustment, on the Mylar. One full-sized paper copy of the final plat shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator. A certificate of compliance, certifying the plat conforms to the approval, must be issued by the Zoning Administrator prior to recording the Mylar plat. Once a plat is properly filed or recorded, the subdivision approval does not expire.

5.5.10	Revisions to Plats. No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made on any subdivision plat after the final approval, unless said plat is first resubmitted to the Development Review Board and the board approves the modifications. No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made on any boundary line adjustment plat after approval, unless said plat is first resubmitted to the Zoning Administrator for approval of the modifications. In the event a final plat is recorded without complying with this requirement, the plat shall be considered null and void.
 


5.5.11	Public Acceptance. Final approval by the Development Review Board shall not be deemed to constitute or be evidence of an acceptance by the town of any street, easement, utility, park, recreational area or open space shown on the final plat. Such acceptance may only be accomplished by formal resolution of the selectboard.

5.6	Waivers

5.6.1	Waiver Authority. The Development Review Board:

(1)	May grant waivers that authorize an adjustment to a dimensional standard of this ordinance. If a waiver of the requirement for a functional second story, Section 1.1.5(G)(7) shall apply.
(2)	Must not approve waivers to reduce any water resources setback required under this ordinance.
(3)	Must not approve waivers for land development within the Flood Hazard Overlay District.
(4)	Must not approve a waiver to allow a prohibited use or the subdivision of a lot that does not conform to the applicable provisions of this ordinance.
(5)	Must not approve a waiver allowing an increase in residential density of greater than 10% except as otherwise allowed by this ordinance.

5.6.2	Application Requirements. The applicant must submit a complete zoning permit application and a written request for a waiver with the Zoning Administrator that includes all of the following:

(1)	A brief description of the subject property and proposed land development.
(2)	A reference to the dimensional standard of these regulations from which the applicant is requesting a waiver.
(3)	The specific modification that the applicant is requesting.
(4)	A response to each of the criteria that the Development Review Board will use to decide whether to approve the waiver (see Figure 5-1).

5.7.3	Public Hearing. The Development Review Board must hold a public hearing and act on the waiver request in accordance with Section 5.9. If the applicant is requesting a waiver from the required setback from a state highway, notice of the hearing must also be sent to the Vermont Secretary of Transportation.

5.6.4	Review Criteria. To approve a waiver, the Development Review Board must conclude that all of the applicable criteria specified in Figure 5-1 have been met.

5.7	Variances

5.7.1	Variance Authority. The Development Review Board:

(1)	May approve variances that authorize more substantial adjustments to the standards of this ordinance under the specific circumstances described in this section.
(2)	Must not approve a variance to allow a prohibited use, an increase in residential density, or the subdivision of a lot that does not conform to the applicable provisions of this ordinance.

5.7.2	Application Requirements. The applicant must file a complete zoning permit application and a written request for a variance with the Zoning Administrator that includes all of the following:

(1)	A brief description of the subject property and proposed land development.
(2)	A reference to specific provision(s) of this ordinance from which the applicant is requesting a variance.
(3)	The specific modification(s) that the applicant is requesting.
(4)	A response to each of the criteria that the Development Review Board will use to decide whether to approve the variance (see Figure 5-1).
 


5.7.3	Public Hearing. The Development Review Board must hold a public hearing and act on the variance request in accordance with Section 5.9. If the applicant is requesting a variance from the required setback from a state highway, notice of the hearing must also be sent to the Vermont Secretary of Transportation.

5.7.4	Review Criteria. To approve a variance, the Development Review Board must conclude that all of the applicable criteria specified in Figure 5-1 have been meet.

5.7.5	Flood Hazard. If the Development Review Board approves a variance for development within the Flood Hazard Overlay District, the written decision must state that “Building a structure below the base flood elevation increases risk to life and property and will result in increased flood insurance premiums.”

5.7.6	Renewable Energy Variance. In the case of a renewable energy project that does not receive a certificate of public good from the Vermont Public Utilities Commission, the Development Review Board may approve a variance for a renewable energy structure according to the criteria indicated in Figure 5-1.

Figure 5-1. Waiver and Variance Review Criteria

CRITERIA	
WAIVER	GENERAL VARIANCE	RENEWABLE
ENERGY VARIANCE	FLOOD
HAZARD VARIANCE
1.  The proposed land development will not alter the essential character
of the area or district in which the property is located.	X	X	X	X
2. The proposed land development will not substantially or permanently
impair the lawful use or development of adjacent property.	X	-	-	-
3.  The proposed land development will not be detrimental to public
health, safety or welfare.	X	-	-	-
4.  The proposed land development is beneficial or necessary for the
continued reasonable use of the property.	X	-	-	-
5.  The applicant is proposing adequate mitigation of any dimensional
encroachment through design, screening or other remedy.	X	-	-	-
6.  The applicant has not created the unnecessary hardship.	-	X	X	X
7.  The applicant is proposing the least deviation possible from these
regulations that will afford relief.	-	X	X	X
8.  There are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including
irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property. These conditions, and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of these regulations in the district in which the property is located, have created an unnecessary hardship for the applicant. These physical circumstances or conditions prevent the property from possibly being developed in strict conformity with these regulations and a variance is necessary to enable reasonable use of the property.	



-	



X	



-	



X
9.  The proposed land development meets all applicable federal and
state rules for compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program.	-	-	-	X
10.  It would be unusually difficult or unduly expensive for the applicant
to build a renewable energy structure in conformance with these regulations.	-	-	X	-
11. The proposed land development will not reduce access to
renewable energy resources on adjacent property.	-	-	X	-
KEY:	X Applicable	- Not Applicable
 


5.8	Consolidated Review

5.8.1	Applicability. When a full application is received for a project requiring multiple review procedures, the Zoning Administrator shall schedule consolidated review, unless the applicant requests in writing that separate reviews be conducted.

5.8.2	Application Requirements. Application requirements for consolidated review shall include all application requirements for each individual type of reviews.

5.8.3	Review Procedures

(1)	Design Review shall be conducted concurrently with Site Plan, Conditional Use, and Subdivision Review, with the Design Advisory Committee making its recommendation in writing to the Development Review Board prior to the hearing. Conditional Use Review shall be understood to include Site Plan Review.
(2)	The Development Review Board must hold a public hearing and act on an application for combined review in accordance with Section 5.9. In addition, the hearing notice must:
(a)	Include a statement that the hearing will be a combined review of the proposed land development; and
(b)	List each type of review the Development Review Board will conduct.
(3)	All hearing and decision requirements and deadlines applicable to each review process will apply.

5.9	Hearing Procedures

5.9.1	Notice of Hearing

The Zoning Administrator must notify the public at least 15 days before a hearing for all conditional use, variance, appeal, and final subdivision applications. The Zoning Administrator must notify the public at least 7 days before a hearing for any other Development Review Board actions under this ordinance

The notice of hearing must include all of the following:

(1)	Publishing the date, place and purpose of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in Manchester.
(2)	Posting the date, place and purpose of the hearing at the town offices and at least one other public place within Manchester.
(3)	Providing the applicant with a notice of public hearing with the date, place and purpose of the hearing to be posted on the subject property within public view. It will be the applicant’s responsibility to ensure that the notice remains posted for the entire warning period and to remove the sign after the close of public hearing.
(4)	Notifying the owners of all properties adjoining the subject property (including those across the road) in writing. The notification must include a description of the proposed project and must
clearly explain to the recipient where to obtain additional information and that he/she must
participate in the hearing in order to have the right to any subsequent appeal.

A defect in the form or substance of the public notice requirements will not invalidate any action or decision under this ordinance when a reasonable effort has been made to provide adequate posting and notice.

5.9.2	Site Visits

The Development Review Board may require an applicant to grant the board access to a site prior to making a decision on an application when deemed necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance. If a quorum of Development Review Board members will be present, a site visit must be warned in accordance with Vermont’s open meeting law - notice must be posted at least 48 hours in advance on the town’s website, at the town office, and at least two other designated public places in town.
 


5.9.3	Conducting a Hearing and Taking Evidence

(1)	The Development Review Board must hold a public hearing within 60 days of the Zoning Administrator determining that an application is complete unless otherwise specified in this ordinance or the applicant agrees to a later hearing date.
(2)	The Development Review Board must conduct public hearings, hear testimony and take evidence according to its adopted rules of procedures.
(3)	All hearings must be open to the public as follows:
(a)	Any individual or group may appear and participate in a public hearing in person or by authorized representative or counsel, or may submit written testimony in advance of the hearing.
(b)	The Development Review Board must give all those wishing to participate an opportunity to be heard as is relevant to the proceeding.
(4)	The applicant or an authorized representative must be present at any public hearing or meeting when the Development Review Board will be considering his/her application.
(a)	The Development Review Board will continue its consideration of an application to its next regularly scheduled meeting if the applicant or an authorized representative is not present.
(b)	In the case of such a continuation, the intervening days will not be counted as part of any time period within which the Development Review Board is required to act.
(5)	Development Review Board members must not communicate directly or indirectly with any applicant, interested person, or their representative regarding a matter that is under consideration except during a properly noticed hearing.

5.9.4	Recessing a Hearing

(1)	The Development Review Board may recess a hearing pending submission of additional information necessary to determine compliance with these regulations or upon the applicant’s request.
(2)	If the Development Review Board recesses a hearing to a specific date and time, the hearing will not have to be warned again when resumed.

5.10	Decisions

5.10.1	Deliberations. The Development Review Board may deliberate and make a decision on the application either in open public session or in a closed deliberative session.

5.10.2	Time to Act. Within 45 days of closing a hearing, the Development Review Board must issue a written decision to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application.

5.10.3	Deemed Approval. If the Development Review Board does not issue a decision within 45 days of closing a hearing, the applicant may file an appeal with the Environmental Division of the Vermont Superior Court to recognize the board’s failure to act resulted in a “deemed approval” of the application.

5.10.4	Findings and Conclusions. The written decision must include a statement of the facts upon which the Development Review Board is basing its decisions and a statement of conclusions relating to the applicable review criteria and standards of this ordinance.

5.10.5	Conditions of Approval. The Development Review Board:

(1)	May attach any conditions it deems necessary to an approval to achieve the purposes of this ordinance including, but not limited to:
(a)	Specific performance standards such as limitations on hours of operation, noise, light or other off-site impacts;
(b)	Required improvements to public facilities or infrastructure to serve the proposed development;
 


(c)	Schedule or phasing of development;
(d)	Inspection or monitoring; and
(e)	Performance bonds in accordance with Section 4.4.4.

(2)	Must specifically describe any conditions or limitations in the written decision. Any conditions attached to the Development Review Board’s approval will be considered part of any subsequent zoning permit issued by the Zoning Administrator for the approved land development.

5.10.6	Submittal of Revised Plans. If the Development Review Board attaches conditions on an approval that require amendments to a site or subdivision plan, the applicant must submit an amended site or subdivision plan that satisfies those conditions prior to Zoning Administrator issuing a certificate of compliance. The Development Review Board may require a revised site plan prior to the issuance of a zoning permit for an approved site plan.

5.10.7	Notification and Filing. The Development Review Board must:

(1)	Send a copy of the decision to the applicant and any interested party that testified at the hearing by certified mail;
(2)	Send a copy of the decision to all others who participated in the hearing; and
(3)	File a copy of the decision with the Zoning Administrator.

5.10.8	Effect and Expiration. If the approved land development or use is:

(1)	Not substantially completed or commenced before the zoning permit expires as established in Section 4.2.12, the development approval will expire with the zoning permit.
(2)	Substantially completed or commenced before the zoning permit expires as established in Section 4.2.12, the development approval will remain in effect unless the use is abandoned or discontinued as established in Section 4.6. Development Review Board approvals and any related conditions run with the land and remain in effect irrespective of whether the property changes ownership.

5.11	Appeals

5.11.1	Who May Appeal

An interested person may appeal an action taken or decision made, under this ordinance as specified in this subsection. For the purposes of this ordinance, an interested person is:

(1)	An applicant who alleges that this ordinance imposes unreasonable or inappropriate restrictions on the existing or future use of his/her property, or that the action taken or decision made is not in accordance with this ordinance.
(2)	The Town of Manchester or any adjoining municipality.
(3)	A person owning or occupying property in the immediate neighborhood of proposed land development who can demonstrate:
(a)	A physical or environmental impact on his/her interests;
(b)	That the action taken or decision made is not in accord with the policies, purposes, or terms of this ordinance or the Manchester Town Plan, as most recently adopted; and
(c)	That he/she participated in any Development Review Board hearing conducted prior to the action or decision made.
(4)	Any combination of at least 10 voters or landowners in the Town of Manchester who by signed petition allege that the action taken or decision made is not in accord with the policies, purposes,
or terms of this ordinance or the Manchester Town Plan, as most recently adopted.
(5)	Any department or administrative subdivision of the state that owns property or interest in property in the Town of Manchester, and the Vermont Agency of Commerce and Community Development.
 


5.11.2	Appeals of Zoning Administrator Decisions

(1)	An interested person may appeal any action or decision of the Zoning Administrator to the Development Review Board by submitting a notice of appeal and any applicable fees with the Manchester Town Clerk within 15 days of the date of the Zoning Administrator’s action or decision.
(2)	The Town Clerk will forward the notice of appeal to the Planning and Zoning Office.
(3)	A notice of appeal must be in writing and must include all of the following information:
(a)	The name and address of the appellant (the person filing the appeal).
(b)	A copy of the Zoning Administrator’s decision or description of the action (if appealing zoning permit, also include a copy of the permit application);
(c)	A brief description of the subject property;
(d)	A reference to any sections of these regulations that the appellant alleges the Zoning Administrator has not properly followed or applied; and
(e)	A statement of the relief the appellant is requesting and why the appellant believes the requested relief to be appropriate under the circumstances.
(4)	If an appeal is filed by a group of persons, then the notice of appeal must designate one person to serve as a representative of the group regarding all matters related to the appeal.
(5)	The appellant may request a stay of enforcement as part of the notice of appeal by including a sworn statement that irremediable damage will directly result if the Development Review Board does not grant the stay.
(6)	Upon receipt of a complete notice of appeal, the Development Review Board must:
(a)	Hold a public hearing and act on the appeal in accordance with Section 5.9.
(b)	Reject the appeal without a hearing and render a decision within 10 days of the appellant filing the notice, if the Development Review Board determines that it decided the issues in an earlier appeal.
(7)	An appeal to the Development Review Board is the exclusive remedy for an interested person with respect to an action or decision of the Zoning Administrator.
(8)	If no interested person appeals the Zoning Administrator’s action or decision to the Development Review Board within 15 days, the action or decision will not be able to be contested at a later time.

5.11.3	Appeals of Development Review Board Decisions

(1)	Any interested person who participated in a hearing on a matter before the Development Review Board may appeal the board’s action or decision to the Environmental Division of the Vermont Superior Court within 30 days of the date of the board’s action or decision.

(2)	The appellant must send a notice of appeal to every interested person who participated in the hearing by certified mail. The Zoning Administrator must provide a prospective appellant with the interested person list upon request.

(3)	If the Zoning Administrator has issued a zoning permit based on a Development Review Board approval, the appeal of that approval will be considered an appeal of the zoning permit as well and the applicant must not commence any use or development authorized by the zoning permit until the appeal is resolved.

(4)	An appeal to the Environmental Division of the Vermont Superior Court is the exclusive remedy for an interested person with respect to an action or decision of the Development Review Board except as otherwise provided by state statute.

(5)	If no interested person appeals a Development Review Board action or decision to the Environmental Division of the Vermont Superior Court within 30 days, all interested persons will be bound by that action or decision and will not be able to contest it at a later time.
 


Section 6	General Regulations

6.0	Applicability

All land use and development within the Town of Manchester must conform to the standards of this section.

6.1	Access

6.1.1	Applicability. All land being developed must have access from a maintained public or private road in accordance with the provisions of this section. For lots without frontage on a maintained road, also see Section 3.9.3(3). See also Section 6.8 for driveway specifications.

6.1.2	Access Permit. An applicant for development to be served by a new curb cut on a town road or state highway must provide the Zoning Administrator with a copy of an access permit or letter of intent from the town or state for the curb cut as applicable, before the Zoning Administrator may issue a zoning permit.

6.1.3	Public Works Specifications. If there is a conflict between a provision of this section and a provision of the town’s Public Works Specifications, the Public Works Specifications will take precedence.

6.1.4	Curb Cuts. New and modified curb cuts must conform to the following:

(1)	Number. A lot must not be served by more than one curb cut except that:
(a)	The Development Review Board may approve a waiver allowing more than once access on a lot if the applicant can demonstrate that it is necessary to accommodate unique physical conditions on the property, to meet minimum standards for emergency access, or to provide improved traffic circulation within the site.
(b)	The Development Review Board may require a secondary or emergency access for subdivisions or developments when deemed necessary to protect public safety.
(2)	Width. The width of a curb cut as measured at the edge of the street or highway right-of-way
must not exceed the distance specified below, unless otherwise recommended by the Public Works Director (this will include reducing the width of existing nonconforming curb cuts if they are modified):
(a)	12 feet for curb cuts serving single- and two-family dwellings.
(b)	16 feet for curb cuts serving multi-family dwellings.
(c)	20 feet for curb cuts serving non-residential uses not frequently accessed by large trucks.
(d)	24 feet for curb cuts serving non-residential uses frequently accessed by large trucks.
(3)	Sidewalks. Where a sidewalk exists or will be constructed along the frontage, it must continue across the curb cut (this will include replacement of missing sidewalks across existing nonconforming curb curb cuts if they are modified).
(4)	Spacing. New curb cuts must conform to the standards below unless otherwise recommended by
the Public Works Director:
(a)	A new curb cut must be aligned with any existing curb cut on the opposite side of the street whenever feasible, and if not feasible, the centerlines of must be offset by at least 30 feet.
(b)	A new curb cut must be separated from existing curb cuts on the same side of the street by at least 45 feet (as measured from centerline to centerline).
(5)	Cross Access. Applicants proposing to subdivide or develop commercial or industrial lots must
provide a two-way access connection to abutting undeveloped, commercial or industrial lots whenever physically feasible (this will not be interpreted to include abutting lots that are in a residential zoning district). As a condition of site plan approval, the applicant may be required to:
(a)	Fully construct the cross access to the edge of the property;
(b)	Partially construct the cross access to the edge of the property (install the base but not
 


the final surface); or provide an easement and legally binding agreement for construction of the access at a later time (when the access would also be constructed on the abutting property).
(6)	Class 4 Roads and Other Unimproved Rights-of-Way. A Class 4 road or other unimproved
right- of-way is not a maintained road and cannot be used to meet the access requirements of this ordinance. No provision of this ordinance will be interpreted to require the town to maintain a Class 4 road or other unimproved right-of way, or to upgrade a Class 4 road or other unimproved right-of-way to a Class 3 road so that it may serve to provide access to adjoining property. Applicants may propose to upgrade a Class 4 road or other unimproved right-of-way to a Class 3 road at their expense and in accordance with town policies and standards so that it may serve to provide access to proposed land development.

6.2	Accessory Apartments

Pursuant to 24 VSA §4412, an accessory apartment or dwelling unit shall constitute a permitted use concurrent with the single-family residential use of a lot.

6.2.1	As Permitted Use

One accessory dwelling unit within or appurtenant to an owner-occupied single-family dwelling shall be approved provided there is compliance with all of the following:

(1)	The property has sufficient water and wastewater capacity, as demonstrated by any required, relevant permits (i.e., municipal water and sewer allocations, or a state water and wastewater permit);
(2)	The unit does not exceed 30% of the total habitable floor area of the single-family dwelling; and
(3)	Applicable setback, coverage, and parking requirements are met.

6.2.2	As Temporary Shelter

The placement of a temporary shelter accessory to a primary single-family residence located in a district in which single-family residences are a permitted or conditional use, may be approved as a conditional use provided that the following criteria are met:

(1)	The Development Review Board concludes the conditional use criteria of Section 5.3 satisfied;
(2)	The primary single-family residence is occupied by the landowner;
(3)	Each occupant of the temporary shelter is a member of the landowner’s immediate family (child, sibling, parent) or related by blood or marriage;
(4)	The occupants display a case of physical disability or financial hardship worthy of consideration under this section;
(5)	The temporary structure meets all setback requirements for the district in which it is located;
(6)	Upon the demise or relocation of the occupants of the temporary shelter, or sale of the property to a non-family member, the shelter is removed and the lot is brought into conformance within 6 months (such order shall be duly recorded in the land records for the Town of Manchester);
(7)	All required state and local permits shall be secured; and
(8)	The permit is renewed on an annual basis.

6.3	ADA Compliant Structures

Structures such as access ramps, which may be needed on private homes or which may be required on public buildings for compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, on buildings existing as of the date of adoption of this amendment (June 21, 1994), should meet required setbacks. However, if safe and suitable access cannot be provided in this manner, access structures may be located within required
 


setbacks if the Zoning Administrator or Development Review Board concludes that such structure and location:

(1)	Is reasonably necessary to provide access in a safe and suitable manner;
(2)	Is reasonably necessary in order to meet applicable guidelines and codes; and
(3)	Does not encroach any more than necessary within otherwise required setbacks.

6.4	Camping and Camping Units

6.6.1	Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to any parcel of land that is occupied by or designed to accommodate not more than 3 camping units, whether as a principal or accessory use. Any parcel of land that is occupied by or designed to accommodate more than 3 camping units will be considered a campground and subject to all applicable provisions of this ordinance applicable to campgrounds.

6.4.2	Camping as an Accessory Use. A resident may locate up to 3 camping units (campers, travel trailers, RVs, cabins, lean-tos, tents, etc.) on his/her residential property to be used for noncommercial, recreational purposes in accordance with the following:

(1)	Such units must not be occupied for more than 21 days total in any calendar year unless the property owner obtains a zoning permit.
(2)	The Zoning Administrator may issue a zoning permit to allow up to 3 camping units to be located on a residential lot and occupied for a maximum of 90 days total in any calendar year as an accessory use of residential property.

6.4.3	Camping as a Principal Use. A property owner may apply for a zoning permit to allow the placement of 1 camping unit as the principal use of an otherwise undeveloped lot in accordance with the following:

(1)	The proposed development may include the construction of a permanent pad, accessory structures and installation of utilities that conform to the standards of this ordinance for similar structures and uses on single-family residential lots.
(2)	The applicant must demonstrate that the camping unit conforms to applicable water supply and wastewater disposal standards.
(3)	The camping unit may remain on the lot year-round, but it may only be occupied for a maximum of 180 days total in any calendar year.

6.5	Child Care Facilities

6.5.1	Purpose

This section recognizes community needs for appropriate child care facilities in a variety of settings, by making provision for such facilities throughout the town, pursuant to 24 VSA §4412. These regulations are not intended to replace or supersede any applicable state regulations or licensing requirements.

6.5.2	Small Home Child Care

A small home child care refers to a state registered small home-based daycare as defined by the State of Vermont. A small home child care shall be considered by right to constitute a single-family residential use of property. Unregistered or unlicensed child care facilities as defined by the State of Vermont shall also be considered by right as a single-family residential use of property. Therefore, these facilities shall not require a permit and may be located in any zoning district in which single-family residential use is allowed.
 


6.5.3	Family Child Care Home

A family child care home refers to a state licensed home-based daycare for up to 12 children in the residence of the licensee where the licensee is one of the primary caregivers. A family child care home serving up to 12 children shall require a permit issued by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may require a site plan for a family childcare home. These facilities may be located in any zoning district in which single-family residential use is allowed.

6.5.4	Child Day Care Facility

An early childhood or child day care facility refers to a state licensed daycare not based in a home and is allowed indicated in Section 1.14 (Use Table).

6.5.5	Child Care Facility on an Existing Small Lot

A child care facility may be established as an accessory use to a residential use on an existing small lot, provided the structure in which the facility will operate meets the setback requirements for the district and all applicable provisions of Section 3.9.

6.6	Customary Home Occupation

6.6.1	Constitutes Residential Use.

Pursuant to 24 VSA §4412(4), a customary home occupation shall be considered by right to constitute a permitted residential use of property. To qualify as a customary home occupation the business activity must meet the following criteria:

(1)	It is carried on by a member of the family who is a de facto resident in the dwelling unit;
(2)	It is clearly incidental and secondary to the primary use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes by occupying or using less than 50% of the livable floor space within the home.
(3)	Not more than one person outside the family is employed on the premises in the home
occupation at any point in time;
(4)	There is no exterior display or exterior sign, except one lightless identification sign, not more than two square feet in size;
(5)	No offensive noise, vibrations, smoke, dust, odors, heat, light, or glare are produced;
(6)	There are no retail sales unless the items sold are the product of the business owner's own labor, or are antiques; and
(7)	The customary home business does not affect the residential character of the neighborhood.

However, a customary home business shall not be interpreted to include the following: commercial stables and kennels, restaurants and tea rooms, garages or shops for repair of motor vehicles, and other trades and businesses of a similar nature.

6.6.2	Tier 1 Customary Home Occupation

A Tier 1 customary home occupation shall conform to the definition above, as well as the following conditions, and may be reviewed and approved by the Zoning Administrator.

(1)	The business is carried on wholly within the dwelling or accessory structure;
(2)	There is no more than one employee who is not a resident of the house or member of the immediate family; and
(3)	There is no exterior storage of materials, and no other exterior indication of a home business or variation from the residential character of the principal building the property or the neighborhood.
 


A Tier 1 home business includes, but is not limited to the following: antique shops, dressmaking, home cooking, teaching, and the skilled practice of an accountant, architect, artist, dentist, photographer, doctor, engineer, insurance agent, lawyer, musician, realtor, barber or beautician, or any other similar profession or skilled practice carried on within the dwelling occupied by the practitioner.

6.6.3	Tier 2 Customary Home Occupation

A Tier 2 customary home occupation is a business, where the following conditions may exist:

(1)	The business is not carried on wholly within the dwelling or accessory structure in that it involves exterior storage of materials, or other exterior indication of a home business;
(2)	On site outdoor parking of large vehicles or equipment regularly used in the ordinary course of
the business;
(3)	The use of equipment on site that creates potential for adverse impacts upon neighbors (including but not limited to noise and odor); or
(4)	Multiple employees who come and go from the site, even if they do not work on site. These Tier 2 businesses shall require conditional use by the Development Review Board.
6.6.4	Exceptions Require Conditional Use Review

(1)	Number of Employees. The Development Review Board may approve, as a conditional use in conformance with Section 5.3 of this ordinance, an increase in the number of employees otherwise allowed who may work on site. This exception is limited to the Downtown (DN), Town Center (TC), Mixed Use 1 (MU1), Mixed Use 2 (MU2), and Mixed Use 3 (MU3) zoning districts, where such expansions may fit with the many commercial uses already permitted.
(2)	Signage. The Development Review Board may approve, as a conditional use in conformance with Section 5.3 of this ordinance, a sign for a customary home occupation to be larger than two square feet, where it is determined that the size and placement of the sign is consistent with and no larger than other existing, conforming commercial signs in the vicinity; where it is determined that a larger sign will create no adverse effects upon the residential character of the neighborhood; and where the size, placement, and design are recommended for approval by the Design Advisory Committee.

6.7	Demolition

6.7.1	Applicability. Demolition of a structure or part of a structure, not including structures exempted in Section 3.3, will require a zoning permit in accordance with the provisions of this section.

6.7.2	General Standards. Within 60 days after demolition is complete:

(1)	All structural materials and debris must be removed from the site;
(2)	The site must be restored to a natural grade; and
(3)	Groundcover must be re-established to prevent erosion unless otherwise specified as a condition of approval.

6.7.3	Historic Structures. Demolition of a structure or part of a structure listed individually, or as a contributing structure within a designated historic district, in the National Register of Historic Places or Vermont Register of Historic Places will require approval from the Development Review Board as a conditional use in accordance with Section 5.3 and the following:

(1)	The applicant must demonstrate that:
 


(a)	It is not feasible to rehabilitate or re-use the structure in order to earn a reasonable economic return from the property.
(b)	It is not feasible to move the structure to a new location on or off the property.
(c)	The non-feasibility of rehabilitation, re-use, or relocation is not due to his/her failure to perform normal maintenance and repairs as necessary to prevent structural damage and deterioration.
(d)	The non-feasibility of rehabilitation, re-use, or relocation is not due to his/her failure to set reasonable rents or sales price, or diligently solicit and retain tenants, as applicable.
(e)	The demolition is not primarily intended to allow development of additional surface parking.
(f)	The demolition is necessary to allow reasonable use of the property or demolition is part of a redevelopment plan that will provide a clear and substantial benefit to the community.
(2)	As a condition of approval for demolition, the Development Review Board:
(a)	May require the applicant to offer the structure for relocation for a period of up to 90 days before the Zoning Administrator may issue a zoning permit for demolition.
(b)	May require the applicant to photographically document the structure and provide the photographs to the town before the Zoning Administrator may issue a zoning permit for demolition.

6.8	Driveways

6.8.1	Applicability. New, extended or modified driveways serving proposed development must conform to the standards of this section. A driveway may serve not more than 2 lots.

6.8.2	Public Works Specifications. If there is a conflict between a provision of this section and a provision of the town’s Public Works Specifications, the Public Works Specifications will take precedence.

6.8.2	Technical Review. The Zoning Administrator will forward all applications for new, extended or modified driveways to the Administrative Advisory Group for review and comment. The Development Review Board or Zoning Administrator may condition or deny any approval or permit based on those comments.

6.8.3	Design Standards. Driveways must conform to the standards of Figure 6-1 and the following:

(1)	Angle. Driveways must intersect the road at an angle as close to 90 degrees as feasible given site-specific conditions. Driveways must not intersect the road at an angle of less than 75 degrees if designed for two-way traffic or 60 degrees if designed for one-way traffic.
(2)	Drainage. Driveways must:
(a)	Not block the flow of drainage in gutters or drainage ditches or pipes.
(b)	Not discharge run-off onto the traveled portion of a road.
(c)	Not generate run-off that would unreasonably contribute to an accumulation of stormwater or that would exceed the capacity of downstream facilities or infrastructure.
(d)	Be installed with culverts, where necessary, designed to carry run-off under the driveway.
Such culverts must be sized to convey anticipated peak stormwater flows and be at least 18 inches in diameter, extend at least 2 feet beyond the driveway edges, and installed to minimize erosion damage at the inlet and outlet. It will be the applicant’s responsibility to install and maintain such culverts.
 


(3)	Pull-Offs. A driveway longer than 450 feet and with a paved width of less than 20 feet must be constructed with pull-off areas not more than 450 feet apart adequately sized and surfaced to accommodate emergency vehicles.
(4)	Turnarounds. A driveway longer than 300 feet must terminate with a parking and turnaround area not more than 50 feet from the principal building that is adequately sized and surfaced to accommodate emergency vehicles.

Figure 6-1. Driveway Design Standards

	Minimum Paved Width	Maximum Grade
Serving 1 lot and less than 300 ft long	9 ft	12%
Serving 2 lots and less than 450 ft long	12 ft	10%
Serving 1 lot and more than 300 ft long	10 ft	10%
Serving 2 lots and more than 450 ft long	14 ft	10%

6.9	Drive-Through Facilities

6.9.1	Development Review Board Approval Required. When drive-through facilities are specifically allowed under this ordinance, they must receive approval from the Development Review Board through the site plan and conditional use review processes.

6.9.2	Design Standards. Drive-through facilities must be designed in accordance with the following:

(1)	Stacking lanes (where vehicles queue for service) and service areas must be located to the side or rear of the building.
(2)	Stacking lanes must be clearly signed, marked and separated from travel lanes.
(3)	Stacking lanes must not block access to service drives, parking spaces or loading areas.
(4)	Drive-through traffic must not cause congestion or other unsafe conditions within the site or on adjacent roads.
(5)	One or more designated pedestrian crossings must be provided across any stacking lane that separates parking from the building.
(6)	Stacking lanes and service areas must not be located within minimum required setbacks.
(7)	The message face of any drive-through menu board shall be fully screened from view from any public right-of-way. Drive thru menu boards may be externally illuminated if it is demonstrated that the illuminated features do not cause glare onto adjoining properties or rights-of-way.
(8)	Drive-through facilities must be located a sufficient distance from property lines and screened to prevent adverse impacts, including but not limited to noise and light trespass, on adjacent properties.

6.10	Erosion Control

6.10.1	Purpose. This section is intended to promote construction practices on development and redevelopment sites that limit soil disturbance and compaction, and minimize erosion and sedimentation of downstream surface waters.

6.10.2	Applicability. All construction activities that will disturb soil must implement appropriate measures to prevent erosion and sedimentation from adversely impacting nearby properties, public infrastructure, or downstream surface waters as set forth in the general standards below. Land development that obtains a state construction general or individual permit will be assumed to have met the requirements of this section. Any zoning permit or approval will be conditional upon the applicant submitting a copy of the state permit to the Zoning Administrator prior to the start of construction.
 


6.10.3	Erosion Control Plan Required. Applicants must submit and implement a professionally prepared erosion control plan for construction activities that will disturb more than 10,000 square feet of soil in accordance with the Vermont Standards and Specifications for Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control.

6.10.4	General Standards. All construction activities that will disturb soil must be undertaken in accordance with the following practices (for further guidance see the Vermont Agency of Natural Resource’s Low Risk Site Handbook for Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control):

(1)	Limit the size of the construction area to the minimum necessary to accommodate the proposed development.
(2)	Preserve significant existing trees within the construction area where feasible. Trees to be preserved within the construction area should be protected by fencing that at a minimum encloses the area around their drip line.
(3)	Mark site boundaries to identify the limits of construction (including storage and access areas) with flags or fencing. No soil disturbance or compaction should occur outside the delineated construction area.
(4)	Limit the amount of soil exposed at one time to reduce the potential for erosion by phasing construction.
(5)	Stabilize and maintain the construction entrance to prevent mud from being tracked onto streets.
(6)	Install silt fences to intercept runoff and allow suspended sediment to settle out on the downslope side of construction activities and between disturbed soil and any drainage feature, stormwater inlet or water body.
(7)	Divert any stormwater from upslope areas around the disturbed area with appropriately stabilized berms or ditches to prevent the runoff from picking up sediment. Untreated stormwater and sediment must not be diverted to neighboring properties, public rights-of-way or water bodies.
(8)	Treat and filter any water pumped out of the construction area before allowing it to flow off the site or to be discharged to a storm drain or water body.
(9)	Slow any concentrated flows of runoff by installing stone check dams in drainage channels.
(10)	Stabilize exposed soil with seed and mulch or erosion control matting promptly when work in an area is complete.
(11)	Monitor the site to ensure that all sediment and erosion control measures are functioning properly. It is particularly important to check erosion control measures just before and after any significant rainfall.
(12)	Periodically clean, replace and maintain all sediment and erosion control measures until vegetation is permanently established on all disturbed areas.
(13)	Till any compacted soil prior to the final seeding and mulching; and
(14)	Stockpile the topsoil removed during construction and spread it back onto disturbed areas prior to the final seeding and mulching. If the quality of the site’s topsoil is inadequate to support appropriate vegetative cover, it does not need to be stockpiled and it may be replaced with better quality soil or, if it is retained, it should be amended as needed.

6.11	Extraction Operations

6.11.1	New Operations

No topsoil, rock, sand, gravel, or other earth product materials may be removed from any parcel for commercial purposes without site plan and conditional use approval from the Development Review  Board. The Development Review Board may approve such earth products removal, provided it concludes that the following requirements are met:
 


(1)	A site plan must be submitted showing existing grades in the area from which the material is to be removed, together with finished grades at the conclusion of the operation.
(2)	The applicant shall provide for proper drainage of the area during and after completion of the operation.
(3)	Finished grade must not result in a slope steeper than a 2:1 (horizontal-to-vertical) ratio.
(4)	No removal shall take place within 20 feet of a property line, except that where the grade from a property line rises toward the lot where removal is to take place, material lying above the grade at the property line may be removed.
(5)	At the conclusion of the operation, or any substantial portion thereof, the whole area where removal has taken place shall be covered with not less than four inches of topsoil, and seeded with a suitable cover crop.

6.11.2	Existing Operations

Existing sand and gravel, or other extractive operations, must conform to this subsection with respect to any enlargement of the area on which such operations are conducted.

6.11.3	Surety Bond

In accordance with the provisions of 24 VSA §4407(8), and before a permit is granted under this section for the removal of soil, sand, or gravel, the applicant shall post a surety bond with the town in an amount and form to guarantee conformity with the provisions of the permit issued hereunder.

6.11.4	Streambed Restrictions

Pursuant to 10 VSA §1021(c), no person shall remove gravel from any watercourse primarily for construction or for sale.

6.12	Fences and Walls

6.12.1	Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to all fences and walls not exempted in Section 3.3.

6.12.2	Setbacks. Fences and walls may be located within district setbacks as specified in Figure 1-1 except that fences that enclose tennis courts must comply with all setback requirements for the district in which they are located.

6.12.3	Height. The maximum height of fences and non-retaining walls will be as follows unless otherwise approved by the Development Review Board in order to provide adequate screening or security:

(1)	4 feet if located between the street and the principal building frontline.
(2)	8 feet if located to the rear or side of the principal building.
(3)	10 feet for a fence enclosing a tennis court, in a rear or side yard.
(4)	Height restrictions will not apply to fences within the Office Industrial district provided that:
(a)	The fence does not abut land in another zoning district; and
(b)	The fence height and location does not reduce sight distance at intersections.
(5)	A fence or wall must not obscure vision above a height of 3 feet at an intersection.

6.12.4	Materials. Unless otherwise approved by the Development Review Board, a fence or wall:

(1)	Must be constructed of permanent material such as wood, chain link, stone, rock, concrete, brick, decorative wrought iron or other materials of similar durability;
 


(2)	Must be constructed so that any support posts are to the inside and the “finished” or “good” side faces out; and
(3)	Must not be constructed of barbed wire, razor wire or similar materials capable of inflicting significant physical injury except as required to meet state or federal regulations.

6.12.5	Retaining Walls. Retaining walls must be located and designed as follows:

(1)	No individual retaining wall may exceed 15 feet in height except that pre-existing retaining walls more than 15 feet in height may be repaired and reconstructed to their pre-existing height.
(2)	All retaining walls more than 4 feet in height must be designed by a qualified professional, and must be topped by a fence, hedge or similar barrier. For a system of terraced walls, only the uppermost wall will require a barrier provided that the terraced sections below are not readily accessible from other portions of the property.
(3)	The height of a retaining wall will be measured from the grade at the base of the face of the wall to the grade at the back of the wall immediately above at the location along the wall where those two grades are the furthest apart.
(4)	Terracing of retaining walls is encouraged. To be considered separate walls, two retaining walls must be separated by a horizontal distance of at least 8 feet.

6.13	Frontage Requirement

No land use or development shall be permitted on lots with less than 50 feet of frontage on a public street or private way, unless the provisions of Section 6.13.1 or Section 6.13.2 are meet.

6.13.1	Three or More Lots

The Development Review Board or Zoning Administrator may approve land use or development of three or more lots which do not front on a public street, provided that the following criteria are satisfied:

(1)	A permanent and legally deeded right-of-way not less than 50 feet in width serves each lot;
(2)	No such right-of-way shall be created or transferred if such action will reduce any lot to a size smaller than required in that district; and
(3)	The road serving the lots through this right-of-way shall meet town road standards as established in Chapter 7 of the Manchester Unified Ordinances.

6.13.2	Less Than Three Lots

Where one or two lots are located to the rear of another lot and cannot meet the frontage requirement, the Development Review Board or Zoning Administrator may approve land use or development provided that:

(1)	A permanent and legally deeded right-of-way at least 20 feet in width serves each lot; and
(2)	The area of the lots and the front, side and rear yards for each lot, meet the minimum requirements for that district.

6.14	Grading, Excavation or Fill

6.14.1	Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to all grading, excavating or filling of land not exempted in Section 3.3 or associated with an extraction operation as defined under this ordinance and as approved per Section 6.11. A property owner must obtain a zoning permit for such grading, excavating or filling of land in accordance with the provisions of this section.
 


6.14.2	Waterways or Wetlands. Excavation and fill is prohibited within surface waters, wetlands and any required setbacks to surface waters or wetlands except:

(1)	The proposed activity may proceed under state approval and permitting provided the landowner submits such approval and permit to the Zoning Administrator.
(2)	A landowner may remove up to 50 cubic yards of material per year for noncommercial private use after securing a permit from the Zoning Administrator. However, only up to 10 cubic yards per  year may be removed from the Batten Kill or West Branch of the Batten Kill, which were designated as Outstanding Resource Waters by the Vermont Water Resources Board in 1991.

6.14.3	Fill Material. The use of any material for fill other than uncontaminated clean fill (may contain soil, stone, gravel, concrete, ceramic, or brick and mortar) is prohibited unless the proposed fill will be subject to state permitting, in which case the conditions of the state permit regarding the fill material will prevail.

6.14.4	General Standards. Grading, excavation and fill operations must conform to the following requirements unless otherwise approved by the Development Review Board as an element of proposed land development subject to a development approval:

(1)	A site plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator showing existing grades in the area to which fill will be deposited, together with finished grades at the conclusion of the operation.
(2)	Grading, excavation or fill is prohibited within 20 feet of the property line except that deposition of
fill may occur below the grade at the property line, or unless the activity includes both properties and the abutting landowner is a co-applicant.
(3)	The applicant shall provide for proper drainage of the area during and after completion of the operation.
(4)	Grading, excavation or fill must not result in a slope steeper than a 2:1 (horizontal-to-vertical)
ratio.
(5)	At the conclusion of the operation, or any substantial portion thereof, the area where fill has been deposited, land has been regraded, or extraction has occurred shall be covered with not less than four inches of topsoil, and seeded with a suitable cover crop.

6.15	Outdoor Display of Merchandise

Outdoor display of retail merchandise is prohibited unless:

(1)	The activity is exempted under Section 3.3; or
(2)	The merchandise is produced to be used outdoors and the display area is approved by the Development Review Board as part of site plan review.

6.16	Ponds

6.16.1	Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to any constructed pond with a surface area of more than 200 square feet or a maximum depth of more than 4 feet. A property owner must obtain a zoning permit to construct, expand or modify such a pond in accordance with the provisions of this section.

6.16.2	Waterways or Wetlands. Construction of a pond within wetlands and any required buffers to surface waters or wetlands is prohibited unless the applicant demonstrates that he/she has obtained all required state permits.
 


6.16.3	General Standards. Ponds must conform to the following unless otherwise approved by the Development Review Board as an element of proposed land development subject to a development approval:

(1)	Ponds are prohibited within zoning district setbacks.
(2)	Ponds must have a grassed spillway system capable of handling stormwater overflow from the pond. Overflow must not be discharged in a manner that would adversely impact downslope properties, public rights-of-way or surface waters.
(3)	Property owners must manage and maintain ponds so as to not create a nuisance or hazard.

6.17	Public Toilet Facilities

6.17.1	Nonresidential Buildings. Nonresidential buildings designed or used for retail, dining, lodging, office or service purposes, or otherwise regularly open to the general public must provide internal, sanitary and secure public toilet facilities for patrons that are clearly identified and maintained in working order.

6.17.2	Nonconforming Buildings. Nonconforming pre-existing buildings must meet the requirement of Section 6.17.1 if proposed renovation or modification of the building requires site plan approval except the Development Review Board may waive this requirement upon the applicant demonstrating that providing public toilet facilities is not feasible given the existing configuration and floor plan of the building and any proposed modifications.

6.18	Stormwater

6.18.1	Purpose. This section is intended to:

(1)	Minimize and control the quantity and quality of stormwater run-off.
(2)	Promote stormwater management methods that maintain pre-development hydrology and drainage patterns through project layout, site design, and best management practices that manage stormwater run-off as close to the source as possible.
(3)	Limit clearing and grading to the minimum needed for construction and minimize impacts to natural vegetation.
(4)	Prevent soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from non-point source pollution generated by land development.
(5)	Protect surface waters and other natural resources from degradation as a result of land development.
(6)	Minimize hazards from flooding and streambank erosion.
(7)	Prevent damage to, and reduce public expenditures associated with, maintaining municipal infrastructure resulting from inadequate stormwater controls.

6.18.2	Applicability. All proposed land development that will increase the amount of impervious surface of a lot must implement appropriate measures to reduce and manage stormwater to prevent run-off from adversely impacting nearby properties, public infrastructure, or downslope water bodies. The provisions  of this section apply to any land development that will increase the amount of impervious surface on a lot except land development that obtains a state stormwater permit. A project with a state stormwater permit will be assumed to have met the requirements of this section. Any zoning permit or approval will be conditional upon the applicant submitting a copy of the state permit to the Zoning Administrator prior to  the start of construction.
 


6.18.3	Public Works Specifications. Applicants must construct stormwater infrastructure in accordance with the town’s Public Works Specifications. In the case of a conflict between a provision of this section and a provision of the Public Works Specifications, the Public Works Specifications will govern.

6.18.4	Design and Engineering Requirements. Applicants must design and engineer proposed land development in accordance with low-impact site design (LID) approaches and green stormwater infrastructure (GSI) best management practices to the maximum extent feasible given the site specific conditions including, but not limited to, soil characteristics and slope. Applicants proposing land development that will increase the amount of impervious surface on a lot by:

(1)	2,500 square feet to 10,000 square feet must demonstrate that appropriate stormwater best management practices will be implemented based on the GSI Simplified Sizing Tool. The GSI Simplified Sizing Tool was developed by the Vermont League of Cities & Towns (VLCT) in collaboration with the Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation (VDEC). The tool, available from the VDEC website, is an Excel spreadsheet allowing applicants to design GSI elements based on site characteristics and development plans.
(2)	10,000 square feet or more must submit and implement a professionally prepared stormwater management plan in accordance with the Vermont Stormwater Management Manual. The Vermont Stormwater Management Manual is available from the VDEC website.

6.18.5	Best Management Practices. Land development that will increase the amount of impervious surface on a lot by 2,500 square feet or more must be designed so that stormwater run-off will be routed through one or more appropriate green stormwater best management practices (BMPs) in accordance with the following:

(1)	BMPs must be sized and designed to capture 90% of the annual storm events, or the first inch of rainfall. See the GSI Simplified Sizing Tool for methods and calculations.
(2)	Stormwater from on-site impervious roofs, roads, driveways, parking areas, sidewalks and walkways must be guided to vegetated areas, retention areas, or other pervious surfaces in order to promote on-site water retention and filtration.
(3)	Applicants must demonstrate that the proposed width of all roads and driveways is the narrowest possible necessary to provide safe access and circulation in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and the town’s Public Works Specifications.
(4)	Applicants must demonstrate the proposed amount of on-site parking is the minimum necessary to meet the parking demand in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and the town’s Public Works Specifications.

6.18.6	Post-Construction Soil Depth and Quality. All disturbed areas on a site not covered by impervious surfaces, incorporated into a structural stormwater treatment practice, or engineered as structural fill or slope once development is complete, must conform to the following:

(1)	The duff layer and topsoil in areas to be disturbed during construction must be removed and stockpiled on-site in a designated, controlled area that is not adjacent to surface waters, wetlands, floodplains, or river corridors. The duff layer and topsoil must be re-applied to the disturbed areas once construction activities are complete.
(2)	At project completion, the soil in disturbed areas must:
(a)	Have a pH from 6.0 to 8.0 or matching the pH of the undisturbed soil on the site.
(b)	Include a topsoil layer with a minimum organic matter content of 10% dry weight in planting beds and 5% organic matter content in turf areas;
 


(c)	Include a topsoil layer with a minimum depth of 8 inches except where tree roots limit the depth of incorporation of amendments needed to meet the criteria.
(d)	Have had the subsoils below the topsoil layer scarified at least 4 inches with some incorporation of the upper material to avoid stratified layers, where feasible.
(3)	If the stockpiled duff layer and topsoil is not sufficient to amend the graded areas, the applicant
must import and establish a minimum 8-inch topsoil layer with subsoils below scarified to at least 4 inches to allow for some incorporation of the topsoil layer.
(4)	The resulting soil must be capable of supporting healthy vegetation. If the disturbed areas will be landscaped in accordance with an approved site plan, the resulting soil must be capable of supporting the plants that will be installed.

6.19	Swimming Pools

A landowner may apply for a zoning permit to install a swimming pool (if not exempted in Section 3.3) on his/her property as an accessory structure in accordance with the following:

(1)	A swimming pool must be completely enclosed to prevent unauthorized access by a wall, fence or other structure not less than 4 feet in height with a self-closing and self-latching gate.
(2)	An above-ground pool will be considered completely enclosed if its exterior walls are smooth and at least 4 feet in height above grade around its entire perimeter, and if either:
(a)	The ladder access will be enclosed by a wall, fence, or other structure not less than 4 feet in height with a self-closing and self-latching gate; or
(b)	Entrance to the pool will be possible only through the use of portable steps or stairs that are removed when the pool is not in use.
(3)	Swimming pools may be located within district setbacks in accordance with Figure 1-1. A
swimming pool must not be located between the principal building and the street unless the applicant can demonstrate that there is no other feasible location on the lot.

6.20	Temporary Construction-Related Structures and Activities

6.20.1	Applicability. Temporary construction-related structures are permitted in any district on the site of permitted land development or an approved staging area in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. Construction-related structures may include, but are not limited to, construction offices, construction trailers, construction dumpsters, storage buildings, portable toilets, fences and signs.

6.20.2	Permitting Process. The permit for the land development will include approval of any construction-related structures. Construction-related structures must be removed from the property promptly upon completion of work and before the Zoning Administrator may issue a final Certificate of Compliance in accordance with Section 4.5.

6.20.3	Off-site Staging Areas. The Zoning Administrator may issue a zoning permit for the temporary use of a property in the Office Industrial District as a staging area for an off-site construction project. The Development Review Board may allow the temporary use of a property in any other district as a staging area for an off-site construction project as a conditional use.

6.20.4	Dumpsters and Portable Toilets. Construction dumpsters and portable toilets must be located and used in accordance with the following:

(1)	Must not impede pedestrian or vehicular access or otherwise create an unsafe condition for pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
 


(2)	Must be labeled with the name and telephone number of the owner, and as being for construction or demolition materials only.
(3)	Must be routinely inspected and emptied as needed.

6.21	Temporary Structures

Erection or placement of all temporary structures, not related to construction per Section 6.20, shall require a permit, except for a tent structure that is removed within one week of erection, or a temporary structure used for private residential purposes on a parcel with single-family use and which is fully screened from view from any public right-of-way. Temporary structures include tents, yurts, portable garages, storage containers, contractors’ trailers, or any other structure of a nonpermanent nature.

6.21.1	Storage Containers

A permit may be issued by the Zoning Administrator to allow a registered or unregistered storage container, truck box, or trailer to be used temporarily for storage in connection with a permitted use. This permit shall be limited to no more than 6 months duration, shall not be renewable, and shall require conformance with the setback requirements of the district in which the container is located.

6.21.2	Other Temporary Structures

Other temporary structures shall be limited to one per lot, for a time period not to exceed 12 months. A permit for more than one of these structures on a lot, or for a timeframe greater than 12 months but not to exceed 36 months, may only be granted upon the following conditions: either the Zoning Administrator determines that these structures are not plainly visible from a public road, nor from nearby or adjoining homes; or upon approval by the Development Review Board as a conditional use, including review of screening where necessary.

As a conditional use, the Development Review Board may approve one extension of such a permit for up to an additional 36 months, taking into account the extent of screening that may be appropriate or necessary; the condition of the existing temporary structure and the degree of maintenance applied to the structure and the site; whether any exterior lighting, existing or proposed, is minimized in type, intensity, and glare only to accomplish the need; whether the temporary structure can reasonably be expected to maintain its structural and aesthetic integrity for the requested timeframe; and upon a determination that there is no adverse impact or effect upon the character of the neighborhood.

6.22	Trash Storage and Recycling Areas

All proposed land development subject to site plan review must provide suitable facilities for trash storage and recycling areas as follows:

(1)	Trash storage and recycling areas must be located within the building or inside an enclosure located to the side or rear of the building and outside required setbacks.
(2)	All outdoor trash and recycling storage and containers must be located on a hard surface (i.e., asphalt or concrete).
(3)	Trash storage and recycling areas must provide adequate space for the maintenance and servicing of containers.
(4)	Enclosures must be at least 5 feet in height and must obscure all materials and containers stored inside.
(5)	Enclosures must be constructed of durable materials that are compatible in design with the
buildings they are intended to serve.
 


(6)	Any doors or gates to trash storage and recycling areas must remain closed and latched except when being accessed for deposit, maintenance or pick-up.
(7)	Trash and recycling areas must be accessible and convenient for building residents/tenants and for collection vehicles.

6.23	Undevelopable Land

6.23.1	Purpose: The purpose of this section is to:

(1)	Prevent development of lands susceptible to environmental, property, or infrastructure damage.
(2)	Prevent development of lands reserved for other purposes.

6.23.2	Development Prohibited on Undevelopable Land. Except as specifically authorized elsewhere in this ordinance, undevelopable land must not be developed.

6.23.3	Definition and Classification. Undevelopable land includes:

(1)	Land with a natural slope greater than 20%, as measured over the proposed area of development in horizontal linear feet, Class A
(2)	Wetlands, as defined in this ordinance, Class A
(3)	Land within the Flood Hazard Overlay District, Class A
(4)	Utility rights-of-way, Class A
(5)	Other public and private rights-of-way and easements, Class B; and
(6)	Land within the Forest Conservation District, Class B.

6.23.3  Calculating Maximum Coverage and Density. Class A undevelopable land will be included when calculating the maximum residential density, lot coverage or building coverage on a lot, unless excluded elsewhere in this ordnance. Class B undevelopable land will not be included when calculating a lot’s maximum residential density.

6.24	Vending Machines or Kiosks

6.24.1  Vending Machines. Vending machines may be allowed as accessory structures in accordance with the following:

(1)	Vending machines must not be internally illuminated.
(2)	Vending machines must not be located between the frontline of the building and the street.
(3)	The vending machine must be located and designed as shown on an approved site plan.

6.24.2  Vending Kiosks. Vending kiosks, including kiosks for ATMs, may be allowed as accessory structures in accordance with the following:

(1)	The vending kiosk must be fully screened from view from any public right-of-way.
(2)	The vending kiosk may contain internally illuminated or audible features provided that the light and sound produced will not be perceptible from adjoining rights-of-way and properties.
(3)	The vending kiosk must be located and designed as shown on an approved site plan.
 


6.25	Water Resources Protection

6.25.1	Purpose. This section is intended to protect and enhance the overall quality, natural function and ecological health of the town’s surface waters and wetlands by mitigating the impact of development on these surface water features.

6.25.2	Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to all land within the water resources setback for the applicable district (see Section 1.15) from all rivers, streams, lakes, natural ponds and wetlands as reflected in the online Natural Resources Atlas as maintained by the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources. The water resources setback will be measured as a horizontal distance from the top of bank for rivers or streams, from the mean high water mark for lakes or ponds, and from the delineated extent of wetlands.

6.25.3	General Standards. Land development and soil disturbance is prohibited and natural woody vegetation must be maintained or established within water resources setbacks except that:

(1)	Water-dependent structures or uses, public recreation facilities and public trails or walkways will be allowed to the extent allowed in the applicable zoning district.
(2)	Up to 20% of the area within the water resources setback or 800 square feet, whichever is greater, may be used for private water access, outdoor recreation, or outdoor seating. That area may be covered with mowed lawn, decks, patios, or walkways.
(3)	Landscaping within water resources setbacks may be used in conjunction with green stormwater infrastructure (GSI) practices provided that such landscaping will not significantly compromise the existing functions of natural vegetation within the setbacks.
(4)	On previously developed, nonconforming sites, redevelopment may be allowed within the same footprint as a conditional use in accordance with Section 5.3.

6.25.4	Previously Developed Nonconforming Sites. Pre-existing development within water resources setbacks will be regulated in accordance with the following:

(1)	The pre-existing development may continue.
(2)	A pre-existing building or developed site may be used for any purpose allowed in the zoning district. The requirement for conditional use approval will only be triggered if the applicant is proposing to expand the footprint or impact of development within the setback.
(3)	On previously developed single- and two-family residential lots, natural woody vegetation will not have to be re-established on areas within the riparian setback maintained as lawns or gardens.

6.25.5	Conditional Use Criteria. In addition to all other applicable criteria of this ordinance, an applicant seeking conditional use approval for land development within the water resources setback must demonstrate that:

(1)	The proposed land development cannot reasonably be accommodated on any portion of the lot outside the setback;
(2)	The proposed land development will not have new or greater (as compared to existing conditions) adverse impact on:
(a)	The natural functions of the surface water and land within the setback;
(b)	Drainage, erosion, siltation and downstream flooding;
(c)	Fish and wildlife habitat; and
(d)	Public access and recreation.
 


(3)	If the site was previously developed, it will be brought into conformance with the standards of this section to the maximum extent feasible.

6.25.6	Timing of Approved Land Development or Soil Disturbance. Applicants must undertake any approved land development or soil disturbance within water resources setbacks during periods of low water.

6.26	Water Supply and Wastewater Disposal

All proposed development requiring a zoning permit under this ordinance must conform to applicable town ordinances and specifications, and state regulations regarding the provision of potable water and disposal of wastewater.
 


Section 7	Utility Facilities

7.1	Wireless Telecommunications Facilities

7.1.1	Purpose

The purpose of this section is to ensure appropriate review and oversight of wireless telecommunications towers and associated infrastructure, to protect the scenic, historic, environmental, and residential resources and qualities of the community, and to minimize the visual and environmental impacts of these facilities, all within the confines dictated by federal law.

The provisions of this section shall not prohibit a property owner’s ability to place or allow placement of antennae used to transmit and receive communications signals on the property owner’s premises if the aggregate area of the largest face of the antennae is not more than eight square feet, and if the antennae and mast to which they are attached do not extend more than 12 feet above the roof of that portion of the building to which they are attached.

These regulations are consistent with the Telecommunications Act of 1996, in that they do not prohibit the provision of wireless telecommunications services, do not discriminate among service providers, and do not pre-empt FCC regulations governing radio frequency emissions.

7.1.2	Review Procedure

Conditional use approval is required for any wireless telecommunications facility that is licensed and regulated by the Federal Communications Commission, along with any associated equipment, buildings, and infrastructure. However, in accordance with 24 VSA §4412(9), the Development Review Board shall approve a wireless telecommunications facility that is determined to create either no impact or only de minimus impact upon any criteria in this section of the ordinance. No permit shall be required for a wireless telecommunication facility that is subject to or has received a Certificate of Public Good under 30 VSA §248(a).

Prior to granting any approval, the Development Review Board shall make affirmative conclusions upon all of the general conditional use criteria described in Section 5.3 of the ordinance and the criteria described below.

7.1.3	Independent Review

The Development Review Board may engage independent consulting assistance to review the application for conformance with this ordinance and the town plan. Consistent with federal law, the applicant will be required to pay any costs associated with that review. Payment shall be received before the Development Review Board may issue its decision.

7.1.4	Design Review

If it falls in the Design Review Overlay District, a telecommunications facility is also subject to design review.

7.1.5	Modifications to Permits

Any change in the number or size of facilities or equipment, or change in technology from the original permit, shall require an amendment to that permit. For minor changes involving replacement of facilities or equipment of equivalent size, material, and construction, administrative review may occur. However, any
 


addition of equipment or facilities, or change in size or materials of equipment or facilities, shall require conditional use approval by the Development Review Board.

7.1.6	Application Requirements

Applications shall include a site plan with elevations and other documents stamped by a qualified engineer that:

(1)	Describe the height, design, and elevation of all proposed infrastructure;
(2)	Document the height of all proposed antenna mounting positions on a tower;
(3)	Describe the tower’s proposed capacity, including number, height, and type(s) of antennae that the tower is expected to accommodate;
(4)	Document the need for the proposed site and structures, and demonstrate why no other alternative or site will provide adequate coverage or capacity;
(5)	Include photographs of existing conditions at the proposed site, and accurate photo simulations showing post-construction conditions at the site; and
(6)	Include a copy of the FCC license or executed contract between the applicant and the FCC
licensee for the proposed facility.

The Development Review Board may require additional information prior to issuing a decision.

7.1.7	Location

Telecommunications towers and associated equipment, buildings, and infrastructure shall not be located:

(1)	On undevelopable land;
(2)	In historic districts as defined in this ordinance;
(3)	In residential zoning districts as defined in this ordinance;
(4)	Within 300 feet of any residence, residential zoning district or school; or
(5)	Within the approach or departure routes or patterns of an approved airstrip.

7.1.8	Use of Existing Structures

Applicants are encouraged to locate antennae within existing tall structures such as church steeples or barn silos; in these instances, the standards of this section may be modified or waived by the Development Review Board.

7.1.9	Co-location

The principle of co-location shall be employed to the greatest extent possible. The applicant shall demonstrate that there are no other existing tower sites that can accommodate the proposed facilities. If other sites do exist, then the applicant must demonstrate that they are technically inadequate, or that bona fide, good faith negotiations with that landowner have failed.

Any permit granted shall include a condition requiring that other wireless service providers shall be allowed to co-locate on any new or existing tower. The applicant shall provide written evidence as to how it will comply with this condition, and under what terms co-location will be allowed.

7.1.10	Setback

The minimum setback requirement for any telecommunications tower or associated structure shall be as required in the applicable zoning district, plus an additional setback equal to the height of the tower (the fall zone). The minimum setback for any tower taller than 100' shall be 300' from a dwelling and residential zoning district boundary. Where a tower is mounted on an existing structure such as a barn
 


silo, church steeple, or utility pole, and the tower does not increase the height of the structure more than ten feet, then the additional fall zone setback is not required.

7.1.11	Environmentally Sensitive Areas

The town plan and this ordinance describe environmentally sensitive areas including steep slopes, wetlands, floodways, unique natural features, wildlife habitat, historic sites, high elevations, ridgelines, and scenic resources. A telecommunications facility and associated infrastructure shall avoid undue adverse impacts on these areas to the greatest extent possible. Where there may be adverse impacts, the project shall be designed to mitigate these impacts to the greatest extent possible.

7.1.12	Height

In addition to other standards herein, no tower or structure shall exceed 130 feet in height. No tower or structure may be higher than 10 feet above the average height of buildings within 300 feet of the proposed facility. If there are no nearby buildings, then no tower or structure shall be higher than 10 feet above the average tree canopy height measured in the area of the proposed facility.

7.1.13	Lighting

Towers with lighting shall not be permitted, unless the Development Review Board concludes it the only viable alternative to meet reasonable facility requirements of a communications service provider. The only tower lighting that may be permitted is that required by FCC permit.

7.1.14	Visual Impact

All towers and related infrastructure shall be designed to minimize the visual impact of height and mass. Materials shall be of a type, style, color, and location so as to blend into the site, minimize glare, and not result in undue adverse visual impacts to the natural landscape or the built environment. Disturbance to existing topography or vegetation shall be minimized, unless found necessary to mitigate visual or aesthetic impacts. The location and type of security fencing shall be shown and described on the site plan.

7.1.15	Noise

The Development Review Board may require the applicant provide a study from a qualified engineer as to the maximum projected noise from the proposed facility, measured in dB Ldn (decibels, logarithmic scale, and accounting for greater sensitivity at night). This study shall include existing or ambient  measurements, plus noise that may be created or caused by the proposed facility. Noise measurements and projections shall be provided for the location of the tower facility itself and at the property line.

7.1.16	Site Screening

Screening shall be required at the perimeter of the site, unless it is demonstrated that existing natural foliage is sufficient. Required screening shall be at least ten feet in depth, and at least ten feet tall, with the potential to grow to significant size at maturity.

7.1.17	Access Roads and Above Ground Utilities

Any roads or above ground utilities shall follow the contour of the land, and be sited and constructed to minimize visual impacts to the greatest extent possible.

7.1.18	Monitoring, Maintenance and Compliance

At the request of the Zoning Administrator or Development Review Board, the owner/operator shall provide a report on the status of the facility, including adherence to permit conditions, operations,
 


appearance, structural integrity, safety, noise, screening/landscaping, service roads, utility connections, and compliance with all applicable federal regulations or permit/license conditions.

7.1.19	Abandonment or Discontinuation

At least 30 days prior to abandonment or discontinuation of use, the owner/operator shall provide written notice to the town by certified mail of any intent to abandon or discontinue the use of the facility or site. Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the Zoning Administrator or Development Review Board may require the owner/operator to promptly remove all structures and facilities and return the site to predevelopment condition. If there is anticipated reuse by another provider, removal may not be required. If weather prevents prompt restoration of the site, a delay in removal and restoration may occur. In either case, a clear and definitive time frame shall be specified for removal or reuse.

7.1.20	Bonding

As a condition of permit approval and in the case of abandonment or discontinuation of use, the Development Review Board may require a bond or other means of security approved by town counsel to ensure that sufficient funds will be available to remove all structures and restore a site should the owner/operator be unwilling or unable to do so.

7.2	Utility Facilities

7.2.1	Applicability. The standards of this section apply to utility facilities other than wireless telecommunication facilities and those not exempted in Section 3.3.

7.2.2	Dimensional Standards. Minimum lot size and frontage requirements will not apply to lots housing utility facilities.

7.2.3	Site Security. Utility facilities must be designed and maintained to prevent unauthorized access and protect public safety.

7.2.4	Screening. The perimeter of a site housing a utility facility must be screened by a buffer that:

(1)	Is at least 12 feet wide.
(2)	Is maintained as a landscaped or naturally vegetated area.
(3)	Has a minimum of 4 trees of at least 30 feet in height at maturity and 12 small trees (less than 30’ at maturity) or shrubs per 100 feet.

7.3	Energy Generation Facilities

7.3.1	Applicability. The standards of this section apply to energy generation facilities not exempted in Section 3.3.

7.3.2	Setbacks. An energy generation structure must be set back a distance equal to the structure’s height or more from all property lines or the district minimum setback requirement, whichever is greater, except if it is building mounted.

7.3.3	Height. The height of an energy generation structure must conform to the following:

(1)	The height of a ground-mounted solar energy generating apparatus must not exceed 30 feet.
(2)	The height of a ground-mounted wind energy apparatus must not exceed 120 feet.
(3)	An energy generating apparatus mounted on a building wall must not extend above the lowest portion of the roof.
 


(4)	An energy generating apparatus mounted on a building roof must not extend more than 10 feet above the roof surface.

7.3.4	Removal. A facility that has been out-of-service for more than 180 days will be considered abandoned and the owner must remove it unless she/he can demonstrate to the Zoning Administrator that energy generation will resume at a specified future date.

7.3.5	Screening. The perimeter of a site housing an energy generation facility must be screened by a buffer that:

(1)	Is at least 12 feet wide.
(2)	Is maintained as a landscaped or naturally vegetated area.
(3)	Has a minimum of 4 large trees of at least 30 feet in height at maturity and 12 small trees (less than 30’ at maturity) or shrubs per 100 feet. The tree requirement may be waived for solar facilities on lots without adequate area to provide large trees within the buffer that would not shade the solar panels.
 


Section 8	Housing

8.1	Adaptive Reuse

8.1.1	Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to the conversion of an existing non- residential building to housing except within the Office Industrial and Forest Conservation districts where residential development is prohibited.

8.1.2	Density. The number of dwelling units that may be created within an eligible building may exceed the maximum residential density of the applicable zoning district provided that each dwelling unit meets the requirements of Section 8.3 and the following criteria:

(1)	The unit will qualify as affordable, workforce or senior housing, as defined in this ordinance.
(2)	The unit will have a total habitable floor area of 1,200 square feet or less.
(3)	The unit will have access to at least 120 square feet of dedicated, secured, enclosed storage (does not have to be directly accessible from the unit).
(4)	The unit will have direct access to at least 120 square feet of private or semi- private outdoor space such as a porch, deck, balcony, yard or patio.
(5)	The unit will have access to at least 1⁄2 acre of common open space suitable for passive outdoor
recreation or a walking trail at least 1⁄2 mile in length.

8.1.3	Historic Buildings. Adaptive reuse of a building listed individually, or as a contributing structure within a designated historic district, in the National Register of Historic Places or Vermont Register of Historic Places must preserve the historic character of the building with any exterior modifications being undertaken in accordance with the practices recommended by the U.S. Department of Interior’s Technical Preservation Services in the Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings.

8.2	Affordable Housing

8.2.1	Purpose

This affordable housing provision is intended to achieve the following:

(1)	Fulfillment of affordable housing goals as established in the town plan;
(2)	Conservation of land and the creation of usable open space and recreation areas;
(3)	Efficient use of town infrastructure and roads; and
(4)	Development that is consistent with the density and character of Manchester while meeting the town's affordable housing goals.

These provisions provide for a degree of flexibility in the design and density of affordable housing projects and financial incentive, through density bonuses, to projects that meet affordable housing needs.

8.2.2	Review Process

An affordable housing project may be permitted as a conditional use, subject to the provisions of Section
5.3 within any district in which multifamily dwellings are allowed.

8.2.3	Design Standards

The following standards shall guide the Development Review Board in its review of an affordable housing project. If any of these standards are not met, and the Development Review Board grants approval of the
 


project, the board shall issue written justification of the rationale for approval despite the failure of the project to meet said standards.

(A)	Outside the Sewer Service Area: If the project does not fall within the sewer service area, the following standards must be met:
(1)	The project shall consist of a minimum of five units.
(2)	The project shall consist of single, two, three, or four family units. Projects involving 10 or more acres may have any mixture of these housing types; however, the following mixture is suggested: at least 25% of the buildings as two-family structures, and at least 25% of the buildings as three- to four-family structures. The types of buildings shall be mixed throughout the development. No such limits apply to parcels smaller than 10 acres in size.
(3)	At least 30% of the parcel shall be retained as open space, and shall be managed by the residents it serves. The intent is to help a project fit into its environment, and to provide a reasonable amount of land for open space and passive or active recreation. While steep slopes or wetlands may serve part of this purpose, all of the open space should not be on such undevelopable land.
(4)	The visibility of dwelling units shall be minimized from public ways or other residential premises through the use of creative building location, grading, screening or planting. Visibility of unsightly abutting land uses from the affordable housing project shall be controlled in the same manner.
(5)	Buildings shall be located at least 50 feet from land used for agriculture in order to minimize the effects of agricultural operations and residential uses upon each other. Natural vegetation shall  be maintained within this 50 foot buffer, where possible, to promote these purposes. Fences shall be erected along such agricultural land to prevent interference with farming practices by children, pets, or any residential activities or uses.

(B)	All Projects: The following standards apply to all affordable housing projects:
(1)	Roads shall be built to town specifications, unless otherwise approved by the Development Review Board upon demonstration of good cause.
(2)	All units may be located on individual lots, on homeowner association owned land, on land owned by organizations whose purposes include the creation and preservation of affordable housing  (i.e., community land trusts), or a combination thereof.
(3)	Site designs shall provide for private outdoor space for each housing unit.
(4)	Consideration shall be given to retaining significant topographic features, to the natural terrain and existing vegetation, and to the project site's relationship with surrounding properties and uses.
(5)	At least one parking space per dwelling is required. All parking shall be located to the side or rear of, or under the buildings, unless the parking area is not visible from the road.

8.2.4	Further Subdivision

No lot shown on a plan for which a permit is granted under this section may be further subdivided, and a notation to this effect shall be shown on the site plan and on the deeds to any such lots.

Subsequent to initial approval of an affordable housing project, the Development Review Board may approve relocation of lot lines within the project. However, any change in overall density, number of affordable housing units, street layout, or open space layout will require further hearings and approval by the Development Review Board.

Prior to issuance of a permit for an affordable housing project that utilizes dimensional waivers or a density bonus, the applicant shall submit to the Zoning Administrator a complete description of the legal and financial mechanisms that will assure perpetual affordability of any affordable housing units. Said
 


legal and financial mechanisms shall be approved by town counsel, and shall become a condition of any approval granted by the Development Review Board for the project.

The Development Review Board shall submit a statement for the public record that describes the manner in which the proposed project does or does not meet the affordable housing needs of the town. This statement shall include a determination of the degree to which application of standard zoning requirements would or would not meet such housing needs.

8.2.5	Determination of Density

The final residential density of the project will be determined by the Development Review Board. The determination will take into account, the base density allowed in the underlying zoning district and the affordable housing needs of the community, as expressed in the Manchester Town Plan or studies assessing housing needs in Manchester.

8.2.6	Affordable Housing Height Bonus

(1)	Outside of the Downtown (DN) and Town Center (TC) districts, an affordable housing structure may be up to 35 feet in height for up to 50% of the footprint of the building.
(2)	Outside of the Downtown (DN) and Town Center (TC) districts, an affordable housing structure may be up to 40 feet in height for provision of at least 50% of the parking under the building.

8.3	Dwelling Units

8.3.1	Applicability. The standards of this section apply to any structure or portion of a structure used or intended to be used as a dwelling unit.

8.3.2	Minimum Unit Size. The minimum size of a dwelling unit must not be less than:

(1)	150 square feet for a studio or efficiency unit (one open living area that includes kitchen, living and sleeping quarters with a separate bathroom);
(2)	220 square feet for a one-bedroom unit; or
(3)	220 square feet plus an additional 70 square feet for each additional bedroom.

8.3.3	Cooking and Sanitation Facilities. All dwelling units must have safe, functioning cooking and sanitation facilities in accordance with the following:

(1)	A dwelling unit must contain permanent bathroom facilities. A bathroom must be a separate room in which there is a toilet, sink, and a shower or bathtub.
(2)	A dwelling unit must contain permanent kitchen facilities. A kitchen must be a room or portion of a room in which there is a sink, refrigerator, and one or more appliances for heating food.
(3)	Any dwelling unit containing 3 or more bedrooms within a multi-family building must have utility
connections for a washing machine and clothes dryer in the unit. Any dwelling unit containing less than 3 bedrooms within a multi- family building must either have utility connections for a washing machine and clothes dryer within the unit or there must be a common laundry room in the building with washing machines and clothes dryers accessible to residents.

8.3.4	Trash Disposal. All multi-family dwelling units must have convenient access to trash and recycling storage areas in accordance with Section 6.22.
 


8.3.5	Open Space. Except for dwelling units located in the Downtown or Town Center districts, all multi-family dwelling units must be located on a lot that includes at least 1⁄4 acre or 400 square feet per dwelling unit, whichever is greater, of common open space suitable for passive outdoor recreation.

8.4	Mobile Homes

Mobile homes shall be permitted in any zoning district that permits single-family residences provided that any such mobile home meets the requirements for a single-family residence of the district in which it is located. Mobile homes are not prohibited by this bylaw except to the same extent as conventional housing is restricted or regulated, and under the provisions of Section 8.5 and Section 2.3.

8.5	Mobile Home Parks

8.5.1	Location

A mobile home park may be permitted as a conditional use, within any district in which multifamily dwellings are allowed.

8.5.2	Minimum Lot Size

A mobile home park shall be located on a lot containing not less than 5 acres, and all mobile homes thereon shall be connected to an approved water supply and a public sewer or approved wastewater treatment system.

8.5.3	Site Development Plan

No mobile home park shall be developed, and no mobile home shall be placed thereon, until a site development plan meeting the requirements of Section 4.3 and Section 5.2 has been approved by the Development Review Board.

8.5.4	Design Standards

(1)	The maximum number of mobile homes in a mobile home park shall not exceed six mobile homes per gross acre of the park.
(2)	Each individual mobile home shall be located on a lot containing not less than 5,400 square feet and not less than 45 feet wide. No mobile home shall be located within 15 feet from the boundary of its individual lot, and no mobile home shall be located within 50 feet from any boundary of the mobile home park lot.
(3)	Each mobile home space shall abut a shared access drive not less than 22 feet in width. Such driveway shall have at least two connections for vehicular travel to and from a public street, located so as to minimize traffic hazards and congestion.
(4)	Parking of any motor vehicle in any part of the 22-foot width of an access drive shall be prohibited, and enforced by the park operator. Parking spaces shall be provided for all vehicles customarily or occasionally in the park, but in no case shall less than three car spaces for each two mobile home sites be required. Such car spaces shall average 10 feet wide and 20 feet long with free access to the access drive. Such car spaces shall be on the mobile home lot, in a parking lot, or may be in parking bays contiguous to an access drive, in which case the width of the drive and parking space combined shall be not less than 45 feet.
(5)	All driveways shall be adequately illuminated.
(6)	A landscaped buffer strip shall be provided along all property and street lines of the mobile home park, not less than 15 feet in width, suitably screened with evergreen plantings.
(7)	Open Space for recreation and playground purposes shall be provided, occupying not less than
10% of the gross mobile home park area, conveniently located to all individual mobile home park
 


sites. Such open space shall be suitably landscaped with a protective screen separating such space from driveways, parking areas, and service areas, and should be suitably equipped and furnished, in the judgment of the Development Review Board, for recreation and play purpose.

8.5.5	Minimum Service Standards

Waste collection stations shall be provided, located not more than 150 feet from each mobile home site, and in compliance with Section 6.22. Waste collection stations shall consist of masonry enclosures for rubbish and garbage containers, and shall be suitably landscaped.

All driveway and parking areas, storm drainage, water supply and sanitary sewer connections to each mobile home site, all electric services, and all required landscaping shall be completed before any mobile home is placed in the mobile home park, except that where landscaping is not completed, the Zoning Administrator may approve occupancy if the owner of a mobile home park shall have filed with the Selectboard a surety bond in form and amount approved by the Development Review Board to guarantee completion of the work.

8.5.6	Operation

The operator of the mobile park shall maintain all parts of the mobile home park in good condition and shall provide for collection and removal of waste and garbage at least twice every week. The operator shall remove snow from all driveways, and shall maintain safe conditions on all driveways at all times.

8.5.7	Sales Prohibited

The sale of mobile homes or other vehicles in connection with the operation of a mobile home park is prohibited. No sale of merchandise and no service business shall be carried on within the lot occupied by a mobile home park, except that the Development Review Board may approve the establishment of a self-service laundry or similar service, or the sale of food or household articles to occupants of the mobile home park only, provided that any such use is otherwise permitted in the district in which the mobile home park is located.

8.6	Planned Residential Development

8.6.1	Purpose

The purpose of Planned Residential Development (PRD) is to enable and encourage increased residential density, flexibility of design, and development of tracts of land for single- and multi-family dwellings in clustered groups, to promote the most appropriate use of land, facilitate the economical provision of streets and utilities, and to enhance the environmental quality and rural character of the area through preservation of open space.

8.6.2	Applicability

A PRD is permitted in any zoning district in which single-family dwellings are permitted. In the Rural Residential (RR) and Rural Agricultural (RA) districts, nonconforming lots of at least four acres existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance (XX/XX/2018) are eligible for the residential density bonus with required land protection.

8.6.3	Application Requirements

A PRD shall comply with the requirements of Section 5.2, Site Plan Review, and Section 11, Subdivision Standards.
 


The Development Review Board may waive the requirement for a metes and bounds survey, prepared by a certified land surveyor, if the Planned Residential Development does not involve the subdivision of land. However, if a metes and bounds survey is necessary for an accurate location and description of the building envelopes or easements then the survey shall be required.

The application submission shall include a narrative plan of development that addresses the following:

(1)	How the design provides for the purposes of the Planned Residential Development;
(2)	The proposed number of units and how the design preserves the natural features of the land and site characteristics as identified above;
(3)	The proposed use of the open space lands and proposed mechanisms for its preservation; and
(4)	Requested waivers and bonus densities and justification for granting them.

8.6.4	Review Process

After submission of an application for a Planned Residential Development, the applicant shall have temporary markers placed on the lands in order to enable the Development Review Board to locate readily and appraise the basic layout of the proposed PRD in the field during the site visit. The applicant shall schedule a site visit with the Development Review Board. The purpose of this site visit shall be to confirm the locations of natural features, agricultural uses, and existing structures relative to proposed lot lines, building envelopes, and infrastructure.

Once a site visit has been conducted, the Development Review Board shall hold a preliminary hearing on the proposed PRD. The Development Review Board shall provide a preliminary decision indicating whether the project should move forward for final approval. A final hearing shall be held once the applicant has addressed any concerns enumerated by the Development Review Board in its preliminary decision.

8.6.5	Density

In a Planned Residential Development, the total number of dwelling units shall not exceed the number which could be permitted if the tract were subdivided into lots conforming to the provisions of the district in which such tract is situated, except that a density bonus may be approved by the Development Review Board according to Section 1.15, Dimensional Standards Table, and the following:

(1)	Preservation of Working Lands Use – Within the Rural Agricultural (RA) District, a density bonus of three dwelling units per ten acres may be awarded to a PRD that results in the preservation of an active farm, or protects agricultural or silvicultural use in perpetuity. At least 70% of the total land area of the project site must be preserved for such use. Appropriate legal restrictions for the perpetual preservation of the agricultural or silvicultural use must be provided.
(2)	Preservation of Open Space – Within the Rural Residential (RR) District, a density bonus of three dwelling units per five acres may be awarded to a PRD that results in the preservation of open space. At least 50% of the total land area of the project site must be preserved as open space. Appropriate legal protections, restrictions, and maintenance plans must be provided.
(3)	Within the Mixed Use 3 (MU3) District, a 50% density bonus may be awarded to a PRD that results in the preservation of at least 50% of the total land area of the project site. Appropriate legal protections, restrictions, and maintenance plans must be provided.
(4)	Net Zero Density Bonus – In the Mixed Use 1 (MU1), MU2, MU3, Residential 10 (R10), R4, R1, RR and RA districts, a density bonus may be granted for a PRD that results in all structures meeting net zero energy building standards as defined in this ordinance. The applicant must provide net zero energy building specifications and demonstrate perpetual function of the energy
 


generation systems prior to the close of the DRB subdivision hearing according to Section 5.5.7 and Section 5.9.
(5)	Utilization of Under-Building Parking – A density bonus may be granted for a PRD with underground or under-building parking. Such bonus will be determined by the Development Review Board, based on site constraints and the percentage of underground parking that is proposed.

The number of bonus units granted shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.

8.6.6	Legal Restrictions and Requirements

(1)	Dedication of Open Space. Land to be preserved as open space in Planned Residential Developments may be offered for dedication to the town for park and conservation purposes. If such land is not so offered, or if the town declines to accept the offer, it shall be dedicated to a community association or other entity, as herein provided.
(2)	Working Land Restrictions. Land to be preserved as working lands for agricultural or silvicultural use must be protected for such use by dedication of development rights and protection of these working lands uses in perpetuity.
(3)	Community Association Required. The applicant shall organize under the laws of the State of
Vermont a non-profit community association, corporation, or cooperative, to be composed of all present and future owners of lots within the PRD. Such non-profit community association, corporation, or cooperative shall be responsible for management and maintenance of all common open space or other common elements of the development. The applicant shall submit a set of deed restrictions or covenants that run with the land and shall record the same in the Manchester land records.
(4)	No Community Association Required. In the case of Planned Residential Developments in which all land designated as open space is dedicated to, and accepted by, the town, and there are not common water, sewer, or other commonly owned elements, the organization of a community association shall not be required.

8.7	Workforce Housing

8.7.1	Purpose. The purpose of this section is to encourage the development of housing that meets the needs of the town’s workforce.

8.7.2	Workforce Housing Height Bonus

(1)	Outside of the Downtown (DN) and Town Center (TC) districts, a workforce housing structure may be up to 35 feet in height for up to 50% of the footprint of the building.
(2)	Outside of the Downtown (DN) and Town Center (TC) districts, a workforce housing structure
may be up to 40 feet in height for provision of at least 50% of the parking under the building.
 


Section 9	Site Design Standards

9.1	Purpose

The purpose of this section is to establish site development standards to protect the quality of life by preventing land use and development from creating or contributing to adverse off-site impacts.

9.2	Applicability

Applicants must obtain site plan approval from the Development Review Board before the Zoning Administrator may issue a zoning permit for any land development other than one- or two-family dwellings and accessory uses or structures to one- or two-family dwellings.

9.3	Performance Standards

Applicants seeking site plan approval must demonstrate that proposed land development conforms to the site plan standards put forth in this section.

9.3.1	Noise. Unless otherwise approved by the Development Review Board, noise emanating off site must not be distinct from the background sound level beyond the property line, and must not interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of other properties. If proposed land use and development is deemed likely to have noise impacts, the Development Review Board may:

(1)	Require the applicant to submit an acoustical analysis of sound generation on the site prepared by a qualified professional.
(2)	Require acoustical site design strategies, and acoustical architectural design strategies to manage noise generated on the site.

9.3.2	Glare. Lighting must not be used or directed in such a manner that it produces glare on roads, on nearby property, or in the windows of nearby buildings.

(1)	All exterior lighting must meet the standards put forth in Section 9.5.
(2)	If proposed land use and development is deemed likely to produce glare or excessive skyglow, the Development Review Board may require a photometric analysis plotting the footcandle distribution on the site for all proposed outdoor lighting.

9.3.3	Odors. Emission of odors that are readily detectable without special instruments at any point beyond the property line and that interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of other properties is prohibited.

9.3.4	Vibration. Vibration that is easily discernible without special instruments at any point beyond the property line is prohibited except that:

(1)	This will not apply to vibration caused by motor vehicle, train, or aircraft traffic.
(2)	The Development Review Board may approve greater vibration levels for a specified period, frequency and purpose.

9.3.5	Electrical or Radio Interference. Creating interference with electrical or radio apparatus beyond the property line is prohibited.
 


9.3.6	Waste Storage. Storage of wastes that attract insects or rodents, or otherwise create a health hazard is prohibited. All waste must be stored in tightly sealed storage containers or within a fully enclosed building unless specifically approved otherwise by the Development Review Board. Solid waste removal must occur on a regular basis to prevent accumulation. Waste receptacles must be appropriate screened from public view per Section 6.22.

9.3.7	Air Quality. The project must not result in undue impacts on air quality. Generation of dust, dirt, fly ash, smoke, particulate matter or other airborne solids that accumulate at any point beyond the property line or that interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of other properties is prohibited except when related to approved construction activities. Consideration of air quality shall include types and quantity of air emissions, odors or hazardous substances, and dust control.

9.3.8	Hazardous Substances. Flammable, combustible or explosive materials must be stored and handled in conformance with state and federal regulations. Such materials must be securely stored within a fully enclosed building or tank. Proposed land use and development must not release toxic or hazardous substances or wastes into the environment or cause contamination of any potable water supply, sanitary sewer or septic system, watercourse or water body, soil or air except as specifically permitted by the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources.

9.3.9	Water Quality. The project must not result in water pollution. Consideration shall include the nature of soils and subsoils, slope, proximity to streams, aquifer recharge areas and groundwater, floodplains, stormwater runoff, and drainage. The project should provide for protection of the natural terrain, shoreline protection, retention of vegetation, and erosion control.

9.3.10	Scenic and Natural Beauty. The project shall not have an undue adverse effect on the scenic or natural beauty of the area, natural landscape, or rare and irreplaceable natural areas. Consideration shall be given to the retention of significant topographic features of the site, and the relationship to surrounding properties and the effects on ridgeline resources.

9.3.11	Historic Sites. For land use and development involving historic sites, the project shall not have an undue adverse effect on historic sites. The applicant may be required to retain the services of a professional with expertise in historic preservation to satisfy this standard. Consideration shall be given to external design of buildings and related site improvements, as well as signs, exterior lighting, overall site design, and historic features. Materials and design details shall take into account harmony and proportion and adjacent land use. Buildings which are included in the Vermont Historic Sites and Structures Survey shall be retained for their historic contribution. It is the intent of this standard to avoid destruction of historic properties or buildings unless it is clearly demonstrated by the applicant that there can be no reasonable use of the property without destruction of the building.

9.3.12	Transportation Safety. The project shall not cause unreasonable congestion or unsafe conditions with respect to the use of transportation facilities existing or proposed. Consideration shall be given to vehicular and pedestrian movement, parking, design and layout of streets and driveways, intersections, grades and profiles, adjoining land uses, sight distances, trip generation and road capacity, turning movements, peak traffic flows, and surface treatment. In connection with any application to change an existing use, consideration shall only be given to impacts of the proposed new use that differ from the impacts associated with the existing use. Additional traffic studies may be requested of the applicant if necessary to satisfy the above considerations.

9.3.13	Energy Conservation. The project shall reflect principles of energy conservation and incorporate the best available technology that is economically justified. Consideration may be given to location and
 


orientation of structures and other project infrastructure, surrounding land uses, energy and utility  sources, the length and placement of utility lines or other utility infrastructure, heating, cooling and lighting technologies employed, landscape design and features, or any other project features that the Development Review Board concludes appropriate to energy conservation.

9.3.14	Impervious Cover. Paved areas shall be only as large as necessary to serve parking, circulation, and improved open space needs, and their appearance will be enhanced by landscaping. No parking   area shall run continuously for more than 80 feet along a front street line, or for more than 150 feet along any street line. A pedestrian walkway shall be provided within each parking area to connect such area  with buildings, public sidewalks, and adjoining land development. Parking areas shall be set back at least 10 feet from side and rear lot lines except for allowances for shared parking and access.

9.3.15	Residential Buffers.

(1)	To protect existing abutting one- and two-family uses from proposed commercial and multifamily development, and where undue adverse impacts may reasonably be anticipated, either of the following shall be the base level’ requirement, whichever is greater:
(a)	An additional 5 feet of setback shall be provided between commercial and multifamily residential buildings and adjoining single family residential property lines, above the minimum setback otherwise required in the district, for each 5,000 square feet of building footprint above that otherwise permitted in the district or corridor;
(b)	No part of a building may break the plane drawn at a 45 degree angle sloping inward and upward from any shared property line on the ground that adjoins residential lands or uses (see illustration below).

 



(2)	Once the setback point or line is established, further consideration shall be given to site-specific mitigation, needs, or circumstances that may prevent adverse impacts with less setback. The final determination of required setback made by the Development Review Board shall thus include  both the quantitative element of distance, as well as circumstances such as slope, natural and built topography, density and intensity of plantings, fencing, and other mitigating factors.
(3)	For commercial developments that abut residential zoning districts, greenspace shall be designed and installed to diminish commercial impacts upon the residential zone. This greenspace shall define, soften, and screen the commercial use. Existing mature trees (deciduous trees of 6" diameter or greater at breast height; conifers 12' tall or greater) shall be preserved in place, relocated on-site, or replaced with trees of equivalent size and species.
 


(4)	The Development Review Board may grant Greenspace reductions when a development project provides exceptional landscape enhancements as described in this section.
(5)	Exceptions to these requirements shall be made only in the case of essential services to provide appropriate, separation or screening for these larger buildings or uses, but not to require so much separation or screening as to effectively preclude a use that is otherwise permissible.

9.4	Landscaping

9.4.1	Intent. The provisions of this section are intended to:

(1)	Enhance the appearance of the built environment as viewed from public vantage points;
(2)	Provide shade and reduce heat and glare, particularly along sidewalks and walkways, and within parking lots;
(3)	Control soil erosion and stormwater runoff;
(4)	Screen potentially incompatible land uses and utilitarian site features;
(5)	Calm traffic, and improve pedestrian safety and comfort; and
(6)	Preserve existing mature vegetation and naturally vegetated buffers to the maximum extent feasible.

9.4.2	Applicability. Proposed development subject to site plan approval, including planned unit developments, must provide landscaping in accordance with the provisions of this section.

9.4.3	General Standards. All landscaping required under this ordinance must conform to the following:

(1)	Landscape Plan. Applicants for site plan approval must submit a landscape plan prepared by a licensed landscape architect or a certified horticulturist when landscaping will be altered or installed.

(2)	Plant Materials. Plant materials must meet the specifications in Figure 9-1 and the following:
(a)	The Town of Manchester strongly encourages use of native species and prohibits use of invasive species as identified by the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources.
(b)	For reasons of health, vigor, and longevity, only nursery-grown plant materials may be
installed to meet the standards of this section.
(c)	All plantings must be planted according to accepted horticultural standards.
(d)	Species chosen must be appropriate to their specific planting location (trees or shrubs planted close to a road or parking area should be salt- tolerant, for example).

(3)	Design Principles. Landscaping must be an integral element of project design, especially as related to parking lot screening, the fit of the building within the natural and built environments (both on-site and as related to adjoining sites), and pedestrian access and circulation, (both within the site and as connected to adjoining sites or other paths or sidewalks) and must be designed in accordance with the following:
(a)	Clustered plantings of substantial trees must be provided in order to enhance the
aesthetic appearance of a site. Except for street trees, individual trees or plantings shall not appear at rigid intervals.
(b)	Substantial deciduous trees with wide canopies mixed with conifers, shrubs and ornamental plants must be provided to create significant shade, screening, and aesthetic improvement. Single-species hedges (such as arbor vitae) must be used for accent or as a backdrop only, and not as primary landscaping elements.
 


(c)	Densely planted, well-maintained flower beds are strongly encouraged as an aesthetic enhancement to landscaping plans.
(d)	Where pedestrian paths are provided, landscaping such as raised planters, trees, or other features must be used to reinforce the identification and use of these paths.

(1)	Performance Bond. If landscaping cannot be installed at an appropriate stage in the  construction due to time of year or unusual weather conditions, the Development Review Board may allow the applicant to install the landscaping within a reasonable time frame. The applicant must submit a performance bond in accordance with Section 4.4.4 to ensure that landscaping will be installed in accordance with the approved plans. The performance bond will be held until the landscaping is completed.

(2)	Maintenance. Landscaping required under this section or as a condition of approval must be maintained in a healthy condition. Dead or dying plants must be replaced within 1 growing season with a comparable plant (in terms of type, form, size at maturity, etc.) of at least the minimum size requirements specified in Figure 9-1.

(3)	Inspection. The Development Review Board may require that the Zoning Administrator inspect the site to determine that the plant materials are healthy and that the landscaping is functioning as intended after several growing seasons as a condition of approval. An inspection is recommended when landscaping is integral to ensuring that the proposed development performs as approved (such as within green stormwater infrastructure or riparian buffers, or where there is a specific screening or aesthetic concern, for example).

Figure 9-1. Planting Specifications


Plant Material	Maximum Crown/Spread (at maturity)	Maximum Height
(at maturity	Minimum Caliper
(at planting)	Minimum Height
(at planting)	Minimum Soil Volume (per plant)	Equivalent Planting Units
Large Tree	40 ft or more	50 ft or more	2-3 inches for deciduous trees	4-6 ft for coniferous trees	1,000 cf	1.0
Medium Tree	30 ft to 40 ft	30 ft to 50 ft			500 cf	0.8
Small Tree	< 30 ft	< 30 ft			250 cf	0.6
Large Shrub	9 ft or more	8 ft or more	n/a	30 in	120 cf	0.5
Medium Shrub	6 ft to 9 ft	4 ft to 8 ft	n/a	24 in	60 cf	0.3
Small Shrub	< 6 ft	< 4 ft	n/a	18 in	15 cf	0.1
Notes: Minimum soil volume per plant may be reduced by 40% for planting areas landscaped with multiple plants
that are not less than 10 ft. in any dimension. Existing, healthy, mature plant materials that will be preserved may be counted towards landscaping requirements at a rate of 120% of the applicable equivalent planting units. Perennial ornamental plants may be substituted for not more than 30% of the total number of required plants at a rate of 0.1 equivalent planting units. Minimum size at planting must be a #1 container or equivalent.

9.4.4	Front Yard Standards. Proposed land development must provide landscaping within the minimum front yard setback, except within the Office Industrial District or where the principal building is or will be constructed to the edge of the sidewalk, in accordance with the following:

(1)	Location. Front yard landscaping must be provided between the edge of the street right-of-way and the frontline of the principal building to:
(a)	Highlight and enhance entrances to the site or freestanding signs located within the front
setback;
(b)	Provide direction to and enhance building entrances;
(c)	Provide visual breaks along blank building facades;
 


(d)	Enhance and shade sidewalks and walkways;
(e)	Screen parking areas or other utilitarian site elements; and
(f)	Intercept and filter stormwater runoff.
(2)	Quantity. Front yards must be landscaped with not less 1.0 equivalent planting unit (EPUs) for every 10 feet of lot frontage (exclusive of street trees).

9.4.5	Streetscape Standards. Proposed land development must provide street trees along existing and proposed streets in accordance with the following:

(1)	Location. Street trees must be planted as follows:
(a)	Within three feet of the edge of the street right-of-way unless otherwise recommended by the Department of Public Works.
(b)	In a planting strip or a tree well within or immediately adjacent to the street right-of-way that is not less than four feet in any dimension unless otherwise recommended by the Department of Public Works.
(2)	Size. Street trees must be sized as follows:
(a)	Where there are no existing or proposed overhead utility lines, street trees must be large trees.
(b)	Where there are existing or proposed overhead utility lines 35 feet or more in height,
street trees must be medium trees.
(c)	Where there are existing or proposed overhead utility lines less than 35 feet in height, street trees must be small trees.
(d)	If existing buildings or similar obstructions will conflict with large trees as they mature, the Development Review Board may waive the requirement for large street trees and allow the applicant to plant medium or small trees as recommended by the Department of Public Works.
(3)	Spacing. Street trees must be planted with a reasonably even, linear spacing as specified below:
(a)	Large trees must be planted at a minimum ratio of one for every 50 feet of frontage.
(b)	Medium or small trees must be planted at a minimum ratio of one for every 30 feet of frontage.
(c)	As recommended by the Department of Public Works, the Development Review Board may approve shifting the spacing of street trees to accommodate site features or maintain sight distance.
(4)	Preservation of Existing Trees. The Town of Manchester strongly encourages preservation of
existing, healthy, mature trees. The Development Review Board may waive the location, spacing and alignment standards above to allow existing trees within 10 feet of the edge of the street right-of-way to meet street tree requirements.

9.4.6	Parking Area Standards. Proposed land development must landscape existing and proposed parking areas except within the Office Industrial District in accordance with the following:

(1)	Location. Single-loaded parking areas with up to 10 spaces and double-loaded parking areas with up to 20 spaces may be landscaped solely along the perimeter of the parking area provided that the planting area is not less than 4 feet in any dimension. All other parking areas must incorporate landscaped planting islands within the parking area.
(2)	Planting Islands. Planting islands must:
(a)	Be not less than 8 feet in any dimension (excluding area subject to vehicle overhang).
(b)	Equal an area that is not less than 15% of the total area of parking spaces (excluding access aisles).
 


(3)	Quantity. Parking areas must be landscaped with not less 1.0 equivalent planting unit (EPU) for every 4 parking spaces.
(4)	Green Stormwater BMPs. The Town of Manchester strongly encourages parking area
landscaping to also function as green stormwater best management practices (BMPs). The Development Review Board may modify the standards of this section as recommended by the Department of Public Works to accommodate green stormwater BMPs.

9.5	Outdoor Lighting

9.5.1	Purpose. The provisions of this section are intended to:

(1)	Ensure that outdoor lighting is designed to maintain safety and security;
(2)	Minimize the obtrusive and disruptive aspects of outdoor lighting;
(3)	Reduce energy use by directing appropriate amounts of light where and when it is needed, and using energy-efficient light sources; and
(4)	Prevent glare, light trespass and skyglow by requiring light fixtures to be shielded and properly aimed.

9.5.2	Applicability. All outdoor lighting must be installed in accordance with the provisions of this section except for public street lights located within rights-of-way.

9.5.3	General Standards. Outdoor lighting must conform to the following:

(1)	Lighting Plan. Applicants for site plan approval must submit a lighting plan prepared by a professional lighting engineer or designer if outdoor lighting will be altered or installed.
(2)	Shielding. All nonexempt outdoor light fixtures must be fully shielded and installed and
maintained in such a manner that the shielding is effective.
(3)	Total Output. Total output from all light fixtures on a site must not exceed 1.25 lumens per developed square foot for residential uses or 2.5 lumens per developed square foot for commercial uses.
(4)	Light Source. All fixtures must use lamps that produce a white light, such as LED, fluorescent
(CFL), metal halide, or incandescent bulbs. Sodium and neon lighting is prohibited. Exterior lighting must not be colored and must shine in a steady, non-fluctuating or non-undulating manner.
(5)	Uniformity. Outdoor lighting must be designed to provide a uniform distribution of light in areas
regularly traversed by vehicles or pedestrians. Lighting plans that produce a ratio of 3:1 or less between the highest light level and lowest light level within a trafficked area on the site are strongly encouraged and ratios in excess of 10:1 are prohibited.
(6)	Spot Light Aiming. Light fixtures containing spot or flood lamps must be aimed no higher than
45° above straight down. When aimed straight down, such light fixtures will be considered fully shielded; when aimed above straight down, they will be considered partially shielded. Use of flood or similar high-intensity lighting is discouraged.
(7)	Freestanding Lights. Freestanding light fixtures must not exceed 24 feet in height in the Office Industrial District and 16 feet in height in all other districts. The Development Review Board may approve higher lights if increased efficiency is achieved without causing light trespass. Freestanding light fixtures may be located within setbacks. The initial light output of a freestanding light fixtures must not exceed 3,000 lumens per lamp. Use of decorative fixtures not more than 12 feet in height is encouraged to light walkways and other pedestrian-oriented spaces.
 


(8)	Light Trespass. Outdoor light fixtures must be oriented and shielded as necessary to prevent light trespass over adjacent property or rights-of-way.
(9)	Time Limits. Outdoor lighting must be extinguished by 10:00 p.m. or one hour past the close of
business. After 10:00 p.m. or one hour past close of business, security lights may be triggered for short periods by motion sensor. The Development Review Board may approve lighting beyond these limits upon concluding the lighting is necessary to protect public safety or secure the property. The Development Review Board may further limit when outdoor lighting may be used as deemed necessary to achieve the purposes of this section and protect the character of the area.

9.6	Parking and Loading Areas

9.6.1	Purpose. The provisions of this section are to:

(1)	Provide a reasonable balance between the supply and demand for parking over the short and long term.
(2)	Ensure that land development provides adequate off-street parking and loading areas to avoid congestion on surrounding streets.
(3)	Minimize the consumption of land for parking and loading to improve stormwater performance
(4)	Enhance the character of streetscapes and property frontages.
(5)	Provide for pedestrian linkages and amenities.
(6)	Create effective parking that is convenient, safe, attractive and comfortable.

9.6.2	Design Principles. Design characteristics and strategies to help achieve these purposes, include, but are not limited to:

(1)	Providing safe, convenient pedestrian links within and between buildings and sites, between parking lots and from these lots to the street, adding amenities such as benches, trees, and comfortable lighting;
(2)	Minimizing the number and size of curb cuts serving any property;
(3)	Creating off-street vehicular links between parking lots;
(4)	Improving and expanding the public sidewalk system;
(5)	Incorporating multi-modal facilities and amenities;
(6)	Building new parking in rear yards and encouraging existing front or side yard parking to be relocated in rear yards;
(7)	Linking adjoining parking lots to ensure efficient use of land, lessen the number of vehicle trips or
movements into public streets, and maximize sidewalk and greenspace areas along the street.

9.6.3	Applicability. All land development must provide off-street parking and all nonresidential or mixed-use development must provide loading areas in accordance with this section except as specifically exempted below:

(1)	Downtown and Town Center. There are no minimum off-street parking or loading requirements in the Downtown and Town Center districts that are located on a street with on-street parking or within 1,000 feet (as measured along the sidewalk) of a public parking facility.
(2)	Small Businesses. There are no minimum off-street parking or loading requirements for non- residential uses in the town core that occupy less than 1,500 square feet and that are located either on a street with on-street parking or within 1,000 feet (as measured along the sidewalk) of a public parking facility.
 



Figure 9-2. Baseline Parking for Residential Uses
Use	Town Core	Outside Core
1-Bedroom Apartment	1 per unit	1 per unit
2-Bedroom Apartment	1 per unit	1.5 per unit
General Residential	1 per unit	2 per unit
Senior Housing	0.25 per unit	0.5 per unit
Lodging House	0.5 per room	1 per room
Nursing Home	1 per 2 beds	1 per 2 beds


Figure 9-3. Baseline Parking for Nonresidential Uses
(*FTE = full-time equivalent employees, SF =Active Floor Area, unless specified otherwise)

Use	Base	Additional
Place of Public Assembly	1 per 4 seats	-
Library or Museum	1 per 500 SF	-
Automobile Service	3	3 per bay
Automobile Retail	1 per 1,250 SF	1 per 1,250 SF lot area
Furniture or Appliance Store	1 per 1,250 SF	-
Art Gallery	1 per 1,250 SF	-
Retail Store, 0-800 SF	1 per 250 SF	1
801-1200 SF	1 per 250 SF	2
1201-1600 SF	1 per 250 SF	3
1601-2000 SF	1 per 250 SF	5
2001-2500 SF	1 per 250 SF	6
Over 2500 SF	1 per 250 SF	1 per 2500 SF
Personal Services, 0-800 SF	1 per 250 SF	1
801-1200 SF	1 per 250 SF	2
1201-1600 SF	1 per 250 SF	3
1601-2000 SF	1 per 250 SF	5
2001-2500 SF	1 per 250 SF	6
Fitness Center, Gym, Spa	1 per 250 SF	-
Building Supply	1 per 500 SF building coverage	-
Bed & Breakfast	2	1 per unit
Hotel	1 per room	1 per 500 SF public meeting area
Motel	1 per room	1 per FTE
Restaurant, Take out	1 per 40 SF	-
Restaurant, Eat in	1 per 2.5 seats	1 per 10 seats
Bar, Brew Pub	1 per 2.5 seats	1 per 10 seats
Micro-Brewery, Distillery, Winery	1 per 2 FTE	1 per 2.5 seats
Bank or Financial Service Office	1 per 250 SF lobby	1 per 400 SF office
Professional Buildings	1 per 400 SF	-
Public Works Yard/Garage	1 per FTE	-
Health Clinic	2 per FTE Clinician	-
Veterinary Clinic	2 per FTE Clinician	-
Daycare	1 per 8 child	1 per FTE
School, Pre-K-8	1 per 50 students	1 per FTE
9-12	1 per 10 students	1 per FTE
Vocational/Other	1 per 3 students	1 per FTE
Warehousing/Storage	1 per 2 FTE	-
Light industry	1 per 2 FTE	-
Mail Order/Wholesale	1 per 2 FTE	-
 


9.6.4	Amount of Parking. Except as exempted in Section 9.6.3, all development must provide off- street parking to meet the needs of the proposed use(s) in accordance with the following:

(1)	Minimum Number of Spaces. The minimum number of vehicle parking spaces will be as specified in Figures 9-2 and 9-3.
(2)	Maximum Number of Spaces. The maximum number of parking spaces will be twice the
minimum number of spaces as specified in Figures 9-2 and 9-3.
(3)	Calculation of Number of Spaces. When calculating the total number of spaces, any decimal will be rounded up to the nearest whole number. On lots with multiple units or uses, the number of spaces for all units and uses may be added together before rounding up any decimal.
(4)	Modification of Number of Spaces. The applicant must provide any combination of the
following in order for the Development Review Board to make a decision to increase or decrease the amount of required off-street parking:
(a)	A parking study prepared by a qualified professional demonstrating the amount of parking that will be needed;
(b)	The applicant meets requirements for shared parking in Section 9.6.5;
(c)	The applicant makes a payment in lieu of parking in accordance with Section 9.6.6; or
(d)	The applicant demonstrates that there is adequate on-street or public parking available within 1,000 feet (as measured along the sidewalk) of the proposed development to meet all or a portion of the demand.

Figure 9-4. Shared Parking Percentages

Land Use	WEEKDAY	WEEKEND	
	Daytime	Evening	Daytime	Evening	Nighttime
	(9 am – 4 pm)	(6 pm – 11 pm)	(9 am – 4 pm)	(6 pm – 11 pm)	(12 am – 6 am)
Office or Industrial	100%	10%	10%	5%	5%
Retail	60%	70%	100%	70%	5%
Lodging	50%	100%	50%	100%	100%
Dining	60%	100%	70%	100%	5%
Other Commercial	60%	80%	100%	90%	5%
Residential	50%	90%	80%	90%	100%

9.6.5	Shared or Off-Site Parking. The Development Review Board may approve a cooperative parking plan to allow parking to be shared by two or more uses or to be provided off-site in accordance with the following:

(1)	Calculate the total amount of shared parking required by:
(a)	Determining the minimum parking requirements for each use as if it were a separate use in accordance with Section 9.6.4 above.
(b)	Multiply each amount by the corresponding percentages for each of the five time periods set forth in Figure 9-4. The Zoning Administrator will establish percentages for any unlisted use.
(c)	Calculate the total for each time period.
(d)	Select the highest total as the required minimum number of shared parking spaces.
(2)	Any shared or off-site parking must be located within 1,000 feet of the associated use (as measured along the sidewalk) unless shuttle service is provided. The parking area and buildings served must be connected by a sidewalk or pedestrian walkway.
 


(3)	The applicant must record a written agreement between the owners and lessees, executed for a minimum of 20 years, in the town’s land records. Should the use(s), parties involved, or terms of the agreement change in a manner that would alter the amount of parking provided or required, the agreement will need to be revised, re-approved and re-recorded in accordance with this section. Should the agreement expire or otherwise terminate, the use(s) for which the shared or off-site parking was provided will be considered in violation of this ordinance unless replacement parking is provided in accordance with this section.
(4)	The applicant must submit plans showing the location of the use(s) or structure(s) for which shared or off-site parking will be provided, the location of the parking, and the schedule of times used by those sharing the parking.

9.6.6	Payment in Lieu of Parking. The Development Review Board may approve a payment in lieu of parking for some or all of the required on-site parking for proposed land development within the town core in accordance with the following:

(1)	The applicant must make the full payment in lieu of parking to the town prior to the Zoning Administrator issuing a certificate of compliance for the associated development.
(2)	The fee will be proportional to the number of parking spaces that would otherwise be required, and will be based upon reasonable cost estimates for the provision of that parking.
(3)	The site plan approval will specify the amount of parking credited as part of the rights attached to the subject property for current and future uses.

9.6.7	Location Standards. Off-street parking and loading areas must be located as follows:

(1)	Required parking and loading areas must be located on the same lot as the use or structure they serve unless a cooperative parking plan is approved in accordance with Section 9.6.5 above or a payment in lieu of parking is made in accordance with Section 9.6.6 above.
(2)	Parking and loading must only occur on those portions of the lot indicated for such use on the approved site plan.
(3)	Required parking and loading areas (inclusive of vehicle overhang) must be located on the lot in accordance with the following:
(a)	Parking areas must meet the setback requirements specified in Figure 1-1. Shared parking areas may be located within a common side or rear setback provided that a cooperative parking plan is approved in accordance with Section 9.6.5 above.
(b)	Parking areas must not be located within minimum required front setback; and in the  town core, parking is prohibited between the street and the building frontline. This will not be interpreted to prohibit parking of registered, operable motor vehicles within a residential driveway.
(c)	Except within the Office Industrial District, loading areas must be located to the side or rear of building they serve.

9.6.8	Dimensional Standards. Off-street parking and loading areas must conform to the following:

(1)	Parking Spaces. Off-street parking spaces must not be less than 9 feet wide by 18 feet deep.
Each space must be accessible from a driveway or access aisle except for:
(a)	Spaces serving a single-family or two-family home; or
(b)	Tandem parking (a double-depth parking space with one vehicle parking the other in) approved by the Development Review Board for multi-family housing, religious facilities or employee parking.
 


(2)	Access Aisles. The minimum width of access aisles within a parking lot or structure is 20 feet except that one-way aisles serving angled parking spaces may be a minimum of 16 feet wide.
(3)	Loading Areas. Loading areas:
(a)	Serving small trucks must have an overhead clearance of at least 10 feet and must be not less than 12 feet wide and 40 feet long, exclusive of access and maneuvering area.
(b)	Serving tractor-trailer trucks must have an overhead clearance of at least 14 feet and must be not less than 12 feet wide and 60 feet long, exclusive of access and maneuvering area.
(4)	Turnarounds. All off-street parking and loading areas must be designed so that vehicles can enter and exit the property without backing out onto a street except for parking that serves a single-family or two-family home and that does not require backing out onto an arterial street.

9.6.9	Design, Construction and Maintenance Standards. Off-street parking and loading areas must conform to the following:

(1)	Surface. Off-street parking and loading areas must provide a firm, level surface appropriate for the anticipated level of use in all seasons. Parking areas for more than 10 vehicles, drive-through lanes and loading areas must be surfaced with asphalt or concrete. The Development Review Board may modify the surfacing requirements to accommodate green stormwater management practices.
(2)	Layout. Perpendicular (90 degree) parking is required unless the applicant demonstrates that
due to site-specific conditions angled parking will allow for more efficient site design and compact development footprint. The Development Review Board may modify the dimensional requirements for angled parking spaces and associated aisles as recommended by the Department of Public Works.
(3)	Erosion and Drainage. Off-street parking and loading areas must be surfaced, graded, drained
and maintained to properly treat all stormwater and minimize erosion in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.10 and Section 6.18. Run-off or eroded surface materials must not flow onto adjacent streets or properties.
(4)	Markings. Parking areas for other than one- or two-family use must demarcate the parking
spaces. The markings must be kept clearly visible and distinct. Accessible parking spaces must be marked and signed in accordance with state and federal requirements.
(5)	Screening. Off-street parking areas and loading areas must be screened as follows:
(a)	Parking areas located within 50 feet of a residential lot must be screened with a fence in accordance with Section 6.12 and a vegetated buffer in accordance with Section 9.3.15.
(b)	Loading areas must be screened in the same manner as parking areas.
(6)	Landscaping. Off-street parking areas must be landscaped in accordance with Section 9.4. The amount of landscaping required will be reduced from 1.0 equivalent planting unit (EPU) per 5 parking spaces to 1.0 EPU per 10 parking spaces for rear parking lots that will be screened from view at the street by buildings.
(7)	Snow Removal. Snow storage areas must be shown on the site plan in accordance with the
following:
(a)	Applicants must demonstrate that adequate area is available on the site for snow storage or, if an adequate area does not exist, that snow will be removed from the site.
(b)	Snow must not be stored within required vegetated buffers or stormwater infrastructure unless those features are specifically designed for that purpose.
(c)	If the parking area has more parking spaces than the minimum required for the use under this section, snow may be stored on the excess spaces.
 


(8)	Accessible Parking. Land development must provide accessible parking in accordance with applicable state and federal regulations. Accessible spaces will count towards the minimum parking required under this section.
(9)	Electric Vehicle Charging. Electric vehicle charging stations may be provided within off-street parking areas as an allowed accessory use in any zoning district. Additional parking will not be required when parking spaces are converted or reserved for charging vehicles and such spaces will count towards the minimum parking required under this section.
(10)	Bus or RV Parking. The Development Review Board may modify the dimensional requirements
for bus or RV parking as recommended by the Department of Public Works.
(11)	Maintenance. Parking and loading areas must be maintained in good condition, free of weeds, dust, trash and debris, and appropriately surfaced and graded to prevent erosion, sedimentation and runoff.

9.6.10	Bicycle Parking.

Applicants must provide at least one bicycle parking space for every 25 automobile parking spaces. Bicycle parking must be located within 200 feet of the building entrance. Bicycle parking should be located under a roof or within a structure whenever feasible.
 


Section 10	Sign Regulations

10.1	Purpose

The purpose of this section is to help preserve and improve the existing attractive aspects of the Manchester environment, to promote the welfare, convenience and safety of its inhabitants and visitors, to conserve the value of property, and to encourage a style and scale of outdoor advertising that is compatible with a tourist-oriented economy and the more attractive features of the Manchester townscape. This section recognizes the necessity of signs to inform the travelling public and as an aid to local businesses in attracting customers. It also recognizes that neither the travelling public nor local businesses are well served by unlimited signage.

10.2	Administration and Interpretation

Before the alteration, construction, or installation of any sign, a zoning permit shall be secured from the Zoning Administrator, except as otherwise provided in this ordinance.

10.2.1	Development Review Board Approval Required

All new freestanding signs on multitenant commercial properties, drive thru menu boards, exterior ATMs, gasoline price signs, and vending kiosks, shall require approval by the Development Review Board as part of the site plan review process as set forth in this ordinance. All other signs are eligible for administrative review.

10.2.2	Design Review Required

Before the alteration, construction, enlargement or installation of any sign within the Design Review Overlay District, approval through the following process shall be secured prior to the issuance of a permit by the Zoning Administrator. The Design Advisory Committee shall review the proposed signage and make a recommendation to the Development Review Board or Zoning Administrator. Through the design review process, the Design Advisory Committee, Development Review Board, and Zoning Administrator shall consider size, location, design, color, texture, lighting, and materials of all exterior signs within their purview.

10.2.3	Administrative Review

Temporary signs and signs not falling in a design review district, shall be subject to administrative review only. The Zoning Administrator may act on an application for a minor modification to an already approved sign within the Design Review Overlay District without consultation from the Design Advisory Committee. A minor modification shall include only:

(a)	A change in business name or logo on the sign retaining the same size, font style, and material.
(b)	A change in location of the sign.

10.2.4	No Permit required

The replacement, repair, or repainting of a damaged or worn sign with one of the same construction, size, color, material and design shall not require a permit.

10.2.5	Size

The size of any sign shall be determined by the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblems, or physical structure of the sign, whichever is largest. However, the calculated area of a freestanding sign
 


does not include its posts and cornices. Where two or more zoning districts co-exist, such as with overlay districts, the underlying district determines the allowable size. The size of signs composed of stenciling or lettering shall be determined measuring the area of an imaginary polygon drawn around the outside edge of all letters or emblems as if it were a single sign.

10.3	Freestanding Signs

10.3.1	Number

(A)	One freestanding sign, pedestal, or post-supported, is allowed per lot. The only exceptions are temporary signs as allowed by provisions in Section 10.8; where a lot has at least 650 feet of frontage on a town or state road, an additional freestanding sign is allowed provided the two signs will be at least 350 feet apart; or where the lot is located within the Town Center District, and has at least 300'  of frontage along a single major street from which vehicular access is gained. In the third case, an additional freestanding sign may be permitted for each additional 300' of road frontage or partial increment thereof on that single major street, under the following conditions:
(1)	Additional signs must be placed at separate, existing driveways accessing the lot from that single major street;
(2)	No business name, nor aspect of any business or establishment, may be listed or advertised on
more than one freestanding sign on a lot;
(3)	Each additional freestanding sign as described herein, shall be limited to 16 square feet.
(B)	For a parcel without frontage on a public road that is served by a legally deeded right-of-way through a parcel with such frontage, said right-of-way shall be considered as part of the premises for purposes of an allowable freestanding sign. However, any such sign must be shared with the front parcel.

This sign shall be no larger than the largest sign otherwise allowed in that particular location in town. To maximize the effectiveness of this sign, consideration should be given to a single place name rather than simply a list of land uses.

This provision is limited to those lots which do not have frontage on a public road; i.e., those uses on rear lots where the otherwise allowed sign would not be visible to the traveling public. This provision shall not be interpreted to interfere with the rights of the underlying landowners (over whose land the right-of-way traverses) to have their own separate sign under this ordinance. This section shall not be interpreted to increase the number or size of freestanding signs allowed on any parcel or lot.

10.3.2	Dimensions and Location

Freestanding signs shall only have two sides, which are parallel to each other, and no more than six inches apart. The maximum allowable size of freestanding signs in the DN, TC, MU1, MU2, MU3, and OI districts is 16 square feet. In the TC, MU3, and OI districts a maximum size of 32 square feet may be allowed with conditional use approval by the Development Review Board. Unless otherwise regulated in this ordinance, freestanding signs in the R10, R4, R1, RR, RA, and FC districts shall be no larger than eight square feet.

The size of posts and cornices shall be proportional with the size of the sign.

Where there are more than eight commercial tenants in separate and unaffiliated ownership on a single lot, up to two square feet of additional sign is permitted for each tenant in excess of eight, up to a maximum size of 24 square feet (this does not apply if there is more than one freestanding sign as allowed in subsection 10.3.1.1). Such additional freestanding sign in excess of 16 square feet shall be
 


designed so that it is easily removed, and the size of the sign thus decreased, should any or all of the additional tenants cease to exist on the lot.

The bottom of a freestanding sign shall not restrict the visibility of vehicles entering or leaving any intersection or driveway, town or state highway, or private road. Maximum allowable height is ten feet, measured from grade level to the top of the sign or any part of its structure.

Freestanding signs and their associated support structures shall be set back at least three feet from the inner edge of sidewalks; where sidewalks do not exist, the setback shall be at least seven feet from the traveled way or edge of pavement of the street or highway.

10.4	Flush-Mounted Signs

10.4.1	Number

If there is no freestanding sign on the lot, then two flush-mounted signs per establishment are allowed on the building where the advertised activity exists. If there is a freestanding sign on the lot, then each establishment is allowed one flush-mounted sign on the building where the advertised activity exists.

In addition, one three square foot flush-mounted sign may be permitted at the rear entrance of each establishment on a lot, provided that:

(1)	The rear entrance is a direct access from a rear parking lot which is located in the rear yard as defined in this ordinance;
(2)	The rear entrance is in addition to a front or side entrance;
(3)	The sign is not illuminated in any manner; and
(4)	The sign is mounted directly above, on, or beside the rear door to the establishment which it advertises.

10.4.2	Dimensions and Location

The maximum allowable size of flush-mounted signs in the DN, TC, MU1, MU2, MU3, and OI districts is 16 square feet. Unless otherwise regulated in this ordinance, flush-mounted signs in the R10, R4, R1, RR, RA, and FC districts shall be no larger than eight square feet. Where mounted on a wall, these signs shall protrude no more than six inches from the wall.

Flush-mounted signs shall be mounted in locations that fit with the architectural design of buildings, such as over entrance doors.

10.5	Projecting Signs

Projecting signs may be substituted for allowable flush-mounted signs on a one-for-one basis. These signs shall not exceed eight square feet in size, and shall not extend further than three feet away from the building. For safety reasons, the lowest part of the sign or its support structures shall be at least eight feet above the sidewalk or grade directly beneath the sign.

10.6	Soffit Signs

Where a covered walkway exists on a building with multiple tenants in separate and unaffiliated ownership, each tenant may have one sign which is hung from the soffit not to exceed two square feet. This sign shall not be illuminated, shall be hung in front of the entrance to the business which it advertises, and hung in a direction perpendicular to the walkway so that it is legible to pedestrians on the
 


walkway. For safety reasons, the lowest part of the sign or its support structures shall be at least eight  feet above the sidewalk or grade directly beneath it. Soffit signs are permitted in addition to any other sign allowed by this ordinance.

10.7	Lighting

Lighting on any sign shall be directed and shielded so that the light shines only on the subject sign, and to prevent glare offsite, into the sky, or onto adjoining properties or roads and highways. All bulbs shall be shielded or hooded. All ground-mounted fixtures shall be screened by bushes or other appropriate  means. All fixtures mounted on the sign itself shall blend in with its background color or its surroundings, as deemed appropriate for the site.

Lighting on any sign shall be limited to a total of 150 watts of incandescent light, 40 watts LED, or the equivalent, unless otherwise authorized for unique site- or sign-specific reasons. No sign may be internally illuminated, except in the case of an exterior ATM or external vending kiosk, if such illumination is specifically approved as part of the site plan and design review process.

Where a sign or its lighting fixtures are being replaced or substantially altered, lighting shall be brought up to these standards. Applicants must demonstrate that lighting fixtures will satisfy these standards, and are appropriate for site-specific needs and circumstances. Internally illuminated signs existing on the date of adoption of this provision (January 6, 1997) may remain as-is, even if minor changes to such signs (such as changing business names or sign faceplates) are proposed. However, more significant changes to these signs (such as changes in location, or to the physical size or structure) will require complete compliance with the ordinance in effect at the time of the application for change.

The Zoning Administrator may require the adjustment or relocation of any sign lighting in order to prevent glare and to ensure vehicular and pedestrian safety.

10.8	Special Categories of Signs

10.8.1	Residential Signs

Residential subdivisions or housing projects are permitted one freestanding sign for identification purposes, not exceeding eight square feet. These signs generally shall not be illuminated. However, illumination may be permitted (at less intensity than normally allowed) in certain limited circumstances, where clear safety concerns are demonstrated that warrant illumination.

A residential sign identifying the address and owner of a parcel containing a single residential use shall not require a permit, except in the Design Review Overlay District. Such residential sign shall not exceed one and one-half square feet.

10.8.2	Gasoline Price Signs

Either of two options may be permitted for gasoline price signs:

(1)	Gasoline price signs shall be confined to the pump island and shall be limited to one square foot in area and one per pump; or
(2)	Gasoline prices may be incorporated into the single freestanding sign allowed on the lot, provided that this freestanding sign is located in the pump island, and that no pump top or other pricing signs are displayed.
 


10.8.3	Window Signs

Window signs may be displayed, and may cover up to 25% of the total window area per business establishment on the side of the building where such signs are located. Indoor nonpermanent window signs shall not require a permit. Permanent window signs, including permanent stenciling or lettering, are allowed as a part of an establishment’s total window coverage, but shall require a permit. Window signs shall not be internally illuminated or require power.

10.8.4	“OPEN” Signs

A business may display two rigid “OPEN” signs without a permit. Each such rigid “OPEN” sign shall:

(1)	Measure no more than two square feet in area.
(2)	Be displayed on the building in which the business is located, in a window, or attached to an approved freestanding sign.
(3)	Only contain the text “OPEN” and may identify business hours. No other lettering is allowed, except that a restaurant may have one rigid sign reading “NOW SERVING” in place of one of the allowable two rigid “OPEN” signs.
(4)	If exposed to the weather, be made of weather-resistant material.
(5)	Not be internally illuminated.

10.8.5	Seasonal Signs

One freestanding, two-sided, portable sign made of weather-resistant material, measuring up to six square feet in size, for the purpose of advertising a restaurant menu special, retail sale, or business service may be displayed during normal business hours on the day of the special or sale, during the time period from May 1 through November 1 and must be stored indoors at all other times. These signs are not allowed to be internally or externally illuminated except as incidentally, externally illuminated by existing, approved site lighting. These signs require a permit, payment of the temporary sign fee, and are subject administrative review, including design review if the site falls in the Design Review Overlay District.

10.8.6	Signs for Public Events

The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to issue a permit for the display of signs on a temporary basis, announcing a public event. The permit fee shall be waived for local charitable organizations. Proof of 501(c)(3) status shall be required. These signs shall:

(1)	Not exceed six square feet in area;
(2)	Not be displayed for more than seven consecutive days; and
(3)	Be removed promptly at the conclusion of the event.

Applications and permits shall specify the dimensions and design of the signs, locations of such signs, include the signed permission of landowners for locations not owned by the permittee, the starting and end dates of the event, and indicate the individual responsible for removal of the signs.

10.8.7	Temporary Signs in lieu of Permanent Signs

One temporary sign, made of rigid material and up to eight square feet in size, may be permitted by the Zoning Administrator, and may be displayed until a permit for a permanent sign is issued, under the following circumstances:

(1)	A permit has been issued for the land use or business establishment requesting the sign;
(2)	A certificate of compliance has been issued for that land use or business;
 


(3)	A complete application has been submitted for a permanent sign for that land use or business; and
(4)	The Zoning Administrator concludes that the temporary sign conforms to this ordinance and any adopted design guidelines.

A temporary sign in lieu of a permanent sign not meeting these criteria shall require approval by the Development Review Board through the design review process outlined in Section 5.4 of this ordinance. A temporary sign in lieu of a permanent sign shall not take the place of a permanent sign for more than 120 days past the issuance of a permit for a permanent sign.

10.8.8	Contractor’s, Real Estate and Project Signs

One contractor’s sign, or sign advertising the sale or lease of real estate, may be displayed on premises without a permit, subject to the following:

(1)	The physical structure of such sign shall not exceed three square feet, not including support posts, which shall be proportional with the size of the sign;
(2)	The sign is constructed of rigid material;
(3)	The sign is removed immediately upon completion of construction, or the sale or lease of the advertised real estate; and

Such sign shall only be:

(1)	Placed in a window and together with any other window signs on the same side of the building not exceed 25% coverage of total window area of that facade;
(2)	Installed as a single, separate, freestanding sign in addition to any other permitted freestanding sign; or
(3)	Installed as a sign panel on an existing permitted freestanding sign.

In place of a contractor’s sign, a project sign may be displayed after securing a permit. A project sign may be up to 20 square feet in a commercial or industrial district, or on a project site of more than 10 acres.  On all other project sites, a project sign shall not exceed 12 square feet. A project sign must be removed immediately upon project completion.

10.8.9	Menu Boards

In addition to the allotted freestanding, flush-mounted, projecting, soffit, or window signs on premises, a restaurant may install a menu board at or near the main entrance to the restaurant. The menu board may be externally illuminated but shall not be internally illuminated. Any external illumination shall not cause glare onto adjoining properties or rights-of-way. The menu board shall require approval by the Development Review Board as part of the overall site plan review of the restaurant.

Drive thru menu boards shall require approval by the Development Review Board as part of its site plan review of the restaurant.

10.9	Non-Operational Businesses

No sign or advertising shall remain on a non-operational business premise more than 30 days after the business has closed. A 30-day extension may be granted by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may allow sign structures without advertising messages to remain in place where appropriate and usable by a subsequent business.
 


10.10	Exempt Signs

The following signs are generally exempt from the provisions of this section except those provisions in 10.11, Prohibited Signs:

(1)	Signs located on or in a rolling stock of common carriers, provided that such rolling stock is not regularly parked near a public right-of-way in such a way that the rolling stock becomes the functional equivalent of a permanent sign.

(2)	Signs on registered and inspected motor vehicles except those which are determined by the Zoning Administrator to be circumventing the intent of this ordinance.

(3)	Signs with an area not more than 260 square inches, identifying stops or fare zone limits of common carriers by motorbus.

(4)	Posters as defined in this ordinance. Any person erecting a poster is responsible for its removal immediately upon the conclusion of the advertised event, or after four days, whichever is sooner.

(5)	Political signs provided they are erected no more than three weeks before an election and are removed the day after the election. Any person erecting a political sign is responsible for its removal.

(6)	Signs erected by the Town of Manchester or its school district.

(7)	Signs erected by the State of Vermont or any of its boards, agencies or departments.

(8)	Small on-premises signs, no more than two square feet in size, which are necessary for and displayed for the direction, instruction, or convenience of the public, including signs which identify rest rooms, freight entrances, designated accessible parking spaces, posted areas, or the like. Up to four such signs per lot are exempt under this provision; the Zoning Administrator may issue permits for additional signs, upon filing of an application and a demonstration of the necessity for those signs. Lettering shall be generic and advertising or logos (including business names) are prohibited on directional signs. These signs shall not be illuminated. Where freestanding, these signs shall not be more than three feet high, and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular safety or circulation. Where building-mounted, these signs shall be placed in appropriate locations related to safety issues and architectural design.

(9)	Informational signs up to 16 square feet in size, on lands which have been conserved by easement or other permanent, protective measures.

(10)	Signs erected as part of an event that has received an event permit from the Town of Manchester.

(11)	Flags of a nation or state.
 


10.11	Prohibited Signs

Unless specifically exempted under section 10.10, no sign may be installed or maintained along and visible from a street or highway which:

(1)	Interferes with, imitates, or resembles any official traffic control sign, signal or device, or attempts or appears to attempt to direct the movement of traffic.

(2)	Prevents the driver of a motor vehicle from having clear and unobstructed view of official traffic control signs and approaching or merging traffic.

(3)	Contains, includes or is illuminated by any flashing, intermittent or moving lights, or contains or consists of pennants, flags, ribbons, balloons, streamers or spinners, or has any animated or moving parts. Commercial holiday decorations or displays are specifically excluded from this restriction from one week before Thanksgiving until January 31. Seasonal lights employing customary strings of white lights are specifically excluded from this restriction from the last Sunday in October to the first Sunday in April.

(4)	Has any lighting that is not shielded to prevent light from being directed off-site, or at any portion of the traveled highway or street, or is of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or to impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle, or otherwise to interfere with the operation thereof.

(5)	Is fraudulent or misleading, or is in violation of, or at variance with any federal law or regulation, including one containing or providing for conditions to or affecting the allocation of federal highway or other funds to the benefit of the state or any subdivision thereof.

(6)	Advertises or promotes activities which are illegal under state or federal law.


(7)	Is not clean and in good repair.

(8)	Is not securely affixed to a substantial structure.


(9)	Contains any fluorescent paint or material or which is lit by neon.

(10)	Is an off-premises sign, except as allowed for permitted temporary event signs or posters as defined in this ordinance.

(11)	Is affixed to a utility pole, tree, rock or other natural feature.
(12)	Any other sign that is not otherwise permitted or allowed under this ordinance. (13)Encroaches on a public right-of-way, path of pedestrian or vehicular travel, parking space,
building entry or exit, or causes an unsafe condition.

(14)Is placed on the roof of any building or structure.
 


Section 11             Subdivision Standards

11.1	Applicability

All subdivision of land must conform to the standards of this section. Subdivisions shall include the division of a lot into two of more lots, boundary line adjustments, Planned Unit Developments, and Planned Residential Developments.

11.2	Capacity of Community Facilities and Utilities

The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed subdivision will not cause a disproportionate or unreasonable burden on the town’s ability to provide community services, facilities, and utilities, including:

(1)	Local schools.
(2)	Police, fire protection and ambulance services.
(3)	Road infrastructure and maintenance.
(4)	Parks and recreation facilities.
(5)	Water supply, sewage disposal and stormwater systems and infrastructure.
(6)	Solid waste disposal services and facilities.

11.3	Suitability of the Land

11.3.1	The land to be subdivided must be suitable for use without endangering public health or safety, and adversely impacting the environment, neighboring properties or the character of the area.

11.3.2	Land subject to periodic flooding, poor drainage, inadequate capability to support development, or other hazardous conditions must not be subdivided unless the applicant can demonstrate that appropriate measures will be taken to overcome the physical limitations.

11.4	Design and Configuration of Parcel Boundaries

11.4.1  Lot Arrangement. The applicant must design the subdivision:

(1)	To follow and extend the planned settlement pattern (including lot size, lot configuration, road layout and building location) as defined by the purpose and standards of the applicable zoning district to the maximum extent feasible given the site’s topography and natural features.
(2)	To connect to and extend existing road, sidewalk, path, trail, utility, greenway, and open space corridors to the maximum extent feasible given the site’s topography and natural features.
(3)	So that there will be no foreseeable difficulties in obtaining zoning permits to build on all lots not
intended for conservation purposes in accordance with the standards of these regulations.
(4)	So that there will be no foreseeable difficulties in providing access to buildings on lots not intended for conservation purposes from an existing or planned road.
(5)	To avoid direct access from arterial streets or state highways. The Development Review Board may require shared access or other means to minimize new curb cuts along arterial streets or state highways.
(6)	To allow further subdivision on any remaining undivided land, lots with further subdivision potential, or adjoining undeveloped parcels in a manner that would result in a logical and coordinated development pattern.
 


(7)	So that there will be positive drainage away from building sites and a coordinated stormwater drainage pattern for the subdivision that does not concentrate stormwater drainage from each lot to adjacent lots.

11.4.2	Lot Dimensions. The applicant must design the subdivision:

(1)	So that all lots front on a road.
(2)	So that lot dimensions meet the minimum standards for the zoning district.
(3)	So that generally side lot lines are at right angles to straight roads or radial to curved roads with recognition that some variability may be desirable to respond to the site’s topography and natural features.
(4)	So that generally rear lot lines are parallel to front lot lines with recognition that some variability may be desirable to respond to the site’s topography and natural features.
(5)	To avoid flag and other irregularly shaped lots except when desirable to respond to the site’s
topography and natural features.
(6)	To minimize the number of lots with frontage on more than one road.
(7)	To minimize the number of lots with a rear lot line that abuts the side lot line of an adjacent lot.

11.4.3	Building Envelopes. The applicant must designate one or more building envelopes on each lot not intended for conservation purposes in accordance with the following:

(1)	Building envelopes identify and limit the area(s) of a lot where structures, parking and associated site development may be located. Access and utilities may be located outside a building envelope.
(2)	A building envelope must not include any land within zoning district setbacks.
(3)	A building envelope generally must not include any undevelopable land.
(4)	For lots 2 acres or less in size, the zoning district setback requirements may define the building envelope.
(5)	For lots more than 2 acres in size, a building envelope generally must be limited to not more than 1 acre if one principal building will be located on an individual lot or not more than 2 acres if multiple principal buildings will be located on a common lot. The Development Review Board may adjust these standards as deemed appropriate given the specific characteristics of the subject property and the proposed subdivision.
(6)	The Development Review Board may approve more than one building envelope per lot given the specific characteristics of the subject property and the proposed subdivision.

11.5	Design and Layout of Necessary Improvements

11.5.1 Roads. Applicants must design and construct all new roads within a subdivision in accordance with this subsection. A vehicular way that provides access to more than 3 lots or 6 dwelling units will be considered a road.

General. Applicants must design and construct all new roads within a subdivision to:

(1)	Safely accommodate all users (including vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian traffic).
(2)	Provide efficient access to property and avoid congestion on existing roads.
(3)	Logically extend and improve the connectivity of the town’s existing road network.
(4)	Fit into the landscape and follow the natural terrain to the greatest extent feasible.
(5)	Provide for livable neighborhoods and attractive streetscapes.
(6)	Not be excessively wide in order to calm traffic and minimize impervious surface.
 


Topography and Arrangement. New roads must be:

(1)	Designed to relate appropriately to the pre-existing topography and provide adequate drainage.
(2)	Graded and laid out to conform as closely as possible to the pre-existing topography.
(3)	Located and designed to maximize the number of lots with building sites at or above street grade.
(4)	Integrated into the town’s existing road network to the maximum extent feasible.
(5)	Designed with right-of-ways that extend to the boundary lines of the parcel(s) being subdivided to facilitate the coordinated development of adjacent undeveloped land and creation of an interconnected road network unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions.
(6)	Designed to discourage high-speed traffic and to avoid creating short- cuts through neighborhoods that will generate substantial through traffic.
(7)	Designed to minimize the amount of impervious surface necessary to provide convenient and safe access to property.

Connectivity. Discontinuous road systems are inefficient and cause undue congestion, while a well- connected road system disperses traffic efficiently and improves walkability. Accordingly, cul-de-sac or dead-end roads are prohibited except that the Development Review Board may approve cul-de-sacs or dead- end roads:

(1)	As stubs to permit future expansion. The Development Review Board may require construction of street stubs or condition approval on a future agreement to extend roads when adjacent property is developed.
(2)	Where topography or other physical conditions make construction of through roads impossible or undesirable.
(3)	Where the development site abuts a limited access highway or a previously developed site where a through connection is not possible.
(4)	To serve not more than 6 lots or 12 dwelling units.

Access Points. A subdivision with more than 20 lots must have at least two access points. The Development Review Board may allow the secondary access to be limited to emergency access. The Development Review Board may require a secondary or emergency access for smaller subdivisions or developments when deemed necessary to protect public safety.

Design and Construction Standards. Applicants must design and construct new roads to the VTrans A- 76 Standards for Town and Development Roads except as otherwise specified in this section.

Design Speed. Applicants must design new roads for a speed of 30 miles per hour or less.

Width. Applicants must design new roads in accordance with the following unless otherwise approved by the Development Review Board to respond to site-specific physical conditions or anticipated traffic flows:

(1)	For roads with a traffic volume of less than 100 trips per day on average, lane widths must be at least 7 feet and not more than 9 feet.
(2)	For roads with a traffic volume of 100 trips per day or more on average, lane widths must be at least 9 feet and not more than 10 feet with 2-foot shoulders on both sides.
(3)	For roads intended to accommodate on-street parking, a parking lane at least 7 feet and not more than 9 feet wide may be located on one or both sides of the road.

Drainage. New roads must be designed:

(1)	With drainage facilities to divert run-off to vegetated areas.
 


(2)	To maintain or establish a buffer of natural woody vegetation between roads and surface waters at least 50 feet wide. The Development Review Board may waive or modify the buffer requirement to respond to site specific physical conditions.
(3)	Not to block the flow of drainage in existing ditches, swales or gutters.
(4)	Not to unreasonably contribute to an accumulation of stormwater that would exceed the capacity of downstream facilities or infrastructure.
(5)	With culverts where needed that are sized to convey anticipated peaks stormwater flows and that are not less than 18 inches in diameter.
(6)	With culverts that extend at least 2 feet beyond the edge of the road and that are installed to minimize erosion damage at the inlet and outlet.

Grade. New roads must generally conform to the topography and must not exceed a maximum grade of 7% for gravel roads and 10% for paved roads as measured over any 100-foot section. The Development Review Board may allow short segments to exceed the maximum grade to respond to the site’s topography and natural features.

Cross-Slope. All roads must have a cross-slope of at least 1% and not more than 3%.

Street Trees. The applicant must plant trees along new roads in accordance with Section 9.4 of this ordinance.

Street Lights. The applicant:

(1)	Should provide streetlights only as necessary for safety and security.
(2)	Should consider locating streetlights at intersections, crosswalks and high-traffic areas.
(3)	Must install LED lamps or fixtures of comparable/greater efficiency that do not exceed 25 feet in height.

11.5.2	Sidewalks and Pathways. The applicant must integrate pedestrian and bicycle access into the design of the subdivision in accordance with the following:

Sidewalks. Applicants must install sidewalks along new roads in the town core in accordance with Section 13-9 of the Manchester Unified Ordinance. Outside of the core, the Development Review Board may require an applicant to install sidewalks within any proposed subdivision to connect to existing public sidewalk along a public street. Such sidewalks outside the core must also meet the standards of Section 13-9 of the Manchester Unified Ordinance.

Pathways. Applicants must install pathways as necessary to provide pedestrian and bicycle access within the subdivision to common lands or facilities, parking areas or similar amenities, as well as between buildings.

11.5.3	Water and Wastewater Facilities. The applicant must design the subdivision to provide potable water and wastewater facilities in accordance with the following:

(1)	Any subdivision within a public water service area must be connected to the public system. The applicant must provide water service to each lot not intended for conservation purposes in accordance with any applicable public works specifications.
(2)	Any subdivision with access to sewer service must be connected to the public system. The applicant must provide sewer service to each lot not intended for conservation purposes in accordance with any applicable public works specifications.
 


(3)	Any subdivision not served by public water and sewer must demonstrate compliance with the state’s water supply and wastewater system rules.

11.5.4	Firefighting Facilities. The applicant must design the subdivision to provide water for fire protection in accordance with the following:

(1)	Within any subdivision that will be connected to the town’s water system, the applicant must install fire hydrants in accordance with the town’s public works specifications.
(2)	Within any subdivision that will not be connected to the town’s water system, the Development
Review Board may require the applicant to install a fire pond or make other appropriate provisions to facilitate firefighting.

11.5.5	Public and Private Utilities. The applicant must design the subdivision to provide utility service to each lot not intended for conservation purposes. Utilities must be located within road rights-of-way to the maximum extent feasible. The applicant must provide the town with a maintenance and access easement for any utilities not located within a road right-of-way.

11.5.6	Landscaping. The applicant must design the subdivision to maximize the preservation of existing mature vegetation and provide additional landscaping when necessary to:

(1)	Maintain and enhance the character of the neighborhood.
(2)	Maintain and provide privacy for adjoining property owners.
(3)	Maintain or establish vegetated buffers along waterways and other natural areas (see Section 6.27).
(4)	Utilize green stormwater infrastructure practices.

11.5.7	Erosion Control. The applicant must design and undertake construction within the subdivision in accordance with the standards of Section 6.10.

11.5.8	Stormwater Management. The applicant must design the subdivision with adequate drainage and stormwater infrastructure in accordance with Section 6.18 and the following:

(1)	The use of low impact development and green stormwater infrastructure techniques is strongly encouraged.
(2)	The stormwater management system must be designed so that post-development peak
discharge rates do not exceed pre-development peak discharge rates.
(3)	The stormwater drainage system must be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system.

11.5.9	Monuments and Lot Corner Markers. The applicant must install:

(1)	Permanent right-of-way monuments at all road intersections and other critical points in street lines in accordance with all applicable state and town specifications, including Rules of the Board of Land Surveyors.
(2)	Lot corner markers at corners and angle points of all lots in accordance with all applicable state and town specifications, including the Rules of the Board of Land Surveyors.

11.5.10	Construction and Maintenance of Necessary Improvements. The applicant must:

(1)	Construct the necessary improvements in accordance with all conditions of approval and specifications before the Zoning Administrator may issue any zoning permits for further land development within the subdivision.
 


(2)	Maintain necessary improvements while lots within the subdivision are being sold and developed in accordance with all conditions of approval.
(3)	Demonstrate how the necessary improvements required under this section will be maintained once lots have been sold or developed.
(4)	Establish an owners’ association or similar legally enforceable mechanism to ensure continuing maintenance of private roads, shared infrastructure, or other common land or facilities within the subdivision. The Development Review Board may require the applicant to provide drafts of covenants, articles of incorporation, bylaws, maintenance agreements or other legal documents for review prior to final approval of the subdivision and to record such documents with the town along with the final plat.

11.6	Character of the Area or Settlement Pattern

11.6.1  Standards. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed subdivision will:

(1)	Be compatible with and enhance the character of the area.
(2)	Not contribute to a pattern of strip development.
(3)	Not substantially impair or diminish the use, value and enjoyment of other property in the area for the purposes already established.
(4)	Not impair or impede the lawful development of property within the area for the uses permitted in the applicable zoning district.

11.7	Soil Preservation

11.7.1  Standards. The applicant must:

(1)	Stockpile any topsoil removed during the course of construction on-site.
(2)	Redistribute stockpiled topsoil to provide even cover on all disturbed areas to be seeded or planted.
(3)	Make reasonable efforts to repair any soil compaction prior to seeding or planting by tilling, subsoiling, plug aerating, or adding organic amendments.
(4)	Not remove any sand, gravel or other earth resources from the site for any purpose other than the minimum necessary and authorized to meet the construction needs of the subdivision.

11.8	Planned Unit Development

11.8.1	Applicability

Planned Unit Development (PUD) may be permitted in all zoning districts, in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. Absent unique or special topographic constraints or other exceptional circumstances affecting the property, the minimum lot size for a PUD is ten acres.

11.8.2	Purpose.

Planned Unit Development (PUD) is for large or complex developments that include two or more principal buildings or uses and is planned as a single continuous project under unified control. PUD allows a developer to meet community land use goals without being strictly bound by requirements of the underlying zoning district. This flexibility permits the creation of a designed grouping of varied and compatible land uses, such as housing, recreation, agriculture, commercial centers, and industrial parks, all within one contained development or subdivision. Individual goals for PUD are as follows:
 


(1)	To allow for a complementary mixture of uses in an integrated and well planned area within a single zoning district.
(2)	Encourage and preserve opportunities for the efficient use of public facilities and infrastructure.
(3)	To ensure contiguous and well-planned open space and to protect areas of significant natural resources consistent with the Town Plan and this ordinance.
(4)	Provide a variety of housing types and encourage the development of market priced workforce housing.
(5)	Promote a walkable, sustainable development pattern that supports alternative forms of transportation (walking, biking and mass transit) while still accommodating automobile traffic.
(6)	To provide a more flexible mechanism for the development of quality site layouts while allowing
densities higher than those allowed in the underlying zoning district.

11.8.3	Allowed Uses

Any permitted use or conditional use allowed in the zoning district in which the Planned Unit Development is located will be allowed in the PUD

11.8.4	Allowable Density

In a Planned Unit Development, the Development Review Board may permit densities that exceed those allowed in the underlying district.

11.8.5	Lot Dimension Requirements

The Development Review Board may permit individual lots in a Planned Unit Development to be reduced in required area, and yard dimensions, below the dimensional requirements otherwise prescribed for the particular zoning district in which the PUD is located.

11.8.6	Street Standards

All streets shall be built to town standards as described in Chapter 13 of the Manchester Unified Ordinance. However, design and construction of private streets to those standards does not obligate the Town of Manchester to accept such streets as town roads. The Development Review Board shall require that each deed for a lot in the Planned Unit Development contain a notification that the internal streets in the PUD are private streets and that maintenance and repair are the sole responsibility of the developer or the individual lot owners as described in the covenants of the association unless otherwise agreed to by the Manchester Selectboard.

11.8.7	Open Space

The land area not included in building lots or in streets, rights-of-way, or easements for utilities, shall be permanently preserved as open space for recreation, conservation, productive working lands use, or the enhancement of the natural environment. The location of open space shall meet the stated objectives of the Plan of Development.

11.8.8	Sketch Plan.

The following information shall be submitted by the applicant for sketch plan review:

(1)	Location map showing the location of the site and existing land uses within three hundred (300) feet of the site, the existing zoning of the site, and the size of the site in acres;
(2)	Sketch plan showing the general location of proposed land use types (single-family, multi-family, common open space, commercial, etc.), general landscaping, parking, pedestrian paths, utilities locations, and other miscellaneous site amenities;
(3)	Concept summary sheet containing the following items:
a.	A description of the type of dwelling units proposed,
b.	An approximate average square footage of all dwelling units proposed by type of unit,
c.	The total number of bedrooms in each dwelling unit,
d.	The anticipated population to be generated by the development,
 


e.	The amount and type of commercial space proposed,
f.	The amount of common or public open space,
g.	The gross residential density in units per acre,
h.	The maximum and average height of all buildings.

11.8.9	PUD Site Development Plan.

The applicant for PUD review and approval shall submit the following information:
(1)	A site development plan meeting the requirements of Section 5.2.

(2)	Architectural elevations, building configurations, proposed materials, indication of building access and openings, architectural floor plans, and other descriptive material or items to provide sufficient detail to illustrate the design philosophy of the project.
(3)	Map showing common open space, including acres and size of common open space.

(4)	Association and condominium documents, including:
a.	Articles of incorporation for an owners’ association, if any,

b.	Association by-laws and membership rules and regulations,
c.	The language of covenants, agreements, or easements restricting the use of common open space and providing for the maintenance of such common open space;
d.	The language of covenants, agreements, or easements controlling the use of common roads, drives, rights of way, and for the maintenance of such common open space;

(5)	Reports from the Town Manager concerning the adequacy and availability of the wastewater utility system to accommodate the PUD. The board may require supportive documentation to be submitted by a qualified professional engineer;

(6)	Reports from the water utility and fire district relative to the ability of the proposed PUD to be serviced by those public services;
(7)	Traffic study prepared by qualified traffic engineer for any project containing 50 or more dwelling units, or as otherwise deemed necessary by the development Review Board;
(8)	Notification that the internal streets in a Planned Unit Development (PUD) are private streets and that maintenance and repair are the sole responsibility of the developer or the individual lot owners as described in the covenants of the owners association.

(9)	Storm Drainage Master Plan. An analysis by a qualified hydrologist or professional engineer of drainage conditions both before and after development of the PUD, quantifying anticipated increases in runoff, peak discharge rates, and including justification for sizing of culverts,  storm drainage catch basins, detention ponds, etc.;

(10)	Plan and profile maps of public improvements, if applicable;
(11)	Public improvement agreement and guarantee, if applicable, in a form acceptable to the town. (12)Upon issuance of a Planned Unit Development (PUD) permit, or an amendment thereto, the
permit or amendment shall be recorded in the land records of the Town of Manchester.
 


Section 12	Definitions

Defined terms are indicated in boldface throughout the text of this section. Terms used with specific meaning under the Flood Hazard Area regulations are indicated in bold italics and are separately defined within Section 2.3.

12.1	Rules of Construction, Intent and Usage

(1)	In the construction of these regulations, the following provisions and rules shall be applied, except when the context clearly requires otherwise:
(a)	The "town" is the Town of Manchester, Vermont.
(b)	Words used in the present tense shall include the future and words used in the future tense shall include the present.
(c)	Words in the singular number shall include the plural and words in the plural number shall include the singular number.
(d)	The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory and not optional or merely directory.
(e)	The words "may" and "should" are permissive.
(f)	The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association, corporation, partnership, trust, company or other organization, governmental body or agency, and any other legal entity.
(g)	The word "lot" includes the words parcel, plot, tract of land, or piece of land.
(h)	The words "used" or "occupied" include the words intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied, employed for, constructed for, altered for, converted for, rented for, leased for, maintained for, utilized for, or occupied for.
(i)	The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specified examples, but is intended to extend its
meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character.
(j)	The terms “such as” and “for example” shall be considered as introducing typical or illustrative, rather than an entirely exclusive or inclusive designation of, permitted or prohibited uses, activities, conditions, establishments or structures.
(k)	The word "built" includes "erected," "constructed," "reconstructed," "altered," "enlarged," or "moved."
(l)	The word "premises" shall include land and structures thereon.
(m)	The words "adjacent" and "next to" shall have the same meaning as "abut."
(n)	The words "original" and “existing” mean the conditions existing on the effective date of these regulations.
(o)	The word "land" includes the words "marsh," "wetland" and "water."
(2)	Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," or "either...or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows:
(a)	"and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply.
(b)	"or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination.
(c)	"either...or" indicates that the connected item, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly but not
in combination.
(3)	References made to officials and official bodies shall mean officials and official bodies of the Town of Manchester, unless the natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise.
(4)	The words "regulation," "these regulations," "these land development regulations," "this ordinance," or “this
bylaw” means the “Manchester Land Use and Development Ordinance" or provisions therein.
(5)	Any word or phrase which is defined in this section, or elsewhere in these regulations, shall have the meaning as so defined whenever the word or phrase is used in these regulations, unless such definition is expressly limited in its meaning or scope.
(6)	Any word or phrase that is not defined in this section, or elsewhere in these regulations, shall have its plain and commonly accepted meaning.
(7)	Definitions contained in Title 24, Chapter 117, Vermont Statutes Annotated, shall be applicable throughout
these regulations.
 


12.2	A

Accessory Apartment: An efficiency or one-bedroom apartment that has facilities and provisions for independent living, including sleeping, food preparation, sanitation, and a separate entrance, and that is clearly subordinate to a single-family dwelling on the same lot.

Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU): See Accessory Apartment.

Accessory Structure: A structure that is: (1) detached from and clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal use of, or structure on, a lot, (2) located on the same lot as the principal structure or use,
(3)	clearly and customarily related to the principal structure or use, and (4) in compliance with the dimensional standards for accessory structures outlined in Section 1.1.5(C) and Figure 1-1.

Accessory Use: A use subordinate to and incidental to the principal use of a building or property.

Active Floor Area: That part of a building used for the conduct of business, defined as gross square footage, less storage spaces, airlock entries, stairways, bathrooms, attics and basements (unless used for the conduct of business as defined herein). Active floor area does include (but is not limited to) office space, kitchen space, areas where customers may browse or be served, interior and exterior display areas, dressing rooms, and areas where sales clerks or other customer service personnel serve the public.

Administrative Advisory Group: A group composed of the town manager, and representatives from the public works, police, fire, and planning and zoning departments that reviews development projects prior to the Development Review Board hearing.

Administrative Officer. See Zoning Administrator

Affordable Housing: Affordable housing shall include either of the following:

(1)	Housing that is owned by inhabitants whose gross annual household income does not exceed 80% of the county median income, as defined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, and the total annual cost of the housing, including principal, interest, taxes and insurance, is not more than 30% of the household’s gross annual income; or
(2)	Housing that is rented by inhabitants whose gross annual household income does not exceed 65% of the county median income, as defined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, and the total annual cost of the housing, including rent, utilities, and condominium association fees, is not more than 30% of the household’s gross annual income.

Affordable Housing Project: A housing development project in which at least 60% of the dwelling units shall be legally defined and protected as affordable housing.

Agriculture (Also agricultural activities, practices or use, see also Farm, Farming): For the purposes of this ordinance, agriculture shall mean:

(1)	The cultivation or other use of land for growing food, fiber, trees, or horticultural and orchard crops; or
(2)	The raising, feeding or management of livestock, poultry, equines, fish or bees; or
(3)	The operation of greenhouses; or
(4)	The production of maple syrup; or
(5)	The onsite storage, preparation and sale of agricultural products principally produced onsite; or
(6)	The onsite production of fuel or power from agricultural products or wastes produced onsite.
 


Agricultural Center: A facility serving as an example of farmstead activities that is open to the public and operated by a private non-profit entity.

Airport: A facility intended and used as the place where one or more fixed-wing or rotary-wing aircraft is regularly stored, maintained, or repaired while not in flight, and including an area that the aircraft may use to take off and land.

Airstrip: An area used for the takeoff and landing of fixed-wing or rotary-wing aircraft.

Antenna: A device attached to a tower or other structure for transmitting or receiving wireless signals.

Antique: An object of art, piece of furniture, household accessory, hand tool, or other similar item of at least 50 years of age which represents the tastes and styles of an earlier period and the present cash value of which reflects the scarcity of similar such items.

Assistant Zoning Administrator: See Zoning Administrator.

Automatic Teller Machine (ATM), Exterior: An exterior structure with sign elements installed as part of an approved commercial site plan that allows automated bank transactions.

Automobile Body Shop: A type of service business dealing in the repair or restoration of non- mechanical elements of automobiles damaged in collisions or by deterioration over time.

Automobile Parts Store: A retail establishment selling automotive products.

12.3	B

Bank (Commercial/Retail): A financial institution licensed as a receiver of deposits and concerned with the managing of withdrawals and deposits for consumer savings and checking accounts, and supplying consumer loans. This includes credit unions.

Bank (Riverbank/Streambank): The land area immediately adjacent to the stream or river that is essential in maintaining the integrity thereof.

Barber Shop: A personal service establishment that provides hair cutting, beard and mustache trimming, and shaving services.

Base Flood: the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (commonly referred to as the 100-year flood”).

Base Flood Elevation (BFE): The elevation of the water surface resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. On the Flood Insurance Rate Map the elevation is usually in feet (above mean sea level), in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929, the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, or other datum referenced in the flood insurance study report, or the average depth of the base flood, usually in feet, above the ground surface.

Basement: That portion of a building that is partly or completely below the average preconstruction level of the adjoining ground. A basement shall be considered as a story where the finished surface of the floor above the basement is: (1) More than four feet above the average pre-construction level of the adjoining ground, or (2) More than 12 feet above the preconstruction ground level at any point. See also Cellar.

Beauty Shop: see Salon.
 


Bed and Breakfast: A residential structure with ten or fewer rooms for rent, accommodating a maximum of 20 guests, for short-term overnight lodging by the day or by the week. The structure must be the primary residence of the owner or operator of the bed and breakfast. Employment shall not exceed three
(3) full-time employees in addition to the owner. Meals may be provided to guests only. Bed and breakfasts are also known as tourist homes.

Bicycle Shop: A retail establishment for the sale, repair, or rental of bicycles, tricycles or unicycles.

Boarding House: See Lodging House.

Boundary Line Adjustment: The relocation of a common property boundary where an additional lot is not created and where an existing lot reduced in size by the adjustment complies with the dimensional requirements of this ordinance.

Brewpub: A restaurant that brews its own beer for sale on the premises.

Buffer: An undisturbed area consisting of trees, shrubs, ground cover plants, duff layer, and generally uneven ground surface that extends a specified distance horizontally across the surface of the land from the mean water level of an adjacent lake or from the top of bank of an adjacent river or stream.

Building: Any structure having a roof and intended for the housing or enclosure of persons, animals, or materials. Also any structure more than eight feet high; excluding an electric light, utility pole, highway or railroad bridge, or flagpole. A building also means a walled or roofed structure, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.

Building, Accessory: Any building that is subordinate to and use of which is incidental and accessory to the use of the principal building on the same lot, or an adjoining lot under the same ownership. An accessory building shall be one not attached to the principal building by any covered porch, breezeway  or other roofed structure.

Building Coverage: The ground area enclosed by the walls of a building. Also, building footprint. Building Envelope: Defined areas in which clearing for construction and development can occur. Building Footprint: See Building Coverage.
Building Height: The vertical distance of a building or structure as measured from the average of the highest and lowest elevations of the finished grade at the foundation or base to the highest point of the roof surface for flat roofs, or to the average height between eaves and the highest ridge for other types of roofs.
 
 


Business: A legally-permitted occupant of land or premises engaged in commercial, industrial or professional activities. A business can be a for-profit entity, a non-profit organization, such as a charity, a not-for-profit organization, such as a credit union, or a social purpose business in which profits are invested into the community or to alleviate a social problem.

Business Services: Establishments primarily engaged in rendering services to business establishments on a fee or contract basis, such as advertising, building maintenance, management and consulting, equipment rental, and other similar services as approved by the Development Review Board or Zoning Administrator.

Bylaw: A provision of this ordinance, a regulation.

12.4	C

Café: See Restaurant.

Camp: A seasonal fixed structure used on a transient basis for recreational purposes; a facility used for accommodating groups of people overnight on a temporary basis in a natural setting for recreation or instruction usually during the summer season. See also Summer Camp.

Campground: A facility, area or place that is used for camping; a place where people can put up a tent or park a camper and that often has toilets, sinks, and showers.

Camping: Overnight transient lodging within or under temporary or mobile structures such and tents, tarps, lean-tos, campers or recreational vehicles.

Canopy: A structure the purpose of which is to shelter an activity performed outside of a building, such as over a building entrance, loading area, bus stop, or gas pumps.

Cellar: A space partially or fully below ground level and with a floor-to-ceiling height of less than 6.5 feet. Cellars shall not be counted as a story in the computation of the intensity of land use development or of gross floor area. See also Basement.

Cemetery: Land used for the burial or internment of the remains of deceased people or pets and open to use by a community of people or the general public. Conversely, a family burying ground is one in which no lots are sold to the public and in which interments are restricted to a group of persons related to each other by blood or marriage.

Certificate of Compliance: A certificate issued by the Zoning Administrator allowing occupancy or use of a building, structure, or premises after it has been determined that all requirements of applicable permits and ordinances have been met.

Change of use: The modification of a use of an existing building or parcel of land, or the replacement of a use of a building or land with another use or uses, or the addition of a use or uses to a building or land, or the cessation of a use or uses of a building or land.

Channel: An area that contains continuously or periodic flowing water that is confined by banks and a streambed.

Charitable Organization: A non-profit organization that has received tax exempt, or 501(c)(3), status from the United States Internal Revenue Service.
 


Child Care: Developmentally appropriate care, protection, and supervision designed to ensure wholesome growth and educational experiences for children outside of their homes for periods of less than 24 hours per day in a daycare facility. See also Daycare and Early Childhood Facility.

Club: Building or use catering exclusively to the members of an organization and their guests for recreational purposes and not operated primarily for profit.

Co-location: The use of a single mount or tower for more than one antenna for one or more telecommunications providers.

Commercial Core: All portions of the Town of Manchester falling within the DN, TC, and MU1 zoning districts.

Commercial Use: Nonresidential use of property for commerce or for the activity of buying and selling.

Common Plan of Development: The scheduled plan for refurbishing a structure. Such work might be planned unit by unit.

Community Center: A facility or portion thereof that provides recreational, educational or cultural activities for the residents of the community.

Community Garden: A private not for profit or public common area used for gardening by a group of households.

Composting Facility: A facility used for the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter through active management to produce, use, or sell a stable humus-rich material. Composting facility shall not include the management of sewage or septage or materials derived from sewage or septage.

Conditional Use: Certain uses that may be allowed only by approval of the Development Review Board subject to affirmative conclusions under general and specific standards, as outlined in Section 5.3 of this ordinance.

Condominium: Privately owned units as defined in the condominium ownership act of the State of Vermont.

Contractor’s Sign: A sign advertising the name of a construction contractor that may be displayed on a temporary basis on site during a permitted construction project.

Convalescent Home: see Nursing Home.

Convenience Store: A retail store no larger than 3,000 gross square feet that is typically open for extended hours and that typically sells limited lines of groceries, household items, snacks and may include the sale of gasoline or other motor fuel, and is intended for the convenience of the surrounding neighborhood or passers-by.

Core: That portion of the Town of Manchester falling in the Downtown, Town Center, and Mixed Use 1 zoning districts or within 2,500 feet of the roundabout at the intersection of Main Street and Depot Street.

Credit Union: A type of not-for-profit bank that is owned by and operated for its consumer members.

Crematory: A building containing a properly installed, certified apparatus, typically a furnace, intended for use in the act of cremation (burning a cadaver to ashes). May be contained in a funeral home.
 


Critical Facilities: (see also essential services) include police stations, fire and rescue facilities, hospitals, shelters, schools, nursing homes, water supply and waste treatment facilities, and other structures the community identifies as essential to the health and welfare of the population and that are especially important following a disaster. For example, the type and location of a business may raise its status to a Critical Facility, such as a grocery or gas station.

Customary Home Occupation (CHO): A business that is customary in residential areas practiced within a dwelling unit. A customary home occupation requires a zoning permit in conformance with Section 6.6 of this ordinance.

12.5	D

Daycare: A facility, operated as a business or service on a regular or continuous basis that provides
child care. See also Child Care and Early Childhood Facility.

Demolition: The destruction and physical removal of any structure or portion of a structure.

Design Advisory Committee: A panel of Manchester citizens created pursuant to 24 VSA Chapter 117 § 4407(6) and appointed by the Selectboard to give guidance to the Development Review Board or Zoning Administrator in the areas of landscaping, architecture, engineering and other pertinent site and architectural design criteria as described in this ordinance.

Development: Development shall include the following: the division of a parcel into two or more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any building or other structure; any mining, excavation or land fill; or any change of use of any building or other structure, or land, or extension of use of land. Note that this definition of development applies throughout this ordinance. The definition of development in 2.3.11 additionally applies to Section 2.3 only.

Development Review Board: A quasi-judicial decision-making board created pursuant to 24 VSA Chapter 117 §4460 comprised of seven Manchester citizen volunteers appointed by the Selectboard to review and issue decisions on development proposals or to hear appeals to decisions of the Zoning Administrator pursuant to this ordinance. Appeals of decisions made by the Development Review Board are heard by the Vermont Superior Court Environmental Division.

Disc Golf Course: A standard 18- or nine-hole (or basket) course on natural turf, over which the game of disc (or Frisbee) golf is played.

Distillery, Craft: A light industrial beverage manufacturing facility for the production and packaging of spirit alcohol for distribution, retail, or wholesale, on or off premise, with a capacity of not more than 750,000 gallons per year.

Distribution Center: A facility where goods are received and stored for delivery to remote locations.

Dog Kennel: An establishment housing or maintaining 5 or more dogs over the age of 6 months.

Dormitory: A building operated by a school that contains semiprivate or private rooms along with bathroom facilities for students. Kitchen and recreation facilities may also be included.

Dry Cleaning: The cleaning of fabrics with non-aqueous organic solvents, either petroleum solvents or synthetic solvents.
 


Dry Cleaning Plant: A facility where dry cleaning occurs. Operations using petroleum solvents are known as petroleum plants and historically pose significant fire hazards. Synthetic dry cleaning solvents presently in use include perchloroethylene and trichlorotrifluoroethane. Operations using these synthetic solvents are respectively called perc plants and fluorocarbon plants. Perc plants are falling out of favor due to the toxic nature of perchloroethylene.

Dry Cleaning Service: A type of personal service business that accepts and returns clothing or other textiles for dry cleaning. A dry cleaning service does not necessarily occur on the site of a dry cleaning plant.

Duplex: A single structure containing two separate dwelling units, regardless of the type of construction. For purposes of this ordinance a single-family detached structure with an accessory apartment shall not be considered a duplex.

Dwelling, One-family (or Single-family): A building designed for, or occupied, or customarily intended to be occupied solely as a residence by one family, except other uses that shall be considered single-family uses of homes as defined throughout this ordinance.

Dwelling, Multi-family: A building containing separate residential units for three or more families.

Dwelling, Two-family: A building designed for, or occupied, or customarily intended to be occupied as a residence by two families. Also Duplex.

Dwelling Unit: A structure or part of a structure occupied or intended to be occupied by one family for residential purposes, containing full housekeeping facilities for the exclusive use of the occupants.

12.6	E

Early Childhood Facility: Any place, operated as a business or service on a regular or continuous basis whether for compensation or not, which provides early care and education to children.

Easement: An acquired right of or upon the property of another for a specified purpose.

Eat-in Restaurant: See Restaurant, Eat-in.

Education Center: A facility offering educational activities or programming that is open to the public and operated by a private non-profit entity.

Essential Services: Services, whether rendered by government or private entities, the interruption of which would endanger the life, health or personal safety of the whole or part of the population. Essential services include full service groceries, pharmacies, government buildings, hospitals and multiunit residential buildings.

Establishment: A legally-permitted occupant of land or premises, (see also business). Exterior Automatic Teller Machine: See Automatic Teller Machine (ATM), Exterior. Exterior Vending Kiosk: See Vending Kiosk, Exterior.
Existing Small Lot: An existing small lot as referred to in Section 3.9 of this ordinance, is hereby further defined as a lot in separate and non-affiliated ownership from any adjoining lot, the owner of which therefore has no land available for enlarging the lot in order to conform with, or achieve closer
 


conformance with the limitations of this bylaw. This definition is not intended to limit the provisions of 24 VSA §4412.

12.7	F

FAA: Federal Aviation Administration.

Fall Zone: The additional setback, equal to the height of the tower, required for wireless telecommunications towers.

Family: Any number of individuals related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit, provided that a group of not more than five persons keeping house together, but not necessarily related by blood or marriage, may be considered a family.

Family Child Care Home: A state licensed home-based daycare for up to 12 children in the residence of the licensee where the licensee is one of the primary caregivers.

Farm: Any tract of land used for dairying or for the raising of agricultural products, horticultural or agronomic products, forest or silvicultural products, livestock, poultry, or carrying out other practices associated with accepted silvicultural practices or agricultural practices, and which may include accessory structures for the sale of such products from the premises where produced, and which may include farm structures.

Farm Café: A restaurant with indoor seating for no more than 40 people, and no more than 1,000 square feet of outdoor seating that meets the following criteria: (1) is subordinate to the commercial agricultural use that is the primary use of the land on which the café is locate; (2) uses products produced on the  farm (3) is located on a farm of at least 10 total acres; and (4) is located in proximity to the farm operation, and is on a parcel used for the farm operation.

Farm Stand: A temporary or seasonally used structure for the display and sale of locally grown agricultural products. May also include the accessory sales of other unprocessed foodstuffs, homemade crafts, and home processed food products (e.g., jams, jellies, pickles, sauces, baked goods).

Farm Structure: A building, enclosure, or fence for housing livestock, raising horticultural or agronomic plants, or carrying out other practices associated with accepted agricultural practices, including a silo, but excluding a dwelling for human habitation.

Farmers Market: An event occurring in a pre-designated site for selling or offering for sale at retail of locally-grown vegetables or produce, where there is a collection of individual vendors who have raised the vegetables or produce or have taken the same on consignment for retail sale. Also includes the   incidental sale at retail of artisan-produced handicrafts, artwork, and baked goods.

Farming: The use of land or structures for agriculture. FCC: Federal Communications Commission.
FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency.

Fence: Any material or combination of materials erected to enclose, screen, separate, or demarcate areas of land. Fences may be of an open (e.g., picket), semi-open, or closed (e.g., brick or stone) style. Closed fences may also be known as walls.
 


Fitness Center: An establishment with equipment and facilities for exercising and maintaining or improving physical fitness.

Fill: Any placed material that changes the natural grade, increases the elevation, or diminishes the flood
storage capacity at the site. See also Land Fill. FIRM: see Flood Insurance Rate Map.
Flood: Flood can mean either of two possibilities:
(1)	A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and mudslides which are proximately caused by flooding and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.
(2)	The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of
erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding.

Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. In some communities the hazard boundaries are available in paper, pdf, or Geographic Information System formats as a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).

Flood Insurance Study: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, the corresponding water surface elevations or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and /or flood related erosion hazards.

Floodplain: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see flood). Also referred to as flood-prone area.

Flood Proofing: Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.

Floodway, regulatory in the Town of Manchester: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot at any point.

Fluvial Erosion: Erosion caused by streams and rivers. Fluvial erosion can be catastrophic when a
flood event causes a rapid adjustment of the stream channel size and/or location.

Food Processing Operation: Industry that uses food as a raw material and changes it in some way to make a food product.

Food Processing Operation, Light: Food processing that does not cause noxious fumes, smoke, or offensive levels of noise or odor, and which has few, if any, impacts related to the manufacturing process itself or affiliated aspects of the process such as large or frequent truck deliveries. Includes small commercial kitchen and small bakery or confectioner,
 


Food Processing Operation, Heavy: Food processing that causes significant noise, noxious fumes, smoke, dust, significant amounts of waste products, or heavy truck traffic that are incompatible with various other land uses.

Footcandle: A unit of measure for illuminance. A unit of illuminance on a surface that is within a one foot radius from a uniform point source of light of one candlepower and equal to one lumen per square foot.

Forestry: The science and craft of creating, managing, using, conserving, and repairing forests, forest ecosystems, or forest products such as timber. See Silviculture and also see Forestry Operations.

Forestry Operations: Woodlot and off-woodlot processing of trees and logs, and the manufacture, assembly, drying, storage, sale and distribution of forest products such as maple syrup, lumber, pulpwood, mulch, veneer, bolt wood, stud wood, poles, pilings, wood chips, fire wood, fuel wood, wood pellets, biomass, Christmas trees, wreaths, bough material and cones.

Frontage: A width of a lot along its front bordering on and parallel to a private road or public right-of- way.

Funeral Home: An establishment with facilities for the preparation of the dead for burial or cremation, for the viewing of the body, and for funeral services (also referred to as funeral parlor or mortuary).

12.8	G

Gas Station: A retail establishment at which gasoline powered motor vehicles are refueled.

Golf Course: A standard 18- or nine-hole course on natural turf, over which the game of golf is played.

Greenspace: That portion of a lot which does not include buildings, structures, driveways, parking facilities or other paved areas and which is vegetated and landscaped. The word greenbelt shall be synonymous with the term green space. Pedestrian paths or walkways, and normal, approved provision for vehicular ingress/egress from a public highway, may be allowed in green space areas. Pedestrian walkways, and outdoor furniture areas designed as part of the landscaping and not serving a direct commercial purpose, shall be counted in calculations of required greenspace area.

Grocery Store: A retail establishment that primarily sells food, including fresh, packaged, and prepared food, as well as household goods.

Gross Square Footage: The total square footage of a building or of a use within a building housing multiple tenants, including storage spaces, airlock entries, stairways, bathrooms, hallways, and other spaces within the building, as measured from the outside wall faces. Gross square footage does not include basements nor attic space, unless such space is used as storage or other active support (except furnaces, etc.) for the subject use.

Group Home: A place providing room, board and personal care to three or more residents unrelated to the homeowner or caregiver. Group homes are also referred to as residential care homes and must be licensed by the Vermont Department of Aging and Disabilities.

Group Service: A service which is customarily performed or provided for a number of persons at the same time or which customarily involves the participation or presence of a number of persons (as opposed, for example, to the customary services provided or performed on an individual basis by a doctor or repair person).
 


12.9	H

Hazardous Material: Any substance or combination of substances which, because of quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, pose a present or potential hazard to ground or surface water or human health if disposed into or on any land or water in the Town of Manchester.

Health Club: See Fitness Center. Heavy Industry: See Industry, Heavy.
Historic Center: A facility that operated by a private non-profit entity that serves to present historic structures or programming to the general public.

Historic District:

Historic Structure: Any structure that is: (a) listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: (i) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (ii) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

Hotel: A building or part of a building in which (a) living or sleeping accommodations are used primarily for transient occupancy on a daily basis, (b) one or more common entrances serve all such living or sleeping units, and (c) 24-hour desk service is provided, in addition to one or more of the following services: housekeeping, telephone, bellhop service, or laundry or dry cleaning service. Allowable accessory uses are restaurants or other public dining facilities, bars or lounges, public banquet halls, ballrooms, meeting rooms, swimming pools, and spa and fitness centers.

12.10	I

Industry: The processing of raw materials and the manufacture of marketable goods.

Industry, Light: Industry of an inoffensive nature that does not cause noxious fumes, smoke, dust, or offensive levels of noise, and which has few, if any, impacts related to the manufacturing process itself or affiliated aspects of the process such as large or frequent truck deliveries.

Industry, Heavy: Industry that causes significant noise, noxious fumes, smoke, dust, significant amounts of waste products, heavy truck traffic or other impacts that are incompatible with various other land uses.

Inn: An owner-occupied building or group of buildings used to provide overnight accommodations, and one or more meals, to guests for short periods of stay (e.g., tourists). Inns may incorporate the primary structure on the lot as well as accessory structures, but shall not exceed 25 guest rooms.

Interested Person: An interested person is either (1) a person having status to appeal a decision of the Zoning Administrator as defined in 24 VSA §4465(b) or (2) a person who has participated in a municipal regulatory proceeding who may appeal a decision rendered in that proceeding by an appropriate
 


municipal panel to the environmental court pursuant to 24 VSA §4471. Participation in a local regulatory proceeding shall consist of offering, through oral or written testimony, evidence or a statement of concern related to the subject of the proceeding.

12.11	J

Junk Yard: See salvage yard.

12.12	K

Kiosk: A small structure used for providing information or displaying advertisements, often incorporating an interactive display screen or screens.

12.13	L

Lake: A body of water that exists in a declivity that is the result of glaciation or created by dam, dike, barrier or other artificial impoundment, or resulting from excavation, which retains water year-round. See also Pond.

Land Development: See Development.

Land Fill: The act of depositing materials on a site to change the grade.

Laundromat: An establishment equipped with washing machines and dryers for self-service use by the general public.

Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA): A letter issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency officially removing a structure or lot from the flood hazard zone based on information provided by a licensed engineer or surveyor. This is used where structures or lots are located above the base flood elevation and have been inadvertently included in the mapped special flood hazard area.

Library: A facility that maintains collections of books and other written, printed or recorded materials for public use, provides for the public use of computer and other technology to facilitate access to information, and functions as a community gathering place for the exchange of information and ideas.

Light Industry: See Industry, Light.

Lodging House: A building in which rooms are rented with or without meals to three or more, but not exceeding, 20 persons. A lodging house shall have no more than one kitchen facility whether shared or not. Also referred to as Boarding House or Rooming House.

Logging: The work or business of felling and trimming trees and transporting logs.

Lot: A plot or parcel of land under singular ownership occupied or may become occupied by one principal building and the accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to it, including such open spaces as required by this ordinance. In the case of multiple dwellings and public, institutional, commercial,  industrial, or agricultural buildings, a group of buildings on the same or contiguous premises, all under the same ownership, may be considered as occupying the same lot. For purposes of this ordinance, the term does not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way.

Lot Coverage: The area of a lot (expressed as a percentage of total lot area) that is covered by developed features, including structures, buildings, accessory structures, parking areas, loading areas, service areas, swimming pools, paved recreational courts, sidewalks, pathways, driveways, roads, storage areas for personal property, exterior display areas for merchandise. Areas covered by permeable
 


pavement and decks and boardwalks may be counted at 50% if installed over a reservoir layer to treat and retain stormwater infiltration. Lot coverage includes that portion of a lot that is not covered with woody or herbaceous plantings or mulch materials.

Lot Line Adjustment: See Boundary Line Adjustment.

Lowest floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement, except an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.

Lumberyard: A facility where building materials such as lumber, plywood, drywall, paneling, cement blocks and other cement products, and other building products are stored and sold. Lumberyards may also process lumber performing millwork, planning, cutting, and other customizing processes. Lumberyards may provide for the sale of associated products including tools and fasteners.

Lumen: A unit of measure of the quantity of light that falls on an area of one square foot every point of which is one foot from the source of one candela. A light source of one candela emits a total of 12.57 lumens.

Luminaire: A complete lighting system, including all necessary mechanical, electrical, and decorative parts.

12.14	M

Manufactured home: a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term manufactured home does not include a recreational vehicle. (See also Mobile Home)

Manufacturing: Shall include fabricating, assembling, treating, processing, and similar operations performed on any materials permitted to be worked upon by the terms of this bylaw.

Menu Board: A sign structure for an approved restaurant that displays menu items.

Menu Board, Drive Thru: A sign structure installed as part of an approved drive thru restaurant that displays menu items and ordering information.

Microbrewery: A light industrial beverage manufacturing facility for the production and packaging of beer or similar fermented malt beverages containing not less than one percent nor more than eight percent of alcohol by volume at 60 degrees Fahrenheit (if such a beverage has an alcohol content of more than six percent and not more than eight percent and has a terminal specific gravity of less than 1.009, it shall be deemed a spirit and not a malt beverage), for distribution, retail, or wholesale, on or off premise, with a capacity of not more than 15,000 barrels per year.

Mixed Use: A structure or development that is occupied by a nonresidential use and a residential use, or by a mix of non-residential uses such as office, manufacturing, retail, public, or entertainment uses.

Mobile Home: A structure or type of manufactured home, transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term manufactured home also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180
 


consecutive days. For insurance purposes the term manufactured home does not include park trailers,
travel trailers, and other similar vehicles.

Mobile Home Park(or Manufactured Home Park): Any parcel or contiguous lots of land under common ownership or control on which are sited, or which is designed, laid out or adapted to accommodate, more than two manufactured or mobile homes. A parcel or contiguous lots owned by agricultural employers providing up to four mobile homes for use by employees, and a parcel or contiguous lots used solely on  a seasonal basis for vacation or recreational mobile homes shall not be considered a mobile home park.

Motel: A facility designed or used primarily to provide transient lodging accommodations for automobile travelers in which each sleeping room customarily has an exterior entrance next to a parking space.

Museum: an institution devoted to the procurement, care, study, and display of objects of lasting interest or value, or a place where objects are exhibited for public viewing.

12.15	N

National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP): A program created by the Congress of the United States through the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968. The program enables property owners in participating municipalities to purchase insurance protection from the government against losses from flooding. Participation in the NFIP is based on an agreement between a municipality and the federal government whereby if the municipality adopts and enforces a floodplain management ordinance to reduce future flood risks in Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA), the federal government will make flood insurance available within the community as a financial protection against flood losses.

Nature Center: A facility operated by a private non-profit entity that serves to offer educational and recreational programming concerning the natural environment to the general public.

Net Zero Density Bonus: A residential density bonus that may be awarded by the Development Review Board to a Planned Residential Development that results in residential structures meeting the net  zero energy building definition.

Net Zero Energy Building (NZEB): A building or group of buildings designed and operated to produce an amount of energy from renewable sources on site equal to the amount of energy the building or group of buildings consumes annually.

NFIP Coordinator: The individual employed within the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources, Department of Environmental Conservation responsible for state-level review, permitting, records maintenance, and dissemination of information concerning the National Flood Insurance Program for Southwestern Vermont, including the Town of Manchester.

Nonconforming Lot or Parcel: a lot or parcel that does not conform to the present bylaws covering dimensional requirements, but was in conformance with all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations prior to the enactment of the present bylaws, including a lot or parcel improperly authorized as a result of error by the Zoning Administrator or Development Review Board.

Nonconforming Structure: a structure or part of a structure that does not conform to the present bylaws but was in conformance with all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations prior to the enactment of the present bylaws, including a structure improperly authorized as a result of error by the Zoning Administrator or Development Review Board. Structures that were in violation of the flood hazard regulations at the time of their creation, and remain so, remain violations and are not nonconforming structures.
 


Nonconforming Use: the use of land or of a structure that does not conform to the present bylaws but did conform to all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations prior to the enactment of the present bylaws, including a use improperly authorized as a result of error by the Zoning Administrator or Development Review Board.

Nonconformity: a nonconforming use, structure, lot, or parcel.

Non-residential Use: Use of a structure or land that is not residential in nature including, but not limited to, agricultural, commercial, educational, governmental, health care, industrial, recreational, religious, silvicultural, or social services use.

Nursing Home: A facility in which highly skilled nursing and residential care is provided to people with chronic physical or mental impairments.

Nursery: An establishment in which plants are propagated and grown to usable size and sold to consumers or landscape contractors.

12.16	O

On-premises Sign: A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, service, event or entertainment carried on, sold, or offered on the same premises on which the sign is displayed.

Off-premises Sign: A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, service, event or entertainment that is not carried on, sold, or offered on the same premises on which the sign is displayed.

12.17	P

Parcel: See Lot.

Park: Any land owned by the public or open for use by the general public for active or passive recreational purposes or as a refuge for wildlife.

Parking, Tandem: The parking of up to two cars, one behind the other.

Parking, Underground: Parking spaces within a covered structure where either 50% of the volume of the parking space is below the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building, or the floor of the parking space is four feet below the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building, whichever is greater.

Parking Garage: A structure built to accommodate the parking of vehicles.

Parking Lot: An area with space to accommodate the parking of more than two vehicles on a commercial, industrial, or institutional lot.

Performing Arts Center: An establishment primarily used for arts performances which may include permanent seating.

Performing Arts Studio: An establishment primarily used for acting, music, dance classes, rehearsal, or other instruction in the performing arts. Such an establishment has no permanent seating for performances.

Permanent Foundation: A foundation of poured concrete footings, or slab.
 


Permanent Sign: Any sign erected or displayed consistently for the duration of any permitted use on premises or any sign the display of which exceeds the specific time limits prescribed for special categories of temporary signs in Section 9 of this ordinance.

Person: an individual, partnership, corporation, association, unincorporated organization, trust or any other legal or commercial entity, including a joint venture or affiliated ownership. The word person also means a municipality or state agency.

Personal Service: An establishment primarily engaged in providing services involving the care of persons or their personal goods, such as a laundry cleaning and pressing service, barber shop, beauty shop, hair and nail salon, shoe repair shop, seamstress shop or tailor shop.

Pharmacy. A retail establishment that sells prescription and over-the-counter medication and personal care products. Pharmacies may sell additional retail products such as food, beverages, office supplies, greeting cards, gifts and other goods.

Place of Worship: A church, mosque, synagogue, temple, convent, monastery, parish house, or other religious gathering place.

Planned Unit Development (PUD): Development of a site in which buildings or lots may not conform to the dimensional standards of the underlying zoning district in exchange for provision of a public good such as open space protection, affordable housing, recreational amenities, or others. A PUD allows for creativity in site design not possible with conventional subdivision and land development practices.
A PUD may have a mix of residential and nonresidential land uses. In exchange for design flexibility, developers are better able to provide amenities and infrastructure improvements, and to accommodate environmental and scenic attributes of the site.

Planned Residential Development (PRD): A type of Planned Unit Development consisting of residential lots or uses.

Planning Commission: The Planning Commission is comprised of five citizen volunteers appointed by the Selectboard and created under the authority enabled under 24 VSA Chapter 117 §4325. This commission has the responsibility of developing overall land use and development policy for the Town of Manchester. This involves the development of land use plans and land use regulations. Adoption of any plans, policies, and regulations developed by the Planning Commission occurs by vote of the  Selectboard. Since the creation of the Development Review Board in 2003, the Planning Commission has no direct regulatory authority and does not review development proposals.

Plat: The final map, drawing or chart, prepared by a licensed surveyor, indicating the manner in which property is to be subdivided, or in which a lot line is to be adjusted, or in which lots are shown as merged.

Pond: A relatively small body of water that exists in a declivity that is the result of glaciation or created by dam, dike, barrier or other artificial impoundment, or resulting from excavation, which retains water year- round. See also Lake.

Poster: A temporary, off-premises sign, not erected or displayed for commercial purposes, and not exceeding three square feet in area, printed, lettered, or drawn on cardboard or paper, advertising a specific event or occurrence at a particular time and place.
 


Project Sign: A freestanding or flush-mounted sign identifying or describing a development project, erected on a temporary basis while a development project is underway. The sign may include a depiction of the project, developer information, architect information, contractor information, and identification of other involved entities, as well as project milestone dates or fundraising goals.

Premises: The piece of land or real estate, lot, building, or set of related buildings comprising the location of one or more businesses or other ventures.

Professional Building: A building partially or primarily used for offices in which professional services or personal services are offered or performed. Also included are administrative offices for schools or other public or non-profit organizations. Businesses which are essentially retail operations, such as catalog sales, or tile shops, or carpet shops where the service performed is essentially the showing of sample merchandise for sale, are not included under this definition. The sale of tangible property, wholesale or retail, is prohibited, except the clearly incidental sale of property accessory to the service rendered. For example: an optometrist may sell eyeglass frames as an adjunct to the primary service of prescribing and fitting corrective lenses, or a hair stylist may sell shampoo as an adjunct to the primary service of hairstyling.

Professional Office: A premises used as an office space for a professional service.

Professional Services: Such services include, but are not limited to: doctor, dentist, lawyer, accountant, architect, therapist, realtor, photographer, or other professions where service is provided to clients primarily on an individual basis.

Public Right-of-Way: A type of easement granted or reserved over land for (1) public transportation purposes, such as for a highway, railroad, canal, or recreation path, or (2) for public infrastructure such as for electrical transmission lines, or oil and gas pipelines. See also Street.

Public Sewer: A sewer system owned or operated by a municipality or other governmental unit.

Public Water: A water supply system owned or operated by a municipality or other governmental unit, or by an entity authorized and regulated by the State of Vermont for purposes of public water supply.

12.18	Q

Quasi-judicial: Having a partly but essentially judicial character by possession of the right to hold hearings on and conduct investigations into items dealing with rules and regulations and to make decisions in the general manner of courts.

12.19	R

Recreation Facility: A structure or site designed and equipped for the conduct of active and passive sports, participatory athletic activities, leisure time activities, and other customary and usual recreational activities. Excluded are facilities intended for spectator activities such as stadiums and arenas.

Recreation Facility, Indoor: A recreation facility wholly within an enclosed building. Indoor recreation facilities may have accessory uses or structures such as snack bars, locker rooms, and pro shops that are designed and intended for use by the patrons of the primary use. Examples include but are not limited to: public or private health clubs, enclosed racquet courts, indoor swimming pools, YMCAs and YWCAs, fitness centers, indoor play areas, training studios for group recreation activities such as martial arts, gymnastics, and dance, bowling alleys, shooting ranges, roller rinks, rock climbing walls, and other similar uses.
 


Recreation Facility, Outdoor: A recreation facility wholly or partially outside of any building or structure. Fields, wooded areas, bodies of water, or other lands may be used for outdoor recreational purposes in this way. Outdoor recreation facilities may include structures such as swimming pools,  tennis courts, skating rinks, playground equipment, and accessory structures. Accessory uses such as snack bars, pro shops, locker rooms, and equipment rental may also occur. Examples of outdoor recreation facilities include but are not limited to: public and private golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts, ball fields, ball courts, driving ranges, miniature golf courses, skateboard parks, trail systems, and other similar unenclosed recreation facilities.

Recreation Path: A public path, any portion thereof, either existing or planned, that is used or intended to be used by the general public for recreation.

Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle which is built on a single chassis; 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

Regulatory Floodway: See Floodway.

Renovation: Any exterior structural change, rearrangement, change of location, or addition to a building, structure, or sign, other than repairs to building equipment and general maintenance. Any interior alteration when new conditional use, or expansion of usable floor area of a permitted use, is involved.
Residential Sign: A sign identifying a residence or residential subdivision or housing development. Residential Zoning District: a zoning district in which the primary permitted land use is residential,
which includes the R10, R4, R1, and RR zoning districts.

Restaurant: Any food service establishment subject to Vermont Health Regulations where food and beverages are prepared and served for consumption; and where the service of alcoholic beverages is incidental to the consumption of food (less than 50% of the gross sales receipts from the business). (Also see Café, Restaurant, Eat-In and Restaurant, Take-Out)

Restaurant, Eat-in: A restaurant that prepares and serves food or beverages primarily to seated patrons for immediate consumption on the premises. It may prepare and package food and beverages for consumption off premises (take-out) provided the area devoted to patron seating (exclusive of any  outdoor dining area) is not less than 40% of the gross floor area of the restaurant (exclusive of any outdoor dining area). Any restaurant with drive-through or drive-in service will be considered a take-out restaurant under this ordinance.

Restaurant, Take-Out: A restaurant with no or limited seating that prepares and serves food and beverages primarily for consumption off the premises. Any restaurant with drive-through or drive-in service will be considered a take-out restaurant under this ordinance. This definition includes a retail bakery that sells 40% or more of its products on the premises.

Retail: A building, property, or activity where the principle use or purpose of which is the sale of goods, products, wares, or merchandise directly to the consumer.

Right-of-Way: A legal right of passage over another’s ground or property. See also Street and Public Right-of-Way.
 


River: Any continually flowing body of water or a section, portion, or tributary thereof, including rivers,
streams, creeks, runs, kills, and rills.

River Corridor: The land area adjacent to a river that is required to accommodate the dimensions, slope, planform, and buffer of the naturally stable channel and that is necessary for the natural maintenance or natural restoration of a dynamic equilibrium condition, as that term is defined in 10 VSA
§1422, and for minimization of fluvial erosion hazards, as delineated by the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources (ANR) in accordance with the ANR River Corridor Protection Guide.

Rooming House: see Lodging House.

12.20	S

Salon: A personal service establishment where hair styling or other cosmetic treatments are performed.

Sawmill: A facility that processes logs for the manufacture of lumber, veneer, plywood, stud wood, poles, pilings, and wood chips.

Salvage Yard: Any place of outdoor storage or deposit for storing, keeping, processing, buying, or selling junk or as a scrap metal processing facility. Salvage yard also means any outdoor area used for operation of an automobile graveyard. It does not mean a garage where wrecked or disabled motor vehicles are stored for less than 90 days for inspection or repairs.

School: The academic and extracurricular space for an institution for the teaching of children or adults in the following categories:
(1)	Primary: An elementary school, offering instruction inclusive of grades kindergarten through eight
(K-8).
(2)	Secondary: A high school or vocational center for instruction after primary school, granting a diploma for levels of education inclusive of grades nine through twelve (9-12).
(3)	Post-Secondary: A school offering instruction after secondary school, including colleges, community colleges, universities, or continuing education institutions.
(4)	Trade or Professional: A school that offers instruction in skilled trades.
(5)	Preschool: A school providing educational services for children from three years of age until admission to primary school and that may include kindergarten (Pre-K and K).

Seamstress Shop: An establishment for the repair, alteration, or custom making of clothes, curtains, or other items constructed of fabrics. See also Tailor Shop.

Seasonal Camp: See Camp.

Seasonal Sign: A commercial temporary sign announcing specials, sales, or business services as permitted between May 1 and November 1 per section 10.8.5 of the ordinance.

Self Storage Facility: A building or buildings containing separate, individual and private storage spaces of varying sizes leased or rented on individual leases for varying periods of time.

Septage: The contents of septic tanks, including the liquids, solids (sludge), fats, oils and grease (scum) that accumulate in septic tanks over time. Partially treated sludge stored in a septic tank. Septage is a by- product from the pretreatment of wastewater in a septic tank where it accumulates over time.

Septic System: An underground wastewater treatment system.
 


Service Business: A business for which the primary source of income is derived from repairs and maintenance of machinery, equipment, and household furnishings and appliances.

Service Station: An establishment that repairs automobiles, trucks, motorcycles or other vehicles.

Setback: The distance between a building or structure and any lot line, measured from the furthest projection of that building or structure on each side. Setbacks are also referred to as the yard or open space required between a building or structure and the front, side, and rear property lines.

Sewage: Water-carried waste that is intended to be removed from a community. Also known as wastewater, it is mostly water and is characterized by volume or rate of flow, physical condition, chemical and toxic constituents, and its bacteriologic status (which organisms it contains and in what quantities). It consists mostly of greywater (from sinks, tubs, showers, dishwashers, and clothes washers), blackwater (the water used to flush toilets, combined with the human waste that it flushes away); soaps and detergents; and toilet paper.

Sewer: A conduit, usually underground, for carrying waste matter and used water from sinks and toilets away from a building to a treatment facility.

Shoreline: A line that constitutes the top of bank of a watercourse or other body of water.

Sign: Any structure, wall display, device or representation designed or used to advertise or call attention to or direct a person to a business, association, profession, commodity product, institution, service, entertainment, person, place or thing, or activity of any kind, and is visible or audible to the public. It does not include the flag of any nation or state on a single pole.

Sign, flush-mounted: A sign attached to and mounted parallel to the face of a building or structure, or where architectural features (covered entryways, awnings, or other building elements except where otherwise prohibited) are clearly designed to accommodate a sign mounted parallel to the building face.

Sign, freestanding: A sign supported by one or more poles, columns, or supports placed in or on the ground and not attached to any building or structure.

Sign, off-premises: A sign that directs attention to a business, profession, commodity, service or entertainment that is not carried on, sold or offered on the same premises.

Sign, on-premises: A sign that directs attention to a business, profession, commodity, service or entertainment carried on, sold or offered on the same premises.

Sign, projecting: A sign attached to and projecting away from the face of a building or structure. Sign, residential: A sign identifying a residence or residential subdivision.
Sign, soffit: A sign hung from and within an overhang, which is attached to a building or structure and covers a walkway serving that building or structure.

Sign, temporary: A sign displayed for a temporary period of time as allowed by provisions of Section 9 of this ordinance.

Sign, window: A sign affixed to a window or door, or a sign placed within a building so as to be plainly visible and legible through a window or door. Small signs incorporated into a window display of merchandise and measuring no more than 100 square inches shall not be considered window signs.
 


Silviculture (also silvicultural activities, practices or use, see also Forestry): The practice of controlling the establishment, growth, composition, health, and quality of forests to meet diverse needs and values.

Site Plan: A scaled map of a lot or site that indicates all significant features including, but not limited to, site improvements, structures, boundaries, parking, drives, walkways, and landscaping, in accordance with Section 4.3 of this ordinance.

Small Home Child Care: A state registered small home-based daycare serving six or fewer children.

Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA): The floodplain within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This area is usually labeled Zone A, AE, AO, AH, or A1-30 in the most current flood insurance study and on the maps published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Maps of this area are available for viewing in the municipal office or online from the FEMA Map Service Center: msc.fema.gov. Base flood elevations have not been determined in Zone A where the flood risk has been mapped by approximate methods. Base flood elevations are shown at selected intervals on maps of Special Flood Hazard Areas that are determined by detailed methods. Please note, where floodways have been determined they may be shown on separate map panels from the Flood Insurance Rate Maps.

Start of Construction: for purposes of floodplain management, start of construction determines the effective map or bylaw that regulated development in the special flood hazard area. Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such  as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footing, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, regardless whether that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

Street: A public roadway or a private roadway devoted to public use. The word street shall include the entire width between property lines of every right-of-way used for vehicular and pedestrian travel which has become public by authority of the law, and such ways on public places other than highways as the public is permitted to use for vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Streets shall be further classified as follows:
(a)	Arterials (such as Vermont Route 7) - limited access highways moving large volumes of traffic  between major points within or outside of the town. (b) Major Collectors (Class 1 Roadways such as Main Street and Bonnet Street) interconnect the neighborhoods of the town, other adjacent communities and the downtown to the neighborhoods. (c) Minor Collectors (Class 2 Roadways such as Barnumville Road and Richville Road) gather traffic from local streets and feed it to major collectors. (d) Local Streets (Class 3 Roadways such as Hillvale Road or Green Mountain Road) are streets used primarily for direct access  to individual properties. (e) Alleys are ways that provide access to the back or side of properties abutting on a street and are used primarily for providing services to such properties. (f) Cul-de-sac is the turn- around at the dead end of a local street. Street shall not refer to a way, or driving aisle, used to access parking spaces within a parking lot, whether public or private, nor to a driveway used to access a private residence or commercial property.
 


Stormwater: The portion of rainfall, melted snow, or irrigation water that flows across ground surfaces and is eventually returned to a waterbody such as a river, stream, pond, or reservoir.

Story: That part of a building above ground level between a floor and the floor next above. If there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the roof or ceiling next above it. Story shall include basements and not cellars. An intermediate floor between the floor and ceiling of any story shall be deemed a mezzanine and shall not be counted as a story unless the total of all mezzanine areas exceeds 5,000 square feet or one-third of the area of the floor immediately below it, whichever is less. A  basement shall be considered as a story where the finished surface of the floor above the basement is:

(1)	More than four feet above the average pre-construction level of the adjoining ground, or
(2)	More than 12 feet above the pre-construction ground level at any point.

Stream: See River.

Structure: An assembly of materials for occupancy or use, including, but not limited to, a building, mobile home or manufactured home, driveway, trailer, storage container or tank, sign, wall, or fence.

Structural Alteration: See Renovation.

Subdivision: A division of a parcel of land into two or more lots, or other divisions of a parcel.

Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged conditions would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

Substantial Improvement: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure after the date of adoption of this bylaw, the cost of which, over three years, or over the period of a common plan of development, cumulatively equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (a) any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specification which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or (b) any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.

Summer Camp: A facility that includes overnight accommodations and is used for recreation or outdoor instruction often during the summer.

12.21	T

Take-Out restaurant: See Restaurant, Take Out.

Tailor Shop: An establishment for the repair, alteration, or custom making of clothes such as suits, coats, and dresses. See also Seamstress Shop.

Technical Service Business: Information-based or technology-based businesses requiring relatively large buildings in which to operate such as publishing houses, internet order businesses, telephone call centers, and research, clinical or forensic laboratories. Ancillary accessory uses may include daycare, food service, fitness facilities, automated banking, and convenience retail for employees of the technical service business.
 


Telecommunications Facility (See also Wireless Telecommunications Facility): A tower, pole, antenna, or other structure intended for receipt or transmission of radio, telephone, or television signals or other electromagnetic signals by a telecommunications or wireless service provider. This includes all appurtenant equipment and infrastructure, including but not limited to access trails or roads, guy wires, buildings, or other equipment or structures.

Telecommunications Provider (See also Wireless Service Provider): an entity licensed by the FCC to provide telecommunications services to individuals or institutions.

Temporary Structure: Any structure designed or used for purposes that are relatively impermanent in nature, and not attached to a permanent foundation. These include, but are not limited to, box trailers, storage pods, Quonset huts, tents, tipis, yurts, and hoop houses. (See Sections 6.17 and 6.18)

Tenant: A legally permitted occupant of land or premises, which is found or located within its own separate, physical space and with its own separate entrance.

Top of Bank: That vertical point along a stream bank where an abrupt change in slope is evident. For streams in wider valleys it is the point where the stream is generally able to overflow the banks and enter the floodplain. For steep and narrow valleys, it will generally be the same as the top of slope.

Top of Slope: See Top of Bank. Tourist Home: See Bed and Breakfast.
Tower: A structure more than 20 feet in height above the ground elevation built for the purpose of support, elevation, or placement of antennae for broadcast services or wireless services.

Travel Trailer: See Recreational Vehicle.

Traveled Way: The portion of the right-of-way which is paved or which lies between the curbs, if any. In the case of unpaved roads, the traveled way shall be deemed to be within 12 feet of either side of the center line of the road.

12.22	U

Undevelopable Land: Land which is not suitable for development, including lands with greater than 20% slope, wetlands, lands within the floodway, lands within the Forest Conservation (FC) District, and lands within public and private rights-of-way, or under conservation easement. (See Section 6.25)

12.23	V

Variance: The relaxation or deviation of the terms of this ordinance in compliance with 24 VSA §4469, whereby, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulation would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.

Vending Kiosk, Exterior: An exterior structure with sign elements installed as part of an approved commercial site plan that allows automated commercial transactions.

Veterinary Clinic/Veterinarian Office: The clinic or office of one who practices medicine dealing with the prevention and treatment of diseases and injuries in animals.

12.24	W

Wall: see Fence
 


Warehouse: A building where raw materials or manufactured goods may be stored before distribution for sale or use.

Wastewater: Any water that has been adversely affected in quality by human activities. Wastewater can originate from a combination of residential, industrial, commercial, agriculture or forestry activities, surface runoff or stormwater, and from sewer inflow or infiltration.

Water Resources Setback: The minimum required setback from surface water features required in a basic zoning district according to Section 1.15 and as further described in Section 6.25 of this ordinance.

Wetland: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Such areas include, but are not limited to, bogs, fens, marshes, ponds, potholes, sloughs, swamps, and vernal pools, but excluding such areas as grow food or crops in connection with farming activities. The methodology for delineating wetlands shall be those as established for the State of Vermont under the Vermont Wetland Rules, which focus on soil type, hydrology, and vegetation. Class 1 and 2 wetlands   tend to be larger, more significant wetlands and are regulated by the State of Vermont. Class 3 wetlands are smaller wetlands that may or may not be regulated by the state depending on their significance and proximity to other wetlands. Regulated Class 3 wetlands are functionally intact enough to provide for wildlife habitat, water quality, or flood prevention. Vernal pools fall into this category. Unregulated Class 3 wetlands do not serve these functions in a meaningful way, typically due to small size, isolation from other wetlands and hydrological features, or past land use practices that have altered the hydrology of the area (e.g., agricultural drainage ditches, tiles).

Wholesale: The sale or distribution of merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users; or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies.

Windmill: Any mechanism including blades, rotors, and other moving surfaces and supporting structures designed for the purpose of converting wind into mechanical or electrical power.

Winery: A light industrial beverage processing facilitiy used for the commercial purpose of processing grapes, other fruit products, or vegetables to produce wine or similar non-distilled spirits. Such commercial use includes wholesale sales, crushing, fermenting, blending, aging, storage, bottling, administrative office functions for the winery and warehousing. Retail sales and tasting facilities of wine and related promotional items may be permitted as part of the winery operations.

Wireless Telecommunications Facility (See also Telecommunications Facility): A tower, pole, antenna, or other structure intended for receipt or transmission of radio, telephone, or television signals or other electromagnetic signals by a telecommunications or wireless service provider. This includes all appurtenant equipment and infrastructure, including but not limited to access trails or roads, guy wires, buildings, or other equipment or structures.

Wireless Service Provider (See also Telecommunications Provider): an entity licensed by the FCC to provide telecommunications services to individuals or institutions.

Workforce Housing: For the purposes of this ordinance, workforce housing shall mean housing for people making 60 to 250 percent of area median income for Bennington County. Housing costs should constitute no more than 35% of such income to qualify as workforce housing.

Worship, Place of: See Place of Worship.
 


12.25	X

12.26	Y

Yard, Depth of: The depth of the front and rear yards as measured perpendicularly to the respective lot
lines.

Yard, Front: An open space between a primary structure and the front lot line, extending the full width of the lot, or in the case of a corner lot, extending along all streets.

Yard, Rear: An open space between a primary structure and the rear lot line, extending the full width of the lot.

Yard, Side: An open space between a primary structure and a side lot line, extending the full length of the lot.

Yard, Width of: The width of the side yards as measured perpendicularly to the respective lot lines.

12.27	Z

Zoning Permit: A document signed and issued by the Zoning Administrator authorizing land use or
development pursuant to the requirements of this ordinance.

Zoning Administrator: Any person duly appointed pursuant to 24 VSA §4448 with the authority to administer the provisions of this ordinance by the issuance of zoning permits, certificates of compliance, administrative opinions, notices or citations of violation, or any other actions necessary to administer the provisions of the ordinance. The Zoning Administrator shall include the Zoning Administrator or Assistant Zoning Administrator.
 
CHAPTER IV TOWN PARKS


4-1	Authority to Enact Chapter

4-2	Purpose of Chapter

4-3	Definitions

4-4	Facility Use Permits

4-5	Applejack Field

4-6	User Fees and Program Fees

4-7	Unpaid Parks and Recreation Department Fees 4-8	Evading Parks and Recreation Department Fees 4-9	Hours of Operation for Parks
4-10	Smoking at Town Parks - prohibition 4-11	Drug Use at Town parks -prohibition
4-12	Dogs, Domestic Animals and Livestock at Town Parks 4-13	Discharge of Weapons at Town parks - prohibition
4-14	Overnight Parking - prohibition

4-15	Overnight Camping - prohibition

4-16	Fireworks and Camp Fires - prohibition

4-17	Other Prohibited Activities at Town Parks

4-18	Motor Vehicles - speed limit on Recreation Park Road

4-19	Motor Vehicles - not permitted on paths and grassed areas and fields 4-20	Motor Vehicles - weight limit on Recreation Park Road
4-21	Vandalism of Town Parks

4-22	Vending at Town Parks - regulations 4-23	Town Swimming Pool - regulations
4-24	Miscellaneous Provisions

4-25	Enforcement
 
4-1	Authority to Enact Chapter


This Chapter was duly adopted by the Legislative Body of the Town, the Selectboard, in accordance with 24

VS.A. §2291 (3).


4-2	Purpose of Chapter


This Chapter has been adopted for the purpose of protecting and maintaining the park system of the Town of Manchester and provide for the safety and comfort of park users.

4-3	Definitions


Adams Park shall mean the park located at the intersection of Main Street and Center Hill Road and referred to as 32-51-16 on the Town's tax maps.

Dana L. Thompson Memorial Park shall mean the park located off of Bonnet Street/Route 30 and referred to as 15-20-27 and 15-20-23 on the Town's tax maps.

Factory Point Town Green shall mean the park located on Depot Street, near the intersection of Main Street, and referred to as 32-52-25 on the Town's tax maps.

Immediate family  member shall mean a spouse, son, daughter, step-son, step-daughter, dependent for tax purposes, and ward of a legal guardian that is a resident of the Town of Manchester.

Non-resident shall mean any person who does not qualify as a "resident" under the definition entitled "Resident".

Organized users shall mean any youth leagues, sports league, schools, not-for-profit organizations, educational institutions, for-profit corporations, day camps, day care providers, or other similar entities; or groups that conduct registration activities, schedule practices or games, provide equipment or uniforms, require a fee or insurance waiver to participate in an activities sport or program; or employ employees, or the sport or program is supervised or directed by a coach, administrator or coordinator.

Parks and Recreation Director shall mean a person appointed by the Town Manager to assist in the administration of recreation programs and maintenance of Town parks.

Proof of Residency shall include (1) the person is listed on the current voter checklist, (2) the person appears on the current Grand List, (3) the person can provide a current utility bill with their name and a physical
 
address in the Town of Manchester, (4) the person has a valid driver's license or state issued identification card with a physical address in the Town of Manchester, (5) the person produces a current tax bill from the Town of Manchester with the person's name on the tax bill, (6) the person produces a Town of Manchester employee l.D. badge or pay stub, (7) the person produces a signed and current copy of a lease, valid for at least six months at a physical address in the Town of Manchester, or (8) the person produces other proof of residency acceptable to the Parks and Recreation Director.

Resident shall mean a person who (1) lives in the Town of Manchester or Village of Manchester, more than 180 days per year, or (2) owns property (commercial or residential) and pays property taxes to the Town of Manchester, or (3) is an active registered voter in the Town of Manchester, or (4) owns a business with a valid tax identification number and is physically located in the Town of Manchester, or (5) is an employee of the municipality (Town of Manchester);  and can provide "Proof of Residency" as defined herein. Immediate family members, as defined herein, shall be considered residents for the purpose of this Chapter.

Town parks  or parks  shall collectively mean the Dana L. Thompson Memorial Park, Adams Park and the Factory Point Town Green as defined herein.

4-4	Facility Use Permits


(1)	All requests to use facilities shall be submitted to the Parks and Recreation Department on a permit application form approved by the Town Manager.

(2)	Any person filing the facility use permit application shall be at least 21 years old and be present during the event. The Parks and Recreation Department may require the applicant to provide a valid government picture identification card.

(3)	Before any facility use permit application may be considered, all fees and deposits must be paid in full, and the individual or group requesting use of any facility must be in good standing with the Town, and the Parks and Recreation Department and its fees and its policies.

(4)	Permit applications may be filed for a period of time not to exceed four months in duration. Permit applications may be filed not more than 30 days and not less than seven days before an event or the start of a sports season, unless otherwise waived by the Director of Parks and Recreation.
 
(5)	Facility fees for the Parks and Recreation Department shall be established in Addendum B. All fees not otherwise established in this Ordinance may be established by the Parks and Recreation Department Director, subject to approval by the Town Manager; provided, that whenever practical, non-resident fees shall be one and one-half times greater than resident fees. Facility use fees are based on reservations not on actual usage.

(6)	All organized users, as defined herein, shall file a facility use permit application with the Parks and Recreation Department for all scheduled games, practices and events and shall pay all facility fees required by this Chapter and Addendum B prior to a permit being issued for the scheduled games, practices, events or the beginning of the sports season. No refunds shall be provided for games, practices or events canceled by the organized user. A violation of this subsection shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation.

(7)	Nothing in this section shall prohibit users not defined as organized users from filing a facility use permit application or for the Parks and Recreation Director issuing a facility use permit to a user that is not an organized user.

(8)	The following facilities shall be used only by permit and fee: Applejack Field; the large baseball field in the southwest corner of the Dana L. Thompson Memorial Park; the Town swimming pool; the Activity Room in the Park House; athletic fields located north of Applejack Field.

(9)	Programs operated by the Parks and Recreation Department, for the benefit of the Parks and Recreation Department, and the Town of Manchester are exempt from facility fees.

(10)	The Town Manager may waive facility fees for the Manchester School District.


(11)	The Town reserves the right to cancel, postpone or reschedule permitted events, at its sole discretion, due to unforeseen circumstances. When the event is canceled by the Parks and Recreation Department, the Town shall refund or credit the account of the user of the facility use fee.

(12)	Whenever a permit is issued by the Parks and Recreation Department to any person or organization, that person or organization shall be entitled to use the facility if the facility is being used by a person or organization without a permit.

(13)	With the exception of Applejack Field, organized users of all fields shall be responsible for lining fields; provided, that the Parks and Recreation Director may restrict or regulate the lining of fields. No
 
person or organization shall perform field or facility maintenance without prior written permission by the Parks and Recreation Director.

(14)	Facility users shall be responsible for damage to facilities that is above and beyond normal wear and tear, or for damages that result from violations of this Ordinance or the policies of the Parks and Recreation Department.

(15)	The Parks and Recreation Director, at his or her sole discretion, may require a certificate of insurance from users in an amount to be determined by the Director of Parks and Recreation.

(16)	The Parks and Recreation Director may require a deposit, established in Addendum A, for cleaning, damage and the return of equipment (including keys and passes). After the facility has been inspected, the Town shall return the deposit to the user within 14 days of use, minus any withholding for cleaning, damages or equipment that is not returned to the Town. Any cleaning that is done by Town staff shall be billed at a rate of not less than $50 per hour, and the minimum charge for any cleaning shall be not less than
$25.


(17)	The Parks and Recreation Department shall make efforts to ensure that facility use is distributed equitably among users; provided, that Town-sponsored programs and events shall take precedence over all other functions, and residents and local youth organizations shall have preference over non-residents.

4-5	Applejack Field


(1)	Applejack Field shall be used for athletic events approved by the Director of Parks and Recreation and for Town-sponsored community events that do not damage the playing surface, including but not limited to community celebrations, outdoor movies and concerts.

(2)	Athletic events shall take precedent over other activities. Non-athletic events that are not sponsored by the Town shall be prohibited on Applejack Field.

(3)	The Parks and Recreation Director shall manage use of Applejack Field to ensure that the playing surface is not damaged, and may limit use at his or her sole discretion, including postponing or cancelling games or events.

(4)	Unauthorized use of Applejack Field shall be considered a First Degree civil violation.
 
4-6	User Fees and Program Fees


(1)	User fees and program fees for the Parks and Recreation Department shall be established in AddendumB.

(2)	All fees not otherwise established in this Ordinance may be established by the Parks and Recreation Department Director, subject to approval by the Town Manager; provided, that non-resident fees shall be one and one-half times greater than resident fees.

4-7	Unpaid Parks and Recreation Department Fees


Any portion of Parks and Recreation Department user fees, program fees or facilities fees unpaid within seven days of the due date shall be subject to the interest and penalties provided for in Chapter I of this Ordinance.

4-8	Evading Parks and Recreation Department Fees


(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally evade a gate or entrance fee, user fee, program fee or facility fee, or for a non-resident, as defined herein, to provide false information in order to receive a resident rate.

(2)	The first violation of this section shall be considered a civil violation and punishable by a penalty equal to the fee otherwise due, plus $50; provided that the penalty, not including the fee, shall not exceed
$800 per violation.


(3)	The second violation of this section within a two year period shall be considered a civil violation and punishable by a penalty equal to the fee otherwise due, plus $100; provided that the penalty, not including  the fee, shall not exceed $800 per violation.

(4)	The third and subsequent violations of this section within a two-year period shall be considered a civil violation and punishable by a penalty equal to the fee otherwise due, plus $250; provided that the penalty, not including the fee, shall not exceed $800 per violation.

4-9	Hours of Operation for Parks


(1)	Town parks shall be open to the public from 5:00 AM to 10:00 PM daily. No person shall use Town parks between the hours of 10:00 PM and 5:00 AM daily.
 
(2)	Notwithstand  subsection 1 of this section, the Director of Parks and Recreation may modify Town park hours from time-to-time for special events, or as reasonably necessary for maintenance or public safety.

(3)	A violation of paragraph 1 of this section shall be punishable as a Third Degree civil violation.


4-10	Smoking and Tobacco at Town Parks - prohibition


(1)	It shall be unlawful to smoke tobacco, use tobacco products or tobacco substitutes in Town parks.


(2)	A violation of this paragraph shall be punishable as a Third Degree civil violation.


4-11	Drug use at Town Parks - prohibition


(1)	It shall be unlawful to possess, ingest or smoke marijuana or marijuana-related products in Town parks.   A violation of this subsection shall be punishable as a Second Degree criminal violation.

(2)	It shall be unlawful to possess or use any controlled substances in Town parks unless otherwise prescribed by a physician. A violation of this subsection shall be punishable as a First Degree criminal violation.

4-12	Dogs, Domestic Animals and Livestock at Town Parks


(1)	Notwithstanding  any other chapter of this Ordinance to the contrary, all dogs shall be on leashes at all times and under the control of a responsible person in the Factory Point Town Green, Adams Park and the Dana L. Thompson Memorial Park, except inside the fenced area in the northeast comer of the Dana L. Thompson Memorial Park that is designated as a dog park.

(2)	No other domestic animals or livestock shall be permitted at Town parks, except as authorized in writing by the Director of Parks and Recreation for special events.

(3)	No dogs and other domestic animals and livestock, except service animals, shall be allowed inside the Park House, inside Applejack Field, on the fields north of Applejack Field (Eckhardt Field and McClellan Field), within the fencing of the three baseball fields and in the fenced in area of the swimming pool.

(4)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation.
 
4-13	Discharge of Weapons at Town Parks - prohibition


(1)	The discharge of firearms, air guns, bows, crossbows and other similar weapons and projectiles at Town parks is prohibited.

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree criminal violation.


4-14	Overnight Parking - prohibition


(1)	It shall be unlawful to park vehicles at the Dana L. Thompson Memorial Park between the hours of 10:00 PM and 5:00 AM.

(2)	The Manchester Police Department may remove the vehicle from the park by towing the vehicle. The owner or operator of the vehicle shall be responsible for all costs associated with the removal of the vehicle.

(3)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation.


4-15	Overnight Camping - prohibition


(1)	It shall be unlawful to camp or sleep in Town parks without prior written permission from the Parks and Recreation Director.

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation.


4-16	Fireworks and Camp Fires - prohibition


(1)	Fireworks and camp fires and other fires not specifically contained within barbecue grills shall be prohibited in Town parks without prior written permission from the Fire Chief of the Manchester Fire Department.

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation.


4-17	Other Prohibited Activities at Town Parks


(1)	It shall be unlawful to play golf, operate remote control aircraft or engage in any other activities at Town parks that present a clear danger to the public.
 
(2)	It shall be unlawful to play loud music at Town parks so as to annoy or impact other park users; provided, Town-sponsored events and games shall be exempt from this section.

(3)	It shall be unlawful to bicycle, skateboard, roller skate or use any other similar wheeled apparatus on the tennis courts and basketball courts.

(4)	It shall be unlawful to possess glass containers, glass bottles or other breakable materials on the tennis courts, basketball courts and skateboard park.

(5)	It shall be unlawful to operate bicycles, scooters or other apparatus that are equipped with pegs extending from any of the axles by more than one-half of an inch on any area of the skateboard park. Any damage resulting from pegs shall be the responsibility of the person using the apparatus with pegs.

(6)	A violation of this section shall be punishable as a Third Degree civil violation.


4-18	Motor Vehicles - speed limit on Recreation Park Road and parking lots


(1)	It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in excess of 15 miles per hour on Recreation Park Road or on any parking lot at the Dana L. Thompson Memorial Park.

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.


4-19	Motor Vehicles - not permitted on paths and grassed areas and fields


(1)	It shall be unlawful to operate motor vehicles at Town Parks on walking paths, sidewalks, grassed areas and fields and other areas not designated for motor vehicle use without the permission of the Parks
and Recreation Director. Vehicles operated by Town employees and engaged in Town-related functions shall be exempt from this section.

(2)	In addition to penalties established herein, violators shall be responsible for paying the cost of restoring any damage caused by motor vehicles.

(3)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.
 
4-20	Motor Vehicles - weight limit on Recreation Park Road


(1)	Unless otherwise permitted in writing by the Director of Public Works, vehicles shall not exceed five tons in weight or two axles on Recreation Park Road. Town-owned vehicles, authorized service vehicles, buses associated with athletic events and emergency vehicles shall be exempt from this section.

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.


4-21	Vandalism of Town Parks


(1)	It shall be unlawful to intentionally damage, destroy or deface any facilities, equipment or grounds of Town parks.

(2)	In addition to penalties established herein, violators shall be responsible for paying the cost of repairing any damage caused by vandalism.

(3)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree criminal violation.


4-22	Vending at Town Parks - regulations


(1)	Vending of food, beverages, merchandise, other related items and commercial activities at Town parks shall be prohibited; provided, that the Town Manager may approve temporary vending at the Dana L. Thompson Memorial Park for special events, games and tournaments as authorized in Chapter IX of this Ordinance. Each separate organization or separately owned business shall constitute a separate vendor.

(2)	Any vendor approved under Chapter IX of this Ordinance may be permitted to vend at the Dana L. Thompson Memorial Park for Town-sponsored  events, tournaments administered by the Town of Manchester,  and games and events at Applejack Field upon the written approval of the Director of Parks and Recreation.

(3)	Vending operated by the Parks and Recreation Department, for the benefit of the Parks and Recreation Department,  shall be exempt from this section.

(4)	A violation of this section shall be considered a First Degree civil violation.
 
4-23	Town Swimming Pool - regulations


(1)	The Parks and Recreation Director shall post the rules and regulations related to the use of the Town-owned swimming pool at the Dana L. Thompson Memorial Park. All swimming pool users and
guests shall adhere to the rules and regulations, and shall follow the directions of Town lifeguards and staff.


(2)	The Town may cap the total cost of a season swimming pass for a household headed by a Manchester resident, as defined herein; provided that this cap shall only apply to immediate family members, as defined in this Chapter. The cap for a Manchester household shall be established in Addendum B of this Ordinance.

(3)	No person under 12 years of age shall be admitted to the swimming pool without a parent, guardian or responsible adult 18 years of age or older, who shall be responsible for supervising the person under 12 years of age at all times while at the Town swimming pool. The parent, guardian, or responsible adult shall be responsible for the general welfare of the child and ensuring that the child adheres to the rules and regulations of the swimming pool.

(4)	The Town shall not charge anyone under three years old to enter the swimming pool ifthe child is accompanied and supervised by an adult 18 years of age or older who has a valid day or season swimming pass; provided, that this section shall not apply to daycare providers, institutions and educational institutions.

(5)	The Parks and Recreation Director may, at his or her sole discretion, suspend or terminate a pool pass without refund or credit when a pool pass is used fraudulently to gain admission to the swimming pool or for misconduct.

(6)	The Parks and Recreation Director, at his or her sole discretion, may provide a twenty percent discount of day admission to the Town swimming pool to groups larger than fifteen people, provided that full payment shall be received before admission is allowed.

(7)	Unauthorized use of the Town swimming pool shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.
 
(8)	Notwithstanding subsection 7 of this section, a violation of this section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation.

4-24	Miscellaneous  Provisions


(1)	The Selectboard designates the Factory Point Town Green as a place suitable for public gatherings and assemblies; provided, that the organizers of any event otherwise comply with this Chapter and Chapter X (Special Events).

(2)	All signs and banners erected at Town parks and not otherwise prohibited or regulated by other Town ordinances or regulations may be approved, in writing, by the Town Manager for a period not to exceed one year.

(3)	Nothing in this Chapter shall otherwise limit the Town Manager and Parks and Recreation Director from promulgating reasonable rules, regulations and policies that provide for the safe and effective management of the Town's park system; provided, such rules, regulations and policies do not conflict with this Chapter.

4-25	Enforcement


For violations of this Chapter that are considered criminal violations, the enforcing authority for this Chapter shall be any sworn officer of the Manchester Police Department; for violations of this Chapter that are considered civil violations, the enforcing authority shall be any sworn officer of the Manchester Police Department and the Municipal Compliance Officer.
 





 

Chair of the Selectboard	Date of Enactment by Selectboard




Attested, Town of Manchester Town Clerk:

rf	JJ..JA... , C-vc_
Town Clerk






NOTE: Amended July 31, 2019 to add Sections 4-17 (3) (4) (5) and (6)
 
CHAPTERV FACTORY POINT CEMETERY


5-1	Authority to Enact Chapter

5-2	Purpose of Chapter

5-3	Definitions
5-4	Management and Operation of Factory Point Cemetery 5-5	General Provisions
5-6	Fa•ctory Point Cemetery Fees

5-7	Interment of Human Remains at Factory Point Cemetery 5-8	Sale of Cemetery Lots
5-9	Headstones and Markers

5-10	Enforcement
 
5-1	Authority to Enact Chapter


This Chapter was duly adopted by the Legislative Body of the Town, the Selectboard, in accordance with 24 VS.A. §2291 (3) and 18 VS.A. §§ 5305, 5361 & 553 l(d).

5-2	Purpose of Chapter


This Chapter has been adopted for the purpose of protecting and maintaining the Factory Point Cemetery.


5-3	Definitions

«	f
Burial shall mean the interment of human remains, including the interment of a body in its entirety or

interment of cremated remains.


Conventional burial shall mean the burial of a human body in its entirety.


Cremation burial shall mean the burial of human remains that have been cremated.


Factory Point Cemetery and Cemetery shall mean the cemetery located on Cemetery Avenue in the Town of Manchester and referred to as 32-51-25 on the Town's tax maps.

Family plot shall mean an area including more than one contiguous lot which is owned by one person or family.

Flat marker shall mean a stone, flush with the surrounding land to mark the grave of a person or persons .


Government marker shall mean any marker provided by or authorized by the United States government or the State of Vermont to mark the burial of an individual. A government marker shall not be considered a flat marker.

Headstone shall mean a stone erected to mark the grave of a person or persons .


Headstone guarantee shall mean a deposit paid to ensure that a permanent headstone, that complies with the standards set forth herein, is placed on a grave within twelve months of a burial.

Military veteran shall mean any Manchester resident who actively served in the armed forces and was honorably discharged from the armed forces.





2
 
Notorious crimes shall mean crimes that involve terrorism, mass murder, serial murder, torture, child molestation, cannibalism, serious war crimes, crimes against humanity, and other similar crimes .

Public safety personnel shall mean any person who served at least five years on the Manchester Police Department or Manchester Fire Department.

Sexton shall mean a person or persons who shall be responsible for overseeing the Factory Point Cemetery, its grounds and infrastructure, the vault, and burials at the Cemetery. The Director of Public Works shall serve as the sexton. The Director may appoint assistant sextons, who shall report to the Director but shall have all the powers and authority v sted in the Director as the sexton. The appointment of <l$Sistant sextons shall be filed with the Town Clerk in writing . The Director may repeal the appointment of assistant sextons .

Vault shall mean the structure or structures located at the Factory Point Cemetery used to temporarily store human bodies before burial.

5-4	Management and Operation of Factory Point Cemetery


(1)	The Town Manager and his or her assistants shall be responsible for the overall management and coordination of the Factory Point Cemetery, selling plots and issuing deeds, and collection of fees and accounting. The Town Manager may appoint a coordinator to manage the day-to-day administrative operations of the Cemetery.

(2)	The sexton and the assistant sextons shall be in charge of the vault and overseeing and scheduling burials.

(3)	The Department of Public Works under the supervision of the Director of Public Works shall be charged with maintenance of the Cemetery.

(4)	The Town Clerk shall be responsible for recording, maintaining and preserving all records, surveys and maps related to the Factory Point Cemetery.

5-5	General Provisions


(1)	The Factory Point Cemetery shall be open to the public from 6:00 AM to dusk each day. It shall be unlawful to be on the grounds of the Cemetery when the Cemetery is closed . It shall be unlawful to camp, sleep, loiter, solicit, vend and conduct commercial activities in the Factory Point Cemetery. A violation of



3
 
this subsection shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.  The enforcing authority for this subsection shall be any sworn officer of the Manchester Police Department or Municipal Compliance Officer.

(2)	It shall be unlawful to intentionally disturb or otherwise interfere with a funeral or burial at the Factory Point Cemetery. A violation of this subsection shall be considered a First Degree criminal violation. The enforcing authority for this subsection shall be any sworn officer of the Manchester Police Department.

(3)	lt shall be unlawful to vandalize, desecrate or damage graves, headstones or markers. A violation of this subsection shall be considered a First Degree criminal violation . The enforcing authority for this subsection shall be any sworn officer of the Manchester Police Department.

(4)	Signage is prohibited at the Factory Point Cemetery, including but not limited to signs that indicate that a lot, vault or tomb is for sale; provided, that headstones and markers authorized by this Chapter and information and directional signage installed by the Town of Manchester shall be exempt from this subsection . A violation of this subsection shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation.

(5)	No trees, shrubs or bushes shall be planted in the Cemetery without the written pennission of the Town Manager. All trees, shrubs and bushes within the Cemetery are the exclusive property of the Town of Manchester and shall be maintained and removed at the sole discretion of the Town .

(6)	No plastic or artificial flowers, ornamental displays, glass or ceramic items or benches, or lighting unless installed by the Town of Manchester, shall be permitted in the Cemetery and shall be promptly removed by the Town .

(7)	Dogs and other domestic animals, with the exception of service animals , shall not be permitted on the ground of the Factory Point Cemetery. A violation of this subsection shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation .

(8)	It shall be unlawful for anyone to access the vault, remove a body or place a body in the vault unless the sexton or assistant sexton is present. A violation of this subsection shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation .





4
 
(9)	Vehicles on the roadway within the Factory Point Town Cemetery may not exceed 10 miles per hour. Vehicles shall not be allowed on the grass . A violation of this subsection shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.

(10)	It shall be unlawful to consume alcohol or smoke tobacco or marijuana on the grounds of the Factory Point Cemetery. A violation of this subsection shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation .

5-6	Factory Point Cemetery Fees

(1)	Fees related to the Factory Point Cemetery shall be established in Addendum A. All fees shall be paid before any goods and serv•ices are provided, including but not limited to interments• . Any unpaid fees shall be subject to interest accrual established under Chapter I.


(2)	Whenever a fee or required paperwork is received less than twenty four hours before a burial, the Town shall assess an additional fee of $50 to expedite processing.

(3)	Whenever a fee or required paperwork is received after a burial, the Town shall assess, in addition to other fees, a late fee of $100.

(4)	No discounts shall be provided for the interment of more than one person or the purchase of more than one cemetery lot.

(5)	All recording fees related to Cemetery documents shall be paid for by the purchaser of lots or the funeral home responsible for the interment.

(6)	The Town may provide a reduced rate for burials of military veterans, as defmed in section 1, and public safety personnel, as defmed by section 1. The rates for burial of military veterans and public safety personnel shall be established in Addendum A. For military veterans, acceptable proof of service shall include a copy of a DD-214 from the Department of Defense or similar documents. For public safety personnel, acceptable proof of service shall be payroll or personnel records or a letter from the current Fire Chief or Chief of Police.











5
 
5-7	Interment of Human Remains at Factory Point Cemetery


(1)	All excavation and interment at the Cemetery shall be performed by Town employees, or by

Town-approved contractors designated by the Director of Public Works. A violation of this subsection shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.

(2)	Only human remains shall be interred at Factory Point Cemetery. No animal remains, including but not limited to domestic animals and pets, shall be buried, interred or scattered across the grounds of the Factory Point Cemetery. A violation of this subsection shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation .

t	•
(3)	The Town Manager may deny the burial of persons who have committed, either by conviction or by

reasonable evidence, notorious crimes, as defined in section 1 of this Chapter. Appeals of the Town Manager's decision not to allow the burial of certain persons under this subsection may be made by the next of kin to the Selectboard in writing, who shall hold a hearing within seven days of receiving the appeal.

(4)	Conventional burials require that the body of the person buried shall be entombed in a concrete vault that complies with standards approved by the Director of the Public Works Department.

(5)	No above-ground vaults or structures shall be allowed , except as approved by the Selectboard .


(6)	No fences, hedges or curbing around cemetery plots shall be allowed.


(7)	Burials shall be performed between April I and November 30 of each year, subject to the availability of Town staff and Town-approved contractors, and suitable weather and soil conditions.

(8)	Burials may be performed between the December 1 and March 31 of each year at the sole discretion of the Director of Public Works, subject to the availability of Town staff and Town-approved contractors, and suitable weather and soil conditions, for an additional fee set forth in Addendum A.

(9)	Burials shall not be allowed on the following days, unless approved by the Town Manager: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Veterans' Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.

(10)	No human body shall be buried at the Factory Point Cemetery unless a valid Burial Transit Permit

issued by a town clerk or a deputy registrar and an Interment Order is filed with the Town Clerk of the
 
Town of Manchester before the burial or on the next business day after the burial. No cremated remains may be buried in the Factory Point Cemetery unless an Interment Order is filed with the Town Clerk of the Town of Manchester before the burial or on the next business day after the burial. A violation of this subsection shall considered a Second Degree civil violation .

(11)	Whenever the Town performs an exhumation, the Town shall charge the same rate as a burial.


5-8	Sale of Cemetery Lots·


(1)	The cost of Cemetery lots shall be governed by Addendum A.


(2)	Conventional lots shall be approximately four feet wide and twelve feet long, and may provide for the interment of one conventional burial and up to two cremated remains; provided, that cremated remains may be interred only when the conventional burial precedes the cremated burial. Whenever a conventional lot is not used for a conventional burial, a conventional lot may be used for the intennent of up to four cremated remains.

(3)	Family cremation lots shall be approximately four feet wide and five to six feet long, and may provide for the interment of up to four cremated remains, subject to space being available in the lot.

(4)	Individual cremation lots shall be approximately two feet wide and two feet long, and shall provide for the interment of the cremated remains of one person.

(5)	Lots shall not be sold from a private party to another private party or transferred from a private

party to another private party without the written permission of the Town Manager and a $50 processing fee payable to the Town. Lots sold or transferred under this subsection shall not be sold or transferred for more than the original purchase price. A violation of this subsection shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.

(6)	Whenever the owner or owners of a cemetery plot are deceased, the cemetery plot is vacant, and the plot has not been transferred by probate decree, the right to use the plot shall be exclusively determined by the Town Manager. The Town Manager shall require documentation and a signed and sworn statement from the person claiming use under this subsection under the pains and penalties of perjury and a $50 processing fee payable to the Town, plus any recording fees.
 
5-9	Headstones and Markers


(1)	Headstones and markers shall be installed only by Town employees or Town-approved contractors, designated by the Director of Public Works. All headstones and markers shall be installed on concrete bases and in compliance with standards established and maintained by the Director of Public Works, and to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works .

(2)	Headstones and markers shall not include any language or images that are derogatory or offensive to a reasonable person, have language or images that are sexual in nature, discriminatory or include references to illegal or immoral activities. The Town Manager may deny the installation of headstones and markers or order the removal thereof when a headstone or marker violates the terms of this subsection.

(3)	Headstones shall be at least six inches thick; shall be at least eighteen inches but not more than ninety-six inches above grade in height; and shall not be more than thirty-six inches in width.

(4)	Flat markers shall be four inches thick and have a surface area no larger than two square feet. Flat markers shall be flush with the ground and not provide a tripping hazard or hinderance to maintenance and grass mowmg.

(5)	Four comer markers, which shall delineate each purchased lot, shall be installed by the Department of Public Works or a contractor selected by the Director of Public Works. The fee, established in  Addendum A, shall be paid upon purchase of a lot. More than one contiguous lot owned by the same  person shall only require one set of comer markers. Comer markers shall be made out of granite and shall not protrude above the surface of the ground . Comer markers shall include the last name of the person who purchased the lot or the last name of the person being buried in the lot, whenever feasible. Comer markers shall be approximately six inches square for conventional and family cremation lots and approximately 4 inches square for cremation lots.

(6)	The Town or a Town-approved contractor shall install standard government markers, which indicate service to the United States armed services. Government markers shall be allowed in addition to all other headstones or markers authorized in this Chapter.

(7)	The Director of Public Works may issue an annual permit to qualified individuals and businesses for the purpose of installing headstones and markers. All such permitted individuals and businesses shall



8
 
provide proof of insurance, including liability insurance and workers compensation insurance , in an amount not less than $1,000,000, naming the Town as an additional insured.

(8)	All headstones and flat markers shall be made of durable stone, including marble and granite or other stone approved by the Director of Public Works. Government markers shall be made of bronze. Headstones and markers shall be free of cracks and other imperfections that may affect the long-term durability of the headstone or marker.

(9)	The Town shall require the payment of a headstone guarantee whenever a person is buried in a lot. Payment shall be made to the Town prior to the burial. The headstone guarantee fee shall be established in Addendum A. Whenever the sexton certifies that an acceptable and appropriate headstone has been installed to the Town's standards , the Town shall promptly refund the headstone guarantee to the person who paid the fee or next of kin. If any acceptable and appropriate permanent headstone has not been
installed within one year of the burial, then the Town may install a headstone using the headstone guarantee and no refund shall be allowed.

(10)	For conventional lots, one headstone is required. In addition to a headstone, up to four additional flat markers may be installed. A flat marker may be substituted for the headstone if desired.

(11)	For family cremation lots, one headstone is required. In addition to a headstone , up to four additional flat markers may be installed. A flat marker may be substituted for the headstone if desired .

(12)	One headstone may be used for two or more contiguous conventional lots or family cremation lots owned by the same person or entity.

(13)	For an individual cremation lot, one flat marker is required and no additional markers, other than a government marker, shall be allowed.

(14)	The owner of two or more contiguous lots as a family plot may petition the Town Manager if the number or size of headstone and flat markers desired is not allowable under these rules . Appeals of the Town Manager's decision may be made in writing to the Selectboard, whose decision shall be final.
 
5-10	Enforcement


Unless otherwise authorized in this Chapter, an issuing officers authorized to enforce this Chapter shall be any Municipal Compliance Officer.





 
QI) ===-·-- ----==-·

Chair of the Selectboard
 


I
Date of Enactment by Selectboard
•
 


Attested, Town of Manchester Town Clerk:


:Iii tf!-JJJo&
Town Clerk
 
CHAPTER VI

DOG LICENSING AND ANIMAL CONTROL




6-1	Authority to Enact Chapter

6-2	Purpose of Chapter

6-3	Definition

6-4	Licensing - requirements and fees

6-5	Licensing - prior years

6-6	Inoculation Against Rabies

6-7	Running At Large and Restraining By Leash In Commercial Districts and Parks 6-8	Noisy Animals
6-9	Clean-Up of Dog Feces

6-10	Impounding - contracting for services 6-11	Impounding of Dogs
6-12	Release of Dogs from Impoundment

6-13	Unclaimed Dogs

6-14	Interference with impoundment prohibited 6-15	Reporting of Animal Bites
6-16	Vicious Dogs

6-17	Vicious Dog Hearing

6-18	Rabid Animals

6-19	Dogs and Other Domestic Animals at Fairs, Festivals, Concerts and Other Public Events and Places
6-20	Enforcement
















1
 
6-1	Authority to Enact Chapter


This Chapter was duly adopted by the Legislative Body of the Town, the Selectboard, in accordance with 20 VS .A. §3549 et seq. and 24 V.S.A. §2291 (10).

6-2	Purpose of Chapter


This Chapter has been adopted for the purpose of protecting public health, safety and order. The regulations set forth herein seek to achieve the aforementioned objectives by promoting the responsible care and supervision of d mestic animals within the Town.

6-3	Definitions


Aggravated vicious dog shall mean any dog that maliciously attacks or otherwise bites a human or another domestic animal multiple times that results in serious injury or death.

At large shall mean off the premises of the owner, and not under the control of the owner nor under visual supervision, a member of his immediate family, or an agent of the owner, by leash, cord or chain so that at all times the dog may be prevented from causing any damage, disturbance, nuisance or annoyance. Notwithstanding, any dog accompanied by its owner or keeper on the premises of another with permission which is neither threatening to persons, livestock, domestic or wild animals, nor causing damage, disturbance, nuisance or annoyance and is in obvious control of or is obedient to the commands of its owner or keeper shall not be considered to be at large except as provided for herein.

Dog shall mean any canine breed or wolf-hybrid.


Person shall mean any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping or harboring a dog. All violations provided for in this Chapter shall be issued to the person owning, keeping or harboring a dog.

Vicious dog shall mean any dog that attacks or otherwise bites a human or domestic animal that results in an lllJUry.

6-4	Licensing- requirements and fees


(1)	It shall be unlawful for a person to keep a dog older than six months in age more than 90 days in any calendar year within the limits of the Town of Manchester, including the Village of Manchester, unless

2
 
the dog is licensed in accordance with the requirements of the Vermont Statutes as are now in effect and as may be amended .

(2)	Notwithstanding subsection 1 of this section, dogs less than six months of age shall be licensed with the Town Clerk on or before the dog is six months of age.

(3)	No dog shall be licensed by the Town Clerk unless a valid rabies certificate, signed by a licensed veterinarian, has been provided to the Town Clerk.

(4)	For licensing between January 1 and April 1 of each year, the Town Clerk shall charge the fee
I	t
established in Addendum A, plus any fees charged by the State of Vermont.


(5)	For licensing between April 2 and June 30 of each year, the Town Clerk shall charge the fee established in Addendum A, plus any fees charged by the State of Vermont.

(6)	For licensing between July 1 and December 31 of each year, the Town Clerk shall charge the fee established in Addendum A, plus any fees charged by the State of Vermont.

(7)	The person owning, keeping or harboring a dog that is licensed within 90 days of moving to the Town of Manchester or Village of Manchester or licensed before the dog is six months of age shall be afforded the licensing fee in subsection 3 of this section. After 90 days the person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall be charged the appropriate fee in subsection 4 or subsection 5.

(8)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation. Any fines issued under this section shall be in addition to licensing fees due to the Town of Manchester.

6-5    Licensing - prior years


(1)	Failure to license a dog, as required in section 4 of this Chapter and subsequent ordinances, shall not nullify or void any fees or penalties otherwise due under section 4. The Town Clerk shall, whenever there is persuasive evidence that a dog was not licensed in prior calendar years but was kept or harbored in the
Town of Manchester, shall collect dog licensing fees for the prior year. The Town Clerk shall assess the fee established in Addendum A, plus any fees charged by the State of Vermont. Anyone who disagrees with the Town Clerk's finding may appeal to the Town Manager in writing within 15 days .

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation .




3
 
6-6	Inoculation Against Rabies


(1)	All domestic pets, including but not limited to dogs and cats, shall be inoculated against rabies as required by the laws of the State of Vermont and any regulations adopted by the Vermont Commissioner of Agriculture .

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.


6-7	Running At Large and Restraining By Leash In Certain Areas


(1)	Unless otherwise provided/or in this Ordinance, no person shall permit or cause any dog to go at large within the Town of Manchester and the Village of Manchester. An owner or any person responsible
for any dog deemed to be running at large, shall be held to have permitted such dog to run at large. Any dog running at large may be impounded as provided for herein .

(2)	All dogs shall be on leashes and under the control of a responsible person whenever outside in the Town's Commercial 1, Commercial 2 and Commercial 3 zoning districts, and on any public sidewalk, right of way and public parking lot, except when on the property of its owner.

(3)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation .


6-8	Noisy Animals


(1)	No person shall keep or harbor any dog or any other domestic animal that, by frequent or long continued noise, including but not limited to barking, disturbs the comfort or repose of persons off of the property where the dog is kept.

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation.


6-9	Clean-Up of Dog Feces


(1)	Any person who owns a dog or is responsible for the keeping or control of a dog shall be responsible for immediately cleaning up and properly disposing of all dog feces when the dog is off the person's property .

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation .
 
6-10	Impounding - contracting for services


The Town Manager rnay enter into a contract or contracts with persons or firms for impoundment services and enforcement of this Chapter.

6-11	Impounding of Dogs


(1)	Any dog running at large on public land or land not owned by the dog's owner, or otherwise in violation of this Chapter, may be impounded by any person designated by the Town for the control of dogs. Not later than two days after the impounding of any dog, the owner shall be notified, or if the owner of the
 
dog is unknown, writtent notice shall be posted for at least three days in three or m-

the Town describing the dog and the place and time of taking.
 
ore conspicuous places in
 

(2)	The owner of any dog so impounded may reclaim such dog upon full payment of the appropriate license fees established in sections 4 and 5, if unpaid, medical services provided by the Town, and all kennel fees and other charges required under this Chapter.

6-12	Release of Dogs from Impoundment


(1)	Any dog impounded under this Chapter shall be held or transported to a boarding kennel wherein it shall be kept until released by the authority of the impounding officer, or an authorized agent of the impounding officer.

(2)	The owner of any dog so impounded may affect the release of the dog after providing proof that such a dog is licensed, payment of any medical services provided by the Town, fees and fines and reasonable kennel fees for boarding of dogs at the impounding kennel.

(3)	In event that the dog does not have a current vaccination  against rabies and the Town is unable to vaccinate the dog, in addition tci boarding  charges and penalties, the owner shall deposit the sum of $100 plus  a sum equal to the amount  otherwise due for licensing with the Town Clerk. If the dog is vaccinated and licensed within two business  days of initial release, the Town Clerk shall refund  $100 of the deposit previously paid  to the Town.
 
6-13	Unclaimed Dogs


(1)	Unless sooner redeemed by payment, it shall be the duty of the pound keeper or other official designated by the Town Manager to keep all dogs so impounded for a period of seven days. If, at the expiration of seven days from and including the initial date of impoundment, such dog shall not have been redeemed, it may be sold, given away or destroyed. The Town Manager shall approve the sale, giving away or destruction of any dog.

(2)	Any owner, if known, who elects not to redeem his or her dog and does not pay the boarding fees

and impoundment fees within thirty days of initial impoundment, may be assessed all such fees and charges i

in a civil action brought under this Chapter.


6-14	Interference with impoundment prohibited


(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the impounding of a dog under provision of this Chapter, or improperly release or attempt to improperly release an impounded dog contrary to this Chapter.

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree criminal violation.


6-15	Reporting of Animal Bites


(1)	Health care providers shall report a dog, cat or other animal bite to the Town Health Officer or the Town of Manchester Police Department within 24 hours, including the name, age and address with contact information of any person who has been bitten by an animal. The report shall be filed by the health care provider with as much information as possible and on the Vermont State Animal Bite Report form. The Manchester Police Department shall transmit all animal bite reports to the Town Health Officer forthwith.

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation.


6-16	Vicious Dogs


(1)	It shall be unlawful for any dog to attack or otherwise bite a human or another domestic animal that results in an injury, and such dog shall be considered a vicious dog. A violation of this subsection shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation .
 
(2) It shall be unlawful for any dog to maliciously attack or otherwise bite a human or another domestic animal multiple times that results in serious injury or death, and such dog shall be considered an aggravated vicious dog. A violation of this subsection shall be considered a First Degree civil violation.

6-17	Vicious Dog Hearing


(1)	Upon receiving a complaint that a dog is vicious, the Police Department or animal control officer shall promptly investigate the complaint and report any founded complaint to the Selectboard .
(2)	The legislative body, within seven days after receipt of a founded complaint from the Police Chief or a direct complaint from an alleged victi•m or owner of an animal allegedly attacked by the dog, s•hall

investigate the charges and hold a hearing on the matter. If the owner of the dog which is the subject of the complaint can be ascertained with due diligence, the owner shall be provided with a written notice of the time, date and place of hearing and the facts of the complaint.

(3)	Ifthe dog is found to have bitten the victim without provocation,  the Selectboard shall make such order for the protection of persons  as the facts and circumstances  of the case may require, including, without limitation, that the dog be disposed of in a humane way, muzzled, chained, or confined. The order shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. A person who, after receiving notice, fails to comply with the terms of the order shall be subject to the penalties provided in 20 VS .A. § 3550.

6-18	Rabid Animals


(1)	Any animal, including but not limited to dogs and cats, which is considered a rabies suspect shall be managed by the Town 's Health Officer in accordance with the rules of the Department of Health.

(2)	The owner of an animal suspected of having rabies that is not properly inoculated as required herein shall reimburse the Town for all costs incurred in conjunction with the impoundment, evaluation, testing, care and disposition of the animal.

6-19	Dogs and Other Domestic Animals at Fairs, Festivals, Concerts and Other Public Events and Places

(1)	The Chief of Police may prohibit dogs and other domestic animals at fairs, festivals, concerts and other public events, at his or her sole discretion, whenever the Chief of Police determines that the presence of dogs and other domestic animals may have a detrimental impact on the public safety and health of
 
attendees of the such events. The Chief of Police shall cause appropriate signage to be erected notifying people that dogs and other domestic animals are prohibited from certain public places and certain public events.

(2)	It shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation to bring a dog or other domestic animal into a public place that the Chief of Police has prohibited dogs and domestic animals from entering under subsection 1 of this Section.

6-20	Enforcement

Sworn officers'of the Manchester Police Department, Municipal Compliance Officers, Health Officer and any person appointed by the Town Manager as an Animal Control Officer are hereby designated as the
enforcement authority of this Chapter.


Notwithstanding any other provision of the Ordinance, fines under this Chapter for violations of Sections 6-6 through 6-18 shall be made in accordance with the requirements of 20 VS.A.§ 3550.








 


Chair of the Selectboard




Attested, Town of Manchester Town Clerk:

a,_ t ,'(jb
Town Clerk
 
I
Date of Enactment by Selectboard
 















8
 
CHAPTER VII REGULATION OF ALCOHOL


 
7-1

7-2

7-3

7-4

7-5

7-6

7-7

7-8

7-9
 
Authority to Enact Chapter Purpose of Chapter Definitions
Open Container - Prohibitions Alcohol at Town Parks
Outdoor Consumption Licenses

Permission to Sell Alcoholic Beverages at Town Parks and Town Rights of Way Catering Permits  and Special Events Permits
Enforcement
 
7-1	Authority to Enact Chapter


This Chapter was duly adopted by the Legislative Body of the Town, the Selectboard, in accordance with 24 VS.A. §2291 (17) and (18).

7-2	Purpose of Chapter


This Chapter has been adopted for the purpose of protecting public safety and preserving public order through the adoption of regulations that restrict the public consumption of alcoholic beverages.

7-3	Definitions


Alcoholic beverage shall mean any beverage that contains alcohol such as malt, vinous or spirituous liquors as defined by Vermont state law.

Open container shall mean any container that contains an alcoholic beverage that is not otherwise permanently sealed or bottles of vinous beverages resealed by a restaurant pursuant to Department of Liquor Control regulations.

7-4	Open Container - Prohibitions


(1)	Except as provided for specifically in the Ordinances, it shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage upon any publicly owned roadway, sidewalk, parking lot, Town park, except as provided for in section 5 of this Chapter, or in or upon any motor vehicle while moving or stationary in any of said places.

(2)	Possession of an open container of any alcoholic beverage in any public place, including motor vehicles, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation hereof.

(3)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.


7-5	Alcohol at Town Parks


(1)	The consumption of alcohol shall not be permitted at Adams Park, except for sampling of alcoholic beverages as permitted by the Department of Liquor Control.
 
(2)	The consumption of alcohol shall not be permitted at the Factory Point Town Green, unless approved by the Chief of Police through a special permit.

(3)	To the extent allowed by applicable state law, alcohol may be consumed at the Dana L. Thompson Memorial Park between the hours of 12:00 noon and 9:00 P.M.; provided, that no container of alcohol may exceed 2 liters in volume, no liquor or beverages with an alcohol content greater than 16% shall be permitted under any circumstances at the Dana L. Thompson Memorial Park and possession shall be limited to not more than thirty-six ounces of malt beverages or other beverages with an alcohol content of
less than 10% per person twenty-one years of age or older, or 375 milliliters of vinous beverages per person twenty-one years of age or older. The Police Department may disband any gathering of people that is, in its sole opinion, unruly or is otherwise disturbing the peace due to the presence of alcohol. The Chief of Police may, at his or her sole discretion, further restrict or prohibit the consumption of alcohol at the Dana L. Thompson Memorial Park.

(4)	The Chief of Police may, at his or her sole discretion, approve a special permit for the sale or consumption of alcohol in the Activity Room and lobby of the Park House at the Dana L. Thompson Memorial Park, provided that: (1) alcohol may be served only by a business licensed by the State of Vermont; (2) no alcoholic beverages greater than 16% alcohol may be served under any circumstances; (3) the licensed business provides the Parks and Recreation Director a valid certificate of insurance (that includes coverage for the serving of alcohol) for not less than $1,000,000 that names the Town specifically as an additional insured; (4) the business that is serving alcohol agrees, and signs an agreement, to hold harmless the Town of Manchester from any claims that may arise from the serving or consumption of alcohol; (5) alcohol may be served only between the hours of 12:00 noon until 10:00 P.M; and (5) the licensed business serving alcohol agrees to adhere to all state and local laws and regulations relating the serving and consumption of alcohol. The Town may require, at its sole discretion, insurance coverage greater than $1,000,000. The sampling of alcoholic beverages as permitted by the Department of Liquor Control may be allowed inside the Park House.

(5)	It shall be unlawful to have an open container or consume alcohol at the Dana L. Thompson Memorial Park within 100 feet of any organized game or practice of a youth organization, middle school (including but not limited to Manchester Elementary Middle School) or high school (including but not limited to Burr and Burton Academy).
 
(6)	Consumption of alcohol at the basketball courts, tennis courts and skateboard park is prohibited.


(7)	A violation of this section shall be punishable as a Second Degree civil violation.


7-6	Outdoor Consumption Licenses


(1)	Any outdoor alcohol consumption permit issued by the Selectboard to a licensed establishment shall be subject to the following conditions: the license holder shall ensure that such outside consumption of alcoholic beverages does not result in unreasonable noise, so that the comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity is disturbed and patrons shall not be seated outdoors after 11:00 P.M.

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.


7-7	Permission to Sell Alcoholic Beverages at Town Parks and Town Rights of Way


The Chief of Police may allow, through a special permit, sale and consumption of alcohol by a licensed and insured person on the Factory Point Town Green, Dana L. Thompson Memorial Park, on Town roadways and sidewalks that are closed to traffic for Town sponsored events; provided that: (1) alcohol may only be served by a business licensed by the State of Vermont; (2) no alcoholic beverages greater than 16% alcohol may be served under any circumstances; (3) the licensed business provides the Chief of Police with a valid certificate of insurance (that includes coverage for the serving of alcohol) for not less than $1,000,000 that names the Town specifically as an additional insured; (4) the business that is serving alcohol agrees, and signs an agreement, to hold harmless the Town of Manchester from any claims that may arise from the serving or consumption of alcohol; (5) alcohol may only be served between 12:00 noon until 9:00 P.M.; provided, the Chief of Police may further restrict the hours of consumption; and (5) the licensed business serving alcohol agrees to adhere to all state and local laws and regulations relative to the serving and consumption of alcohol. The Town may require, at its sole discretion, insurance coverage greater than
$1,000,000.


(2)	Nothing in this section shall subvert or otherwise replace permits required by the State of Vermont and the Town of Manchester for the sale of alcoholic beverages.

(3)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.
 
7-8	Catering Permits and Special Event Permits


The Town Clerk may approve catering permits and special events permits to business and individuals otherwise licensed by the State of Vermont to sell alcoholic beverages. The Town Clerk shall notify the Police Department upon the approval of any catering permit and special events permit.

7-9	Enforcement


Sworn Police Officers of the Town of Manchester Police Department are hereby designated as the enforcement authority of this Chapter.










I	I

Chair of the Selectboard	Date of Enactment by Selectboard




Attested, Town of Manchester Town Clerk:


Q,uik  if-'--.2Jdct,"_,c,vc_

Town Clerk






NOTE: Amended July 31, 2019 to add Sections 7-5 (6) and (7)
 
CHAPTER VIII COMMERCE


 
8-1

8-2

8-3

8-4

8-5

8-6

8-7

8-8

8-9
 
Authority to Enact Chapter Purpose of Chapter Definitions
Game Table and Video Game Machine Restrictions Sale of Marijuana - prohibition
Mining and Milling of Fissionable Source Materials Businesses Selling Firearms
Sale of Drug Paraphernalia Near Schools Enforcement
 
8-1	Authority to Enact Chapter


This Chapter was duly adopted by the Legislative Body of the Town, the Selectboard, in accordance with 24 V.S.A. 2291 (11), (14)

8-2	Purpose of Chapter


This Chapter has been adopted for the purpose of protecting public health, safety and welfare, preserving public order, regulating entertainments, and abating public nuisances.

8-3	Definitions


Fissionable source material shall mean uranium or thorium, or any combination thereof, in any physical or chemical form; or ores that contain by weight one-hundredth of one percent (0.01%) or more of uranium, thorium or any combination thereof.

Game table shall mean any billiards table, shuffleboard table, bumper pool table, foosball table, air hockey

table, or other similar equipment.


Drug paraphernalia  shall mean any device designed primarily for use of individuals for the smoking or ingestion of marijuana, hashish, hashish oil, cocaine or any other illegal controlled substances.

Video game machine shall mean any computerized device that accepts or requires tokens, coins, currency, debit cards, credit cards, vouchers or credits purchased with money or otherwise requires a fee to operate.

8-4	Game Table and Video Game Machine Restrictions


(1)	Commercial properties in the Town of Manchester shall be limited to having not more than two game tables and not more than four video game machines.

(2)	Notwithstanding subsection 1 of this section, the Selectboard, by majority vote, may approve more than two game tables and more than four video game machines for a commercial property at a warned public meeting .

(3)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.
 
8-5	Sale of Marijuana - prohibition


(1)	It shall be illegal to sell or distribute marijuana in the Town of Manchester.


(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a First Degree civil violation.


8-6	Mining and Milling of Fissionable Source Materials


(1)	The mining and milling of uranium or any fissionable source materials shall be prohibited in the Town of Manchester.

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a First Degree civil violation.


8-7	Businesses Selling Firearms


(1)	Any business that is permitted after the enactment date of this Chapter that sells, buys or trades firearms and holds a valid federal firearms license shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a property line
of an existing public or private elementary school, middle school, high school, vocational school or daycare center.

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a First Degree civil violation.


8-8	Sale of Drug Paraphernalia Near Schools


(1)  Any business that is permitted after the enactment date of this Chapter that sells drug paraphernalia shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a property line of an existing public or private elementary school, middle school, high school, vocational school or daycare center.

(2)       A violation of this section shall be considered a First Degree civil violation.


8-9	Enforcement


Sworn officers of the Manchester Police Department are hereby designated as the enforcement authority for this Chapter; provided, that Section 6, shall be enforced by the Municipal Compliance Officer.
 

({-/ -2o/

Chair of the Selectboard	Date of Enactment by Selectboard




Attested, Town of Manchester Town Clerk:



 

Town Clerk
 
CHAPTER IX

VENDING, PEDDLERS AND DOOR-TO-DOOR SALES



9-1	Authority to Enact Chapter

9-2	Purpose of Chapter

9-3	Definitions

9-4	General Vendor Requirements and Conditions 9-5	Vending Licenses - general
9-6	Class I Vending Licenses (up to 100 square feet)

9-7	Class II Vending Licenses (up to 200 square feet) 9-8	Class III Vending Licenses - Farmers' Markets
9-9	Class IV Vending Licenses - Weekend Events

9-10	Class V Vending Licenses -Temporary Vendors 9-11	Exceptions and Exemptions
9-12	Penalties

9-13	Enforcement
 
 
 
9-1	Authority to Enact Chapter


This Chapter has been promulgated under the authority granted to the Legislative Body of the Town of Manchester by 24 VS.A. § 2291(9).

9-2	Purpose of Chapter


The purpose of this Chapter is to allow for and regulate vending while promoting public safety, health, order and convenience upon highways, driveways, sidewalks, parking areas and other places that may be frequented by the public.

9-3	Definitions


The following definitions shall apply to this Chapter:


Door-to-door sale of goods and services is defined as the act of soliciting, selling or promoting goods, merchandise or services at private residences when the owner or the occupant of the private residence has not expressly requested such goods or services.

Merchandise shall mean goods, commodities, food products or any other item that can be sold on a retail or wholesale basis to the general public .

Vendor shall mean any person, organization or entity that sells merchandise at a non-permanent location, or that is not located within a legally existing structure in the Town of Manchester. This Chapter shall not apply to vendors who. are exclusively selling fruits, vegetables or farm produce.

9-4	General Vendor Requirements and Conditions


The following requirements and conditions shall apply to all Class I, II, III, IV and V licenses:


(1)	It shall be unlawful for any vendor to sell merchandise without a license . A violation of this subsection shall be considered a First Degree civil violation.

(2)	Vendors shall adhere to all provisions of this Chapter. The Selectboard may impose additional restrictions and conditions upon licenses .

(3)	Failure to comply with the requirements of this Chapter may result in fines, as provided for herein, or revocation of current licenses or denial of future licenses by the Selectboard.
 
(4)	The Town Manager may suspend, for not more than 30 days, a license for failure to comply with the requirements or conditions of this Chapter. Vendors may appeal this decision in writing to the Selectboard.

(5)	At its sole discretion the Selectboard may require a cash bond, not to exceed $1,000, to ensure compliance with this Chapter. The bond, plus interest and minus any fines, shall be returned to the vendor when the license has expired, is surrendered, is not renewed or has been revoked by the Selectboard provided there has been full compliance with the tenns of this Chapter.

(6)	Vendors shall not conduct business within the public right-of-way unless specifically authorized by the Selectboard, or during events sponsored by the ifown of Manchester and approved by the Town Manager.

(7)	Vendors shall obtain written permission from the landowner of any property on which vending is to occur. Written permission shall be submitted with the license application each year. The Zoning Administrator shall provide c01mnents to the Selectboard regarding any conflict with land use permits and the Selectboard may consider such comments during the licensing process at a public meeting.

(8)	All vending equipment, trailers and related items shall be removed from the vending location and Town's Commercial 1, 2 and 3 districts each night or at the end of each business day. Vending equipment may be stored in the commercial districts in a structure or building so that the equipment is not visible to the public.

(9)	Signage, including menus, for vendors may not exceed a total of eight (8) square feet per vendor.

Signage shall be defined as any wording or image related to the vending operation that is either

free-standing or affixed to the outside of a vehicle, trailer or cart.  Neon, lighted signs and flags, other than the American flag and the flag of states and nations, are not pennitted . All signage shall be on the parcel where vending is to occur but not on sidewalks, walkways or the Town right of way.  The location, size and design of any signage outside of a vehicle, trailer or cart and not affixed to a vehicle, trailer or cart must be approved by the Selectboard.

(10)	Vending employee vehicles shall be parked in areas that are not generally used by customers or the general public .

(11)	Vendors agree to hold the Town harmless from any claims that may arise as a result of vending operations, including traffic accidents. Vendors shall submit with their application a current and valid
 
certificate of insurance, naming the Town of Manchester as an additionally insured, for $500,000 per incident and $1,000,000 overall coverage, shall maintain such coverage during the term of the license, and shall promptly furnish proof of such coverage at the request of the Town at any time during the term of the license.

(12)	Vendors may operate only between the hours of 7:00 AM and 9:00 P.M. The Town Manager may, from time to time, modify this condition for special purposes or events.

(13)	Vendors may not dump or otherwise dispose of grey-water or any wastewater on-site. Vendors may not dispose of grey-water in Town- or privately-owned catch basins or sewer basins.

(14)	Vendors agree that it shall be the sole responsibility of the vendor to comply with all State licensing requirements including, but not limited to, health licenses, business licenses and tax licenses.

(15)	Vendors agree to timely collect and remit all applicable taxes and fees, including local option sales tax and meals tax .

(16)	Vendors shall not use exterior lights.


(17)	Vendors shall not operate within ten (10) feet of any and all adjacent property boundary lines without the prior written consent of the adjacent property owner and the approval of the Selectboard. Written permission must be submitted with all applications.

(18)	Vendors shall maintain the site of vending in a clean and neat state and shall be responsible for the appropriate disposal of all rubbish generated by their business or by patrons thereof.

(19)	Licenses issued under this Chapter shall be restricted to a specific location or physical address, as indicated in the license, and shall not be transferred or assigned to any other entity.  Licenses issued under this Chapter may be amended with approval of the Selectboard, to move locations, with no additional fee.

(20)	Licenses shall riot be granted for more than twelve months; nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as creating a contract or obligation on the part of the Town of Manchester to grant or renew future licenses.

(21)	Vendors shall submit a copy of a State of Vennont "Meals and Rooms Tax License" or "Sales Tax License" with any license application.



4
 
(22)	It shall be unlawful to sell goods and services door-to-door, as defined in section 3 of this Chapter, in the Town of Manchester; provided, that not-for-profit organizations recognized by the Internal Revenue Service or the State ofVennont, religious organizations recognized by the Internal Revenue Service,
not-for-profit educational institutions and political causes, parties or candidates or speech that is protected by the free speech provisions of the Constitution are exempt from the requirements of this Chapter. A violation of this subsection shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation .
(23)	It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to solicit funds or sell good or services on public rights of way, roadways, sidewalks, and parking lots in the Town of Manchester unless approved by the
f	H
Town Manager, in writing and at his or her sole discretion. A violation of this subsection shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.

(24)	Applicants for a vending license shall make application on a form provided by the Town Manager. The Town Manager shall present all complete applications to the Selectboard for its approval or disapproval, except as provided herein.  To ensure timely approval, all applications should be submitted at least one month before the requested license would become effective.  The application shall include, but is not limited to, a description and photograph of the proposed equipment to be used, the name, address, telephone number and electronic mail address of the applicant and a detailed map of the area that will be used to vend and the location of any freestanding signage . The Town Manager, Police Chief, Planning Director, Design Advisory Board or Planning Commission may make recommendations to the Selectboard.
Vendors shall seek and obtain the Selectboard's approval each time the vendor relocates to another parcel or proposes to use new equipment, trailer or cart.

9-5	Vending Licenses - general


(1)	There shall be five separate classes of vending licenses, as established in sections 9-6, 9-7, 9-8, 9-9 and 9-10 of this Chapter.

(2)	Licenses authorized in 9-6, 9-7, 9-8 and 9-9 of this Chapter shall be approved or disapproved by the Selectboard, through a vote of the majority of Selectboard members present and voting. Licenses
authorized in Chapter 9- 10 of this Chapter shall be approved or disapproved by the Town Manager.


(3)	The Selectboard may not issue more than a total of six Class I and Class II vendor licenses at any given time; provided, that applications submitted by year round vendors licensed by the Town in the


5
 
previous year with full payment before December 1 and in good standing shall be given preference by the Selectboard.

9-6	Class I Vending Licenses (up to 100 square feet)


(1)	A Class I License is defined as a sole proprietor, partnership, corporation, other for-profit entity or not-for-profit entity that operates a vending operation with a total footprint, including a vehicle used to store supplies, that is within fifty feet of the vending operation, of between one and one hundred square
feet.  Each license allows a vendor to operate a single vending operation . Vendors shall make an application on a form provided by the Town Manager.

(2)	The fees for Class I licenses shall be established in Addendum A; provided, a different fee shall be established in Addendum A for vendors that operate between May 1 and October 31.

(3)	Class I vendors shall vend only on commercially zoned parcels on Main Street between the intersection of Equinox Terrace Road and the intersection of Memorial Avenue; and on Depot Street, between the intersection of Main Street and the intersection of East Branch Farm Road; and at the Dana L. Thompson Memorial Park upon the written approval of the Town Manager.

(4)	Class I vendors shall not use more than two (2) employees per location at any given time.


(5)	Vending vehicles and trailers shall be reviewed by the Design Advisory Board, who shall provide comments to the Selectboard . The Selectboard shall approve or disapprove vending vehicles and trailers.

(6)	Class I vendors may use one single pole umbrella not to exceed 10 feet in diameter.  Vendors may not use tents, canopies, awnings, or other multiple pole apparatus. Vendors may not use chairs or tables that are to be used by the public .

(7)	Under no circumstances shall a Class I vendor footprint exceed 100 square feet.


(8)	Class I vendors may sell only food and/or beverages.  All other merchandise is prohibited.


(9)	Vendors shall post a copy of the vending license in a conspicuous place for public examination at all times while in operation .

(10)	Gasoline and diesel powered generators shall not be permitted.
 
9-7	Class II Vending Licenses  (up to 200 square feet)


{l)	A Class II License is defined as a sole proprietor, partnership, corporation, other for-profit entity or not-for-profit entity that operates a vending operation with a total footprint, including a vehicle used to  store supplies, that is within fifty feet of the vending operation, of between one hundred and one and two hundred square feet.  The Selectboard may limit the number of Class II vending licenses . Each license allows a vendor to operate a single vending operation. Vendors shall apply on a form provided by the Town Manager.

(2)	The fees for Class II licenses shall be established in Addendum A.


(3)	All Class II licenses shall run from January 1 to December 31 of any year.


(4)	Class II vendors shall vend only on commercially zoned parcels on Main Street between the intersection of Equinox Terrace Road and the intersection of Memorial Avenue; and on Depot Street, between the intersection of Main Street and the intersection of East Branch Farm Road; and at the Dana L. Thompson Memorial Park upon the written approval of the Town Manager.

(5)	Class II vendors shall not use more than three (3) employees per location at any given time.


(6)	Vending vehicles and trailers shall be reviewed by the Design Advisory Board, who shall provide comments to the Selectboard. The Selectboard shall approve or disapprove vending vehicles and trailers .

(7)	Class II vendors may use up to two single-pole umbrellas not to exceed ten feet each in diameter. Vendors may not use tents, canopies, awnings, or other multiple-pole apparatus. Vendors may not use chairs or tables that are to be used by the public.

(8)	Under no circumstances shall a Class II vendor footprint exceed 200 square feet.


(9)	Class II vendors may sell only food and/or beverages. All other merchandise is prohibited .


{l0)	Vendors shall post a copy of the vending license in a conspicuous place for public examination at all times while in operation.

(11)	Gasoline and diesel powered generators shall not be pennitted.
 
9-8	Class III Vending Licenses - Farmers' Markets


(1)	The Selectboard may, at its sole discretion, issue a license to an incorporated or organized fanners' market association.

(2)	The fees for Class III licenses shall be established in Addendum A.


(3)	A vendor may sell only foods grown by the vendor or merchandise produced by the vendor; vendors may not resell merchandise.

(4)	Each vendor may not exceed .a. footprint of 200 square feet.


(5)	Licenses granted under this section shall run January 1 to December 31 of any given year


9-9	Class IV Vending Licenses - Weekend Events


(1)	The Selectboard may, at its sole discretion, grant a Class IV license to a sole proprietor, partnership, corporation, other for-profit entity or not-for-profit entity for an event not to exceed four consecutive days; provided, however, that the Selectboard may grant only two licenses per calendar year to an entity.

(2)	In addition to food and beverages, notwithstanding any other clause to the contrary, Class IV vendors may vend merchandise that includes arts and crafts, antiques, collectibles, and other such merchandise.

(3)	Notwithstanding any fees established in Addendum A, no fee charged under this section shall be less than $400 or greater than $1,000.

9-10	Class V Vending Licenses -Temporary Vendors


(1)	The Town Manager may grant a temporary license to a vendor, defined as a sole proprietor, partnership, corporation, other for-profit entity or not-for-profit entity that operates a vending operation  with a total footprint, including a vehicle used to store supplies, that is within fifty feet of the vending operation, of between one and two hundred square feet; provided, that a vendor approved under this section
may vend for not more than three consecutive days or more than seven days in any given calendar year. Licenses shall be issued for specific days. Each license allows a vendor to operate a single vending operation. Vendors shall make an application on a form provided by the Town Manager.
 
(2)	The fees for Class V licenses shall be established in Addendum A of this Code.


(3)	Class V vendors shall vend only on commercially zoned parcels on Main Street between the intersection of Equinox Terrace Road and the intersection of Memorial Avenue; and on Depot Street, between the intersection of Main Street and the intersection of East Branch Farm Road; and at the Dana L. Thompson Memorial Park upon the approval of the Town Manager .

(4)	Class V vendors may sell only food and/or beverages . All other merchandise is prohibited. Class V vendors may use one single pole umbrella not to exceed 10 feet in diameter.  Vendors may not use tents, canopies, awnings, or other multiple pole apparatus. Class V vendors may not use chairs or tables that are to be used by the public . Gasoline and diesel powered generators shall not be permitted .

(5)	Notwithstanding subsection 4 of this section, vendors at the Dana L. Thompson Memorial Park may vend food and beverages; and clothing, sports equipment, and merchandise whenever it is related to a particular event or tournament. Class V vendors at the Dana L. Thompson Memorial Park may use tents
and awnings , provided that the footprint of the vending operation shall not exceed a total of 200 square feet.

(6)	Vendors shall post a copy of the vending license in a conspicuous place for public examination at all times while in operation.

9-11	Exceptions and Exemptions


(1)	The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to events administered by the Town of Manchester or the Manchester School District.

(2)	This Chapter shall not be construed to govern garage sales, tag sales, lawn sales or lemonade stands and other similar temporary, casual occurrences that are operated by town residents on parcels zoned residential and with annual revenues less than $500.

9-12	Penalties


(1)	Except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter, any violation of this Chapter shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.
 
(2)	Failure to pay fines, unless otherwise appealed, within fourteen days shall result in the revocation of the vendor's license.

(3)	Whenever possible, fines shall be issued to the licensed vendor and not an employee of the vendor. 9-13	Enforcement
Sworn police officers of the Manchester Police Department and any Municipal Compliance Officer are hereby designated as the enforcement authority for this Chapter. The Town may make periodic site visits to licensed vendors to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.






 
  OcS-----....;:,

Chair of the Selectboard




Attested, Town of Manchester Town Clerk:
a:utzc-J1 j)u_Q
Town Clerk
 



I	I
Date of Enactment by Selectboard
 


























10
 
 
 
CHAPTER IO REGULATION OF SEWER USE


 
10-1
10-2
10-3
10-4
10-5
10-6
10-7
10-8
10-9
10-10
10-11
10-12
10-13



10-1
 
General  Information Definitions
Application Procedure Construction
Rate and Fee Schedule
Billing and Collection Sewer Use
Powers and Authority of Department Personnel
Miscellaneous Provisions Civil Designation Penalties
Enforcement Savings Clause



General Information
 

The provisions set forth herein shall serve as the legal basis for the operation, administration, and all decision-making pertaining to the delivery of sewer service to the inhabitants of the Town of Manchester, Vermont.

This Ordinance has been adopted under the authority granted the Town's Legislative Body by 24 V.S.A.§3617.

The Manchester Sewer Department is governed by a five member Board of Sewer Commissioners (the Manchester Selectboard) who serve in a regulatory and policy making capacity. Administration, operations, and policy implementation for the Department is carried out through the auspices of the Town Manager, the Water and Sewer Superintendent and Sewer Department Staff.

Information may be obtained as follows:

a.	Permits and Procedures -Town Manager (362-1313)

b.	Billing and Accounts Payable - Utility Clerk (362-1197)

c.	Operations and Technical Assistance - Water and Sewer Superintendent(362-3339)

d.	Emergency Situations - Dispatch Office (362-2022)









-33-
 
10-2	Definitions

a.	Applicant - A property owner or contract purchaser seeking new or additional sewer service through the application procedure outlined in Section 10-3.

b.	Board  of  Sewer  Commissioners  -The  five  member  Selectboard  which  oversee  the Manchester Sewer Department.   Hereafter referred to as the Board.

c.	Customer -  The owner or owners of a premises served by the Department.

d.	Department -The Manchester Sewer Department

e.	Extension of Use - Any modification to a residential, commercial, or industrial unit served by the sewer system which would result in additional sewage generation. Sewage generation quantities shall be derived from the rules and regulations promulgated by the State of Vermont, Department of Water Resources and Environmental Engineering.

f.	Industrial Wastes -The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from domestic sanitary sewage.

g.	Main - A sewer pipe utilized to transmit sewage from service lines to the treatment plant.
Sewer mains shall not include sewer service lines.

h.	Service Line -The exterior pipe that runs between the sewer main and the customer's building.

i.	Sewage - Water-carried wastes discharged into the sewer system.

j.	Sewage Treatment Plant -Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.

k.	Sewer System - All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.
Existing and future portions of said system may not be owned or maintained by the Department.



10-3	Application Procedure

(a)	Application Format - Application for sewer service shall be made on forms approved by the Board and must contain all information necessary for timely decision-making.

Sewer  service  shall  not  be  granted  to  any  person  who  does  not  fully  comply  with  the application procedures specified herein.

(b)	Allocation Request - Because the sewer system has a limited capacity, an allocation must be issued by the Department to all applicants seeking an Extension of Use or connection to the municipal sewer system.  Said allocation shall be issued in conformance with the Sewer Allocation Policy outlined in Section 10-3(c).

-34-
 
Information to be supplied in association with the Allocation Request shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

1.	Conceptual plan noting buildings to be served
2.	Proposed size of lines and a general utility layout
3.	Estimated sewer demand

(c)	Allocation  Policy  - Allocation  of  sewer capacity  shall be limited  to  all  applicants  in
quantities set forth as follows:

1.	Maximum Annual Allocation per Category:
Residential	20,000	GPD (gallons per day)
Commercial	-	14,000	GPD
Other	6,000	GPD

2.	Maximum Annual Allocation per Project:
Residential	3,000	GPD
Commercial	-	2,100	GPD
Other	900	GPD

Allocations may be granted in annual installments to an applicant for not more than a five year period; provided, however, such an installment may not exceed the Maximum Annual Allocation per project as noted above. For the purposes of this policy statement, "annual" shall be measured from January 1until December 31.

For any sewer allocation commitment granted, the Board may require that said commitment expire within a specified period of time if it has not been utilized. An allocation commitment shall be considered utilized at the time in which a fully completed Final Application has been submitted to the Town of Manchester.

Sewer allocations granted under this policy shall be specific in nature (time limits,  site, capacity levels). Nor shall this policy be interpreted to imply that a successful applicant has any inherent right to reserve or be granted any future sewer allocation above and beyond that specifically voted by the Board of Sewer Commissioners.

(d)	Final Application - A Final Application shall be prepared and submitted to the Town Manager's office subsequent to a Capacity Allocation being granted under Section 10-3(c). The Final Application shall be accompanied by design plans and the requisite fee as set forth in Section 10-S(c).

(e)	Application Processing - Capacity allocation requests and Final Applications which involve one single family residence or an Extension of Use request shall be processed and approved by the Town Manager. All other allocation requests  and/or  applications  shall require Board  action.

(f) Refund Policy - Applicants who withdraw their application prior to a decision being rendered by the Board on a Final Application shall be refunded 75% of the connection fee.

If the Board denies a Final Application, or if a capacity commitment expires, no refund shall be granted.





/	-35-
 
10-4	Construction



(a)	Construction Standards - All construction performed in association with the municipal sewer  system  shall conform  to  the  Department's  "Standard  Specifications  for  Sewer"  and comply with all special conditions stipulated by the Board.



(b)	Construction Agreement - For sewer main extensions, the Board may require that an applicant enter into a written Construction Agreement with the Department prior to any construction being performed.



(c)	Inspection Services - During construction of sewer main, a resident inspector may be appointed by the Board to oversee all construction activities. All costs incurred as a result of such inspection service shall be borne by the Applicant.

It shall be the responsibility of the resident inspector, or the applicant's engineer, to insure that all facilities are installed in accordance with the plans, specifications and special conditions, as approved by the Board.



(d)	Initiation of Sewer Service - The Board shall initiate sewer service to a new sewer main only after the Board has been provided the following:

1.	Written certification by the resident inspector or the applicant's engineer that all construction was conducted in accordance with the approved plans, specifications and special conditions.

2.	All deeds and right-of-way instruments; only if the Town is to assume ownership.

3.	"As-built" plans prepared by a registered surveyor or engineer on reproducible Mylar in a form acceptable to the Town's engineer.

4.	Certification that all newly constructed sewer main has passed all State and/or Departmental testing requirements.



(e)	Service lines - The cost of installing and maintaining a service line shall be borne solely by the customer.

Installation of said lines shall not take place between November 12 and April 1, except in case of an emergency.



(t) Conformance With Other Regulations - Applicants should be aware that securing permission to initiate sewer service does not remove the responsibility of obtaining other permits; such as public building permits, zoning permits, street opening permits, etc.
 
10-5	Rate and Fee Schedule

(a-1) Usage Charge - Each customer shall be required  to pay a quarterly usage charge at a rate of $0.0035*per  gallon  of metered  water  use.     A minimum  quarterly  usage charge of
$20.00** shall be required  of all customers.     Customers who do not have municipal water
service, and thus, are not metered shall be assessed a sewer usage fee based upon  an estimated quarterly water usage of 19,160 gallons.*** Revenue derived from the Usage Charges   shall   be   utilized   for   the   operation   and   maintenance   of   the   sewer   system.

(a-2) Commercial Car Washes - A flat quarterly usage change of $2,200 per wash bay shall be assessed for those establishments that use a water source not metered by a properly installed (Town Technician approved) water meter.****

(a-3) Hose Bib Connections - A properly installed (Town Technician approved) hose bib account, metering water primarily for outdoor use (gardens, pools, etc) that does not enter the Sewer System for wastewater treatment, is not subject to Sewer Usage Charge.*****

(b)	Assessment Fees - A quarterly payment of an assessment fee shall be required of any person who owns a building within 200 feet of a public sewer main. Said fee is hereby established at a rate of $.002497****** per $100 of the affected property's most recently assessed value. Revenue collected from said assessment fee shall be ear-marked to retire any debt incurred  by the Department.

(c)	Connection Fees - Fees for connection and Extension of Use permits shall be assessed at a rate of $11.68 per the estimated number of gallons per day (GPD) of sewage generation.******* Said GPD estimate shall be derived from Table M-1 " Estimated Design Flow Based on Type of Establishment, Town of Manchester Vermont" and dated August 6, 2004. Table M-1 is a modification of the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Rules Chapter One, Wastewater System and Potable Water Supply Rules effective August 16, 2002.

All connection fees collected shall be transferred to a special "Sewer Capital Improvement" fund to be established by the Town Treasurer. Expenditures from said fund shall only be utilized for costs associated with capital improvements to the sewer system.












 
*	4/5/05
**	4/5/05
***	4/5/05

****	4/5/05
*****	4/5/05
******	4/24/01
*******	04/5/05
 
Usage Charge was changed from $0.0023 per gallon to .00035 per gallon. Minimum quarterly usage charge was changed from $10 to $20.00.
Customers lacking metered water service quarterly charge changed from 11,220 gallons to
19,160 gallons
Commercial Car wash section added. Hose Bib Connections section added.
Assessment fee reduced from $.004305 to $.002497 Connection fees were increased from $6.13 to $11.68 GPD
 
Table Ml
ESTIMATED DESIGN FLOW BASED ON TYPE OF ESTABLISHMENT
TOWN OF MANCHESTER, VERMONT
August 6, 2004

ESTABLISHMENTS	GALLONS PER PERSON PER
DAY (unless otherwise noted)
Assembly Areas, Conference Room	3.5
Airports (per passenger)	3.5
Bathhouses and Swimming Pools	3.5
Bowling Alley (no food service)(per lane)	52.5
Cafeterias (per seat)	35
Camps:	Construction camps (semi-permanent)	35
Day camps (no meals served)	10.5
Resort Camps (Night & Day) with limited plumbing	35
Churches:	Sanctuary seating x 25%	3.5
Church suppers	5.6
Country Clubs (per resident member)	70
Country Clubs (oer non-resident member present)	17.5
Day Care Centers:	
Without meals:	10.5
With one meal:	14
With two meals:	17.5
Dentists:	
Per Staff Member	24.5
Per Chair	140
Doctor's Office:	
Staff Member	24.5
Patient	7
Room Rentals:	
Boarding Houses	35
Addition for non-resident boarders	7
Roomin1! Houses (per occupant bed space)	28
Factories faallons per person, per shift, exclusive of industrial waste)	10.5
Gyms:	
Per Participant	7
Spectator	2.1
Hairdressers:	
Operator	7
Per Chair	105
Hospitals (per bed space)	175
Hotels with Private Baths(per person sleeping space) c	35
Institutions other than hospitals (per bed)	87.5
Laundries, self service (gallons per machine)	350
Mobile Home Parks:	
For wastewater systems serving 4 or fewer trailers (per space)	315
For wastewater systems serving 5 or more trailers (per space)	175
Motels with bath, toilet (per person sleeping space)c	35
Picnic Parks (toilet wastes only/picnicker)	3.5
 

Restaurants:	
For toilet and kitchen wastes per seat
(including restaurant and bar seats)	21
Additional per seat for restaurant serving 3 meals per day	10.5
Restaurants (fast food -per seat)	35
Schools:	
Boarding	70
Day, without evms, cafeterias, or showers	10.5
Day, with evms, cafeterias, and showers	17.5
Day, with cafeteria, but without evms or showers	14
Service Stations (first set of gas pumps)	350
(each set thereafter)	210
Sewer Line Infiltration (where applicable)	300 gal/in pipe/dia/mile/day	See Note 1
Shopping Centers/Stores: c	
Large Dry Goods (per 100 square feet)	3.5
Large Supermarkets with meat department
without garbage grinder (per 100 square feet)	5.25
Large Supermarkets with meat department
with garbage grinder (per 100 square feet)	7.7
Small Dry Good Stores in shopping centers (per store)	70
Theaters:	
Movie <oer auditorium seat)	3.5
Drive-in (per car space)	3.5
Veterinary Clinic (3 or less doctors):	
without animal boarding (per clinic)	525
with animal boarding {per clinic)	1,050
Workers:	
Construction (at semi-permanent camps)	35
Day at schools and offices (per shift)	10.5

Notes:
1.	These values are based on the Table 1of the Environmental Protection Rules (Chapter 1Wastewater System and Potable Water Supply Rules) with the following exceptions:
a.	Design Flow from Residential Units (part a, and part b} has been omitted.
b.	Estimates for seasonal use at campgrounds, RV Sites, and Cabins have been omitted.
c.	Estimated water usage for the other establishments shown above already include the 80% reduction due to municipal connection and a 10% reduction for low flow fixtures.
2.	Single family residential units (3 bedrooms or less) connected to a wastewater disposal
system with a design capacity of at least 50,000 gallons per day may use a design flow of 210 gallons per unit per day. For single family residential units for 4 or more
bedrooms use a design flow of 210 gallons per unit per day plus 70 gallons per
bedroom for 4 or more bedrooms. Reductions due to connection to a municipal system and or low flow fixtures are not applicable.
3.	Where noted the estimated usage does not include laundry or restaurant waste.
 
10-6	Sewer Billing and Collection

(a)	Billing Schedule - Sewer bills shall be issued by the Department  on a quarterly basis. Customers shall pay said bills within thirty (30) days of date of issue.

(b)	Billing Procedure - Sewer bills shall be issued to the owner of the property receiving service from the Department.  The property owner shall be responsible for the payment of all sewer bills and interest charges incurred in association with all past and present sewer/ service to the property in question.

A change in ownership of a property does not relieve the new property owner of any delinquent charges or fees incurred by previous owners.

(c)	Billing Penalties  and Interest Charges - Sewer bills which  are not paid  within  thirty
(30)	days of date of issue shall be subject to a 1 112% interest charge per month (or portion thereof).

Customers who are delinquent in the payment of their sewer bills are subject to:

1.	Disconnection as specified under the provisions of 24 V.S.A. §5141; or

2.	A lien being placed upon the property in question. 10-7	Sewer Use
(a)	Discharge of the following types of substances into the sewer system shall be prohibited:
1.	petroleum products;
2.	hazardous and toxic wastes;
3.	substances with a P.H. lower than 5.0 and higher than 9.5;
4.	liquids in excess of 150 degrees;
5.	grease, fats and wax, whether or not emulsified;
6.	radioactive material;
7.	any flammable or explosive liquids, solids, or gases;
8.	substances which cause:
a.	Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited
to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
b.	Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions);
c.	Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
d.	Unusual volume oflow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs.
9.	Any substance deemed by the Superintendent to have a deleterious impact upon public health or the proper operation of the sewer system.

(b)	Discharge of the following types of substances into the sewer system shall be prohibited unless permission for discharge is expressly authorized in writing by the Superintendent:
1.	septage;
2.	industrial waste;
3.	surface water, ground water, and storm water runoff.
 
10-8	Powers and Authority of Department Personnel

(a)	Right of Access - For purposes related to inspection, maintenance, operation, or service termination, Department personnel shall have the right of access to a customer's property.

Department employees shall carry identification on their persons indicating that they work for the Sewer Department  and shall produce said identification upon request.

(b)	Service Line Repairs - When a service line malfunctions and the owner cannot be readily located or refuses to make immediate repairs, the Department shall have the right to make necessary repairs and charge the customer for same.

10-9	Miscellaneous Provisions

(a)	Separate Service Lines -A separate and independent service line shall be provided for every building unless an alternative arrangement is approved in writing by the Superintendent.

(b)	Grease Interceptors -All restaurants (or like entities) connected to the sewer system shall be required to install grease interceptors to specifications set forth by the Superintendent.

10-10	Civil  Designation*

A violation of this Ordinance shall be a civil matter enforced in accordance with the provisions of 24 V.S.A. § 1974a and 1977 et seq.




Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be subject to a fine of five hundred dollars ($500).  Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.  The waiver fee shall be established at $250. *

10-12	Enforcement*
The issuing official authorized to enforce this Ordinance shall be the Town's Sewer Superintendent.

10-13	Savings Clause
Should any provision of this Ordinance be held to violate a Federal or State Law, all other provisions shall remain in force.

*  3/27/95 Amendments adopted in order to conform to "Municipal Enforcement Act", so-called.













-41-
 
CHAPTERX SPECIAL EVENTS


10-1	Authority to Enact Chapter

10-2	Purpose of Chapter

10-3	Definitions

10-4	Special Events Permit

10-5	Special Events Permit Application

10-6	Special Permit Approval

10-7	Reimbursement for Town Services

10-8	Applicability  of Other Laws and Chapters 10-9	Penalties for Violations
10-10	Permit to Discharge Fireworks 10-11	Exemption
10-12	Enforcement

10-13	Enactment Date











 
 
10-1	Authority to Enact Chapter


This Chapter was duly adopted by the Legislative Body of the Town, the Selectboard, in accordance with 24 V.S.A. 2291 (4), (11) and (14).

10-2	Purpose of Chapter


The purpose of this Chapter is to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety and welfare for the citizens of the Town of Manchester and attendees at events through the regulation oflarge commercial assemblies, to allow for the management of emergencies, and encourage cultural, social and athletic events through the orderly permitting of events.

10-3	Definitions


Chief of Police for this Chapter shall mean the police officer duly appointed as the Chief of Police or a sworn officer designated by the Chief of Police to act on his or her behalf.

Person shall mean an individual, corporation, government, governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, or other legal entity.

Special event shall mean a gathering reasonably anticipated to involve four hundred or more individuals in a public or private place, parcel or adjacent parcels at any given time during the event, including but not limited to athletic events, circuses, carnivals, plays, concerts, entertainments, exhibitions of any kind or races, and the gathering is not regularly and routinely scheduled. A special event shall also mean any organized activity within the right of way of a public roadway that is reasonably anticipated to involve more than 100 people, such as a road race, bicycle race or parade; and any event that closes public roads, detours traffic on public roads or involves traffic control on public roads. Participants shall include attendees, participants, spectators, staff, volunteers, vendors and other similar individuals.

Special events liaison shall mean any sworn officer of the Manchester Police Department appointed by the Chief of Police to assist with the coordination and permitting of special events.

Special events permit shall mean a permit issued by the Chief of Police of the Town of Manchester authorizing the holding of a special event under stated conditions as to time, place and manner.

10-4	Special Events Permit
 
No special event, as defined in section 3, shall be conducted in the Town of Manchester or Village of Manchester unless a special event permit has been obtained from the Chief of Police in accordance with this Chapter.

10-5	Special Events Permit Application

(1)	An application for a special event permit, which may be for a series of activities or events undertaken by a single permittee within a 90 day period, under the provisions of this Chapter shall be filed with the Chief of Police of the Manchester Police Department at least twenty-one days before the first date set for the event and must be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee established in Addendum A. Applications shall be made on an application form approved by the Town Manager.

(2)	All permit applications for special events shall include the following:

(a)	The name, address, electronic mail address, cellular telephone number and telephone number of the applicant, the principal officers of the applicant, the individual making the application, and any other individual authorized to represent the applicant in applying for the permit;

(b)	The physical location of the proposed event to be held, including the 9-1-1 address or addresses and the map, block and lot numbers of any parcels involved in the event;

(c)	If the permittee is not the owner of the premises where the event is to take place, the name and contact information of the owner shall be given as well as the owner's signed consent to the event attached to the application;

(d)	A site plan, printed on paper at least 11 inches by 14 inches, indicating location, layout, state and local highways, entrances and exits, traffic flow patterns, parking (including the number of parking spaces), and permanent and temporary structures;

(e)	A map, printed on paper at least 11 inches by 14 inches, showing any public roadways, sidewalk and parking lots the applicant intends to utilize for the event, as well as evacuation routes and how emergency personnel will access the site in the event of an emergency;
 
(f)	The proposed dates and hours of operation and the number of days that the event will be conducted;

(g)	The maximum estimated total number of people anticipated to participate in or attend the event including attendees , participants, spectators, staff, volunteers , vendors and other similar individuals;

(h)	A description of the event, including a schedule;

(i)	Details of what arrangements have been made to protect the public health, safety, welfare and convenience during the event including , but not limited to, arrangements for traffic control and emergency medical services;

U)	Provisions, if any, for food and beverage, potable water , bathroom facilities , removal and disposal of onsite septic and trash , and temporary electrical service;

(k)	Proposed directional signage and roadway signage for event and the location of the signage;


(1)	Whether the event includes amplified music , other audio, lasers or other visual effects;


(m)	Whether the event includes pyrotechnics, explosives, firearms or alcoholic beverages; and


(n)	Whether the event will include overnight camping or other types of onsite lodging .


10-6	Special Permit Approval


(1)	The Chief of Police may approve, approve with conditions and/or modifications, or deny each application upon consideration of the approval standards set forth in subsection 4 of this Section. The Chief of Police may hold a meeting to gather necessary facts about the application.

(2)	Any person or organization that is aggrieved by the decision of the Chief of Police may appeal the decision of the Chief of Police, in writing, to the Town Manager no later than seven (7) business days after the decision is issued by the Chief of Police. The Town Manager may approve, approve with conditions and/or modifications, or deny each application upon consideration of the approval standards set forth in subsection 4 of this Section. The Town Manager may hold a meeting to gather necessary facts about the application.
 
(3)	Prior to acting upon an application , the Chief of Police shall consult with the Town Manager, Zoning Administrator, Fire Chief, Director of the Public Works Department, Health Officer, Manchester
Rescue Squad and any other Town officer that the Chief of Police determines may have a role in the special event or may be impacted by the special event, including the Superintendent of the Water and Sewer Departments and Village of Manchester.

(4)	Prior to the issuance of any permit under this Section, the Chief of Police shall determine that the proposed event satisfies all of the following standards, or would satisfy such standards if permitted subject to conditions as provided in Section 5:

(a)	The proposed event would be held on a property in conformance with any applicable Town ordinances including, but not limited to, Chapter IX (Vending, Peddlers and Door-To-Door Sales), Chapter III of the Ordinances (Land Use and Development Ordinance) or the land use regulations of the Village of Manchester;
(b)	The proposed event would not result in undue adverse traffic congestion and unsafe	  conditions regarding the use of public roads, sidewalks and other public rights-of-ways;


(c)	The proposed event would not present or create a threat to the safety of persons or property because of fire, explosion or other hazard;

(d)	The proposed event would not create unhealthy conditions regarding water supply, sewage disposal or solid waste disposal;

(e)	The proposed event would not unreasonably interfere with the use of neighboring property for its customary use on an ongoing basis;

(f)	The proposed event would not overburden the public infrastructure of the Town, including but not limited to the Town's water and sewer systems. Special attention shall be given to the cumulative impacts of other activities that may be occurring at the same time .

(g)	The proposed event has a history of non-compliance with permit conditions, disturbing the peace or other impacts to the public health safety or welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Manchester; and,
 
(h)	The proposed event is not anticipated to have an adverse effect on the general public health and safety of the inhabitants of the Town of Manchester.

(5)	When issuing a permit under this Chapter, the Chief of Police may attach such reasonable

conditions as he or she may find appropriate to mitigate or eliminate impacts reviewable under the approval standards set forth in subsection of 4 of this section. Such conditions may include but are not limited to:

(a)	Establishing specific hours for the proposed event and establishing noise limits for the event;

(b)	Restricting or prohibiting domestic animals, including dogs and livestock, from the event;

(c)	Requiring the provision of traffic-control personnel, at no cost to the Town. All costs shall be borne by the permit holder;

(d)	Requiring the provision of crowd control, public safety personnel and medical personnel, at no cost to the Town. All costs shall be borne by the permit holder;

(f)	Requiring the provision of firefighting equipment and personnel, at no cost to the Town. All costs shall be borne by the permit holder;

(g)	Requiring the posting of security bonds or escrow accounts to ensure compliance with applicable ordinances and permit conditions;

(h)	Requiring that trash and litter on public streets attributable to the proposed event be collected and removed at no cost to the Town;

(i)	Restricting or prohibiting the consumption of alcoholic beverages in connection with any regulated activity;

U)	Prohibiting the sale of admission or seating tickets in excess of the established capacity of the event area;

(k)	Requiring public sanitation, food, water, and emergency medical facilities as necessary;


(1)	Ensuring the event location is suitable to accommodate the number of people anticipated to attend, including vehicles;
 
(m)	Imposing other reasonable conditions to assure that the event will not substantially impair the provision of fire and police protection and medical and other essential public services;

(n)	If the event is held on municipal property, the person holding the special event may be required to furnish a certificate issued by insurance company licensed to do business Vermont demonstrating coverage of at least $1,000,000 of general liability insurance and naming the Town of Manchester as an additional insured. Such certificate shall be furnished to the Town Manager at least one business day prior to the event; provided, that the Chief of Police may require an amount greater than $1,000,000. Such insurance shall be in place throughout the set-up, tear-down and the event.

10-7	Reimbursement for Town Services


The Chief of Police shall invoice permit holders for all services provided to the event, whether the services were scheduled or emergency in nature. The rate for services shall be established by the Chief of Police through a fee schedule; the rate for materials and supplies shall be one-hundred and twenty-five percent of the cost of the materials or supplies.

10-8	Applicability of Other Laws and Chapters


The permit required under this Chapter shall not replace or eliminate any requirement to obtain approval under any other applicable laws or ordinances, including but not limited to Chapter III and Chapter IX (Vending, Peddlers and Door-To-Door  Sales), state and local permits required for the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages, and state health and safety permits.

10-9	Penalties


(1)	Failure to obtain a permit when necessary, failure to abide by the terms and/or conditions of a permit, or misrepresentation of any information contained within or in support of a permit application shall constitute a First Degree civil violation.

(2)	The Town Manager may institute an action in the name of the Town to obtain injunctive or other appropriate relief.

(3)	Depending on the severity of the violation or the number of violations, the Chief of Police may revoke a permit for failure to comply with any conditions contained in such a permit, or for any disturbance
 
of the peace or for occurrences detrimental to the public health , safety or welfare. The Chief of Police may also issue a notice of trespass as appropriate .

10-10	Permit to Discharge Fireworks


Notwithstanding any chapter or section to the contrary , any discharge of fireworks, excluding sparklers and novelty smoke devices, in the Town of Manchester or Village of Manchester shall require a permit , issued by the Fire Chief and Chief of Police to ensure that the fireworks are of a character, and so located, discharged or fired as, in the opinion of the Fire Chief shall not be hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons. Applications for a permit must be made at least 15 days in advance of the fireworks display.

10-11	Exemption


The Town of Manchester and School District of the Town of Manchester is hereby exempt from all fees
contained herein , but shall not otherwise be exempt from the requirements of this Chapter.	 

10-12	Enforcement


The Chief of Police is hereby designated as the enforcement authority for this Chapter.


10-13	Effective Date


This Chapter shall be effective January 1, 2018 .





 

Chair of the Selectboard	Date of Enactment by Selectboard



Attested,  Town of Manchester Town Clerk:


 

Town Clerk
 
CHAPTER XI FIRE DEPARTMENT


11-1	Authority to Enact Chapter

11-2	Purpose of Chapter

11-3	Definitions

11-4	Burning and Burn Permits

11-5	Outdoor Boilers
11-6	Hazardous 'Materials Response by Fire Department 11-7	Enforcement














































I
 
 
 
11-1	Authority to Enact Chapter


This Chapter was duly adopted by the Legislative Body of the Town, the Selectboard, in accordance with 10 VS.A. § 565, 24 VS.A . § 1956 and 24 VS.A. §2291 (14).

11-2	Purpose of Chapter


The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the public safety, to regulate nuisances related to fires and burning in the Town of Manchester and provide for the reimbursement of costs associated with hazardous materials responses.

11-3	Definitions


Burning shall mean the intentional lighting of material on fire or the maintaining of materials on fire.


Contained fires  and contained burning shall mean any fire in a container or pit that is surrounded by non-combustible material such as stone, masonry material or metal.

Openfires and open burning shall mean any fire that is not in a container or pit that is surrounded by non-combustible material.

Costs shall mean all reasonable and necessary expenses that are incurred by the Town of Manchester as a direct result of the hazardous materials emergency response, including but not limited to the following:

(a)	Emergency response, incident assessment, control, containment and abatement of a hazardous materials incident, to include costs associated with transportation and temporary storage of hazardous materials if such transportation and temporary storage is necessary to control and contain the hazardous materials incident.

(b)	Ensuring the safety of the public, both on and off the site of the hazardous materials incident.

(c)	Repairing or replacing equipment if said equipment was damaged or destroyed as a direct result of the hazardous materials incident.
 
(d)	Equipment, including rental equipment, utilized by the Town of Manchester to the extent such labor and equipment is necessary for emergency response, incident assessment , control, containment and abatement of the i1mnediate hazard.

(e)	Contract labor and equipment utilized by the Town of Manchester for emergency response ,

incident assessment, control, containment and abatement of the immediate hazard.


(f)	Overtime costs for compensation of Town of Manchester employees for the time devoted specifically to the hazardous materials incident.
t	· I
(g)	Labor and equipment utilized by the Town of Manchester via a mutual aid agreement for

emergency response, incident assessment , control , containment or abatement of the immediate hazard.

(h)	Disposable materials and supplies consumed and expended as a result of the hazardous materials incident, including but not limited to, absorbents , foams, neutralization agents, over pack drums or containers.

(i)	Decontamination of equipment that is contaminated during the hazardous materials  incident.


(j)	Laboratory costs for purposes of analyzing samples taken during the release or incident.


Hazardous material means a substance or material that the United States Secretary of Transportation has determined is capable of posing an umeasonable risk to health , safety, and property when transported in commerce, and is designated as hazardous under section 5103 of Federal Hazardous Materials Transportation Law (49 U.S .C. 5103) . The term includes hazardous substances, hazardous wastes, marine pollutants, elevated temperature materials, materials designated as hazardous in the Hazardous Materials Table (see 49 C.F.R. 172. 101), and materials that meet the defining criteria for hazard classes and divisions in 49 C.F.R. 173.

Hazardous material incident means actual or threatened release of a hazardous substance or material, including hazardous waste, which poses an imminent threat to the environment and/or to the health, safety or welfare of the population and requires emergency response, incident assessment, control, containment or abatement of the immediate hazard.
 
Person means an individual, firm, corporation , association, partnership, commercial entity, consortium ,

joint venture, governmental entity, or any other legal entity.


Release shall mean the accidental or intentional, sudden or gradual spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, disc;harging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing into the environment (including the abandonment or discarding of barrels, containers and other receptacles containing any hazardous material or substance, waste, pollutant or contaminant) whether such release occurs from a fixed facility or while the materials are being transported .

Responder means any person authorized to participate in a coordinated emergency response to a hazardous 1

material incident.


(g)	Emergency response shall mean the provision of authorized assistance during and following a hazardous material incident and to reduce the likelihood of secondary damage, and may include incident assessment, control, containment or abatement of the immediate hazard .

(h)	Responsible party shall mean the person or persons who cause or allow a release of a hazardous material or substance or who had custody or control of the hazardous material or substance at the time of such release .

11-4	Burning and Burning Permits


(1)	Except as provided in this Chapter, the burning of any solid waste by open fire is prohibited in the Town of Manchester unless the practice has been approved by the Department of Environmental Conservation.

(2)	To the extent allowed by the Vermont Air Pollution Control Regulations, a specific permit may be granted by the Fire Warden, Deputy Fire Warden or Key Person for the following types of burning:

(a)	The open burning ofleaves, brush, garden wastes, slash, slabwood, and other such natural wood wastes resulting from property maintenance, logging operations, and clearing operations .

(b)	The open burning of natural wood, grass, leaves, and similar materials for agricultural improvement, forest, or wildlife habitat management or festive celebrations.
 
(c)	After providing notice to the Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation, and necessary demolition permits for the disposal of asbestos and lead paint , the burning of solid or liquid fuels or structures for bona fide fire training , provided that materials other than natural wood are removed from any structures to the greatest extent possible , prior to the training.

(d)	Burning of natural-wood demolition or construction materials and natural-wood commercial wastes such as pallets or skids, provided such burning is approved by the Department of Environmental Conservation .

(e)	Any fire container that is more than seventy-two inches in diameter or any fire that is more than seventy-two inches in height shall be considered a bonfire and shall require a permit from the Fire Warden, Deputy Fire Warden or Key Person.

(f)	The open burning of natural wood by the Town of Manchester in accordance with 10 VS.A. Section 565.

(3)	Any person or organization permitted under subsection 2 of this section shall be responsible for the safety of the fire and shall ensure that an adequate water supply is available to control a fire.

(4)	The Fire Warden , Deputy Fire Warden or Key Person shall not issue a permit unless satisfied that no hazardous condition will be created by such burning and the emission of air contaminants will not create a danger to the health and property of the citizens of the Town of Manchester. Permits which are issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall be for a specified date(s), time(s) , and location(s), and for specific materials .

(5)	The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the following :


(a)	Burning of natural wood or any fuel in a furnace to provide heat for a building or structure or for preparing food on a cooking appliance inside of a building or structure.

(b)	Burning of natural wood or any fuel for evaporators related to maple syrup production.


(c)	Burning of natural wood or any fuel for cooking food on outdoor barbecues, grills, smokers and other similar appliances with a cooking surface less than twelve square feet, including cooking of food by vendors licensed under Chapter IX.
 
(d)	Contained fires governed by subsection 8 of this Chapter.


(e)	Contained fires at properties pennitted as campgrounds under Chapter III.


(6)	Burning shall be allowed by permit from 7:00 AM to 9:00 PM on Mondays , Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays.

(7)	Burning shall not be allowed under the following conditions:


(a)	On parcels less than one-quarter of an acre.


(b)	Burning of rubbish ,' trash, hazardous materials, and materials that cause noiious or hazardous smoke or fumes .

(c)	Within fifty (50) feet of a neighboring property line or within fifty (50) feet of any structure larger than 120 square feet.

(d)	Within fifty (50) feet of a wooded area or beneath canopies , natural or otherwise.


(8)	Fires contained in a receptacle , pit or similar container shall be allowed without a bum permit ;

provided , that the following conditions are met:


(a)	The fire is located on a parcel at least one-quarter of an acre in size.


(b)	The fire is located on a parcel that is not in the Commercial 1, Commercial 2 or Commercial 3 zoning districts .

(c)	The fire is located at least twenty (20) feet from any structure larger than 120 square feet and twenty (20) feet from any adjacent property line.

(9)	Fires contained in a receptacle, pit or similar container and use propane, natural gas, ethanol or similar fuels that produce no smoke shall be exempt from the provisions of subsection 8 of this section.

(10)	In addition to any other penalties established in this Chapter, burning in violation of this Chapter or burning that causes the Fire Department or other emergency personnel of the Town to respond to an incident may be responsible for reimbursing the Town of Manchester for costs, including labor, equipment and materials . The labor rate shall be billed at $50.00 per person, per hour for the purposes of this section.
 
11-5	Outdoor Boilers


Outdoor boilers used to heat structures and installed after the enactment of this Chapter, in addition to any requirements of Chapter III of these Ordinances and any other state or federal regulations, shall be installed not less than fifty feet from any adjacent structure on an adjacent parcel.

11-6	Hazardous Materials Responses and Reimbursement

(1)	The responsible party shall be liable for the payment of all reasonable and necessary costs incurred by the Town of Manchester, its Fire Department, mutual aid departments , other agencies of the Town or its
I	·  I
agents for emergency response, incident assessment, control, containment or abatement of the immediate

hazard as a direct result of  the hazardous material incident. The authority to recover costs under this article shall not include costs incurred for actual fire suppression service that is normally or usually provided  within the Town of Manchester by the Fire Department or its authorized agents.

(2)	The Chief of Police shall be charged with determining the responsible party.


(3)	When responding to a hazardous material incident, the emergency response agencies of the Town of Mancheste r, including the Fire Department, Police Department, Department of Public Works, Water and Sewer Departments and other Town officials and employees, shall keep a detailed record of all the costs attributable thereto, including equipment and vehicles , personnel and supplies and materials.

Notwithstanding any other payments normally made to Fire Department employees, the Town shall compensate Fire Department employees at a rate of $15.00 per hour for firefighters and $20.00 per hour for officers, including chiefs, captains and lieutenants for incidents that involve hazardous material incidents.

All personnel costs not related to the Fire Department shall be billed at 140 percent of the hourly rate in order to recover costs associated with fringe benefits.

All  equipment  costs  shall  be  billed  using  the  most  recent  reimbursements   rates   established  by  the  Federal Emergency    Management   Agency    (https://www.fema.gov/schedule -equipment-rates)  .         ·

(4)	The Fire Chief or his or her designee shall be responsible for collecting invoices, timesheets and other such documents from emergency response agencies .
 
(5)	The Town Manager or his or her designee shall be responsible for invoicing the responsible party and the insurance company of the responsible party.

The Town Manager or his or her designee shall submit one or a series of consolidated invoices to the responsible party that identify the costs related to responding to the hazardous materials incident; provided, however , that whenever the total cost of the response is less than $500 the Town Manager, at his or her sole discretion, may opt to waive the requirements of this subsection.

The responsible party shall reimburse the Town of Manchester within 60 days of the Town of Manchester invoicing the responsible party. After 60 days, the provisions of Chapter I, section 24 (Collection of Fees and Interest for Late Payments) shall govern late fees and interest.

11-7	Enforcement


Any sworn officer of the Manch ster Police Department or any Municipal Compliance Officer shall be designated as the enforcement officer of this Chapter.








 


Chair of the Selectboard




Attested,  Town of Manchester  Town Clerk:


aJ±rfl-Jie_
Town Clerk
 
l	I
Date  of Enactment  by Selectboard  ·
 
 
 
CHAPTER XII SECURITY AND FIRE ALARMS



 
12-1

12-2

12-3

12-4

12-5
12-•6

12-7

12-8

12-9

12-10

12-11

12-12

12-13

12-14

12-15

12-16

12-17

12-18
 
Authority to Enact Chapter Purpose of Chapter Definitions
Registration Requirement Alarm Permit Fees
Device Dialing Number Limitations on Dialing Dialing Dial Delay Timing of Device
Disconnection or Deactivation of Alarm Administrative  Rules
False Alarms - penalties

Repeat Violations of this Chapter Limitation of Liability
Failure to Report An Activated Alarm Providing' False Reports of Emergencies Exemptions
Enforcement
 
 
 
12-1	Authority to Enact Chapter


The Chapter has been promulgated under the authority granted to the Town's legislative body, the Selectboard, under 24 VS.A. §2291 (14) .

12-2	Purpose of Chapter


This Chapter has been adopted to protect public safety and welfare by enacting regulations and procedures that reduce the likelihood of false alarms. False alarms are a public nuisance, needlessly waste the time and resources ,of the Town's public safety departments, and may negatively impact the preparedness and responsiveness of police, fire, rescue and other public safety personnel.

12-3	Definitions


Alarm system shall mean any device that automatically calls or otherwise contacts the emergency telephone number of the Police Department, Fire Department, Rescue Squad, State Police, Vermont emergency dispatch center, 9-1-1, a privately operated central station or answering service and uses a pre-taped,
pre-recorded or other electronic means to indicate that an emergency, including but not limited to fire, smoke, gases, intruders, may exist or that the services of the Police Department, Fire Department, Rescue Squad or other town public safety department or function are needed. Alarm system shall also mean any alarm device that automatically emits an audible, visual or other response upon the occurrence of any hazard or emergency, and is intended to alert a person outside the the building to the existence of a possible hazard or emergency or any system that allows persons to activate a so-called panic button . Alarm systems shall not include residential fire, smoke, gas or security alarms or alarms on motor vehicles; provided that the alarm does not automatically call the emergency telephone number of the Police Department, Fire Department, Rescue Squad, State Police, Vermont emergency dispatch center, 9-1-1, a privately operated central station or answering service.

False alarm shall mean the activation of an Alarm System through negligence of an alarm user or employee, improper installation or programming, mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, or any
other cause that may result in the police, fire, rescue or other public safety personnel responding, where it is determined by reasonable suspicion that no criminal or emergency activity or attempted criminal or emergency activity has occurred.



2
 
12-4	Registration Requirement


(1)	Each alarm system maintained in the Town of Manchester and Village of Manchester shall be registered by the person operating the alarm system, or the owner, lessee, or occupant of the property on or before April 1 of each year with the Manchester Police Department on a form approved by the Town Manager. The registration form shall include the Annual Alarm Registration Fee as established in Addendum A of the Code.

(2)	The Chief of Police of the Manchester Police Department is authorized to grant a revocable First Class Permit or Second Class Permit, as defined by section 5 of this Chapter, to any person or organization operating the alarm system, or the owner, lessee, or occupant of the property located in the Town of Manchester or Village of Manchester in order to operate; maintain, install or modify an alarm system. No alarm system shall be allowed to operate unless a permit has been issued by the Chief of Police .

(3)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation .


12-5	Alarm Permit Fees


(1)	First Class Permit shall apply to any alarm system installed and operated in any structure open to the public or used for commercial, retail or industrial purposes or is a residential _ structure with more than three separate dwellings. The fee for a First Class Permit shall be established in Addendum A.

(2)	Second Class Permit shall mean any alarm system installed in a structure designed and used primarily for human habitation with three or less separate dwellings. The fee for a Second Class Permit shall be established in Addendum A

12-6	Device Dialing Number


(1)	All alarm systems that dial the Manchester Police Department and Fire Department shall be programmed to dial the numbers assigned by the Chief of Police .

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation.
 
12-7	Limitations on Dialing


(1)	No person shall use, operate or install any dialing device that will, upon activation, automatically dial, call or connect with the telephone number designated by the Chief of Police in section 6 of this Chapter, for the purpose of receiving such alarms, more than two times for any one emergency incident.

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation.


12-8	Dialing Delay


(1)	Upon the activation of a burglary (break-in) alarm or motion sensor, there shall be a mandatory	1 delay of at least fifteen seconds before the transmission of a signal to the Police Department, to enable the user to abort the signal in the ev:ent that the signal was inadvertent. This fifteen second delay shall not apply to robbery (hold-up), panic buttons, fire or medical emergency alarms.

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation.


12-9	Timing of Device


(1)	With the exception of fire alarms, users of alarm systems emitting an audible, visual, or other response shall install, or cause to be installed, an automatic timing device that shall deactivate the alarm so that it will remain activated for no more than fifteen minutes.

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation .


12-10	Disconnection or Deactivation of Alarm


In the event that an alarm system emitting an audible or other similar response shall fail to deactivate within the time limitation specified in section 9, subsection 1 of the Chapter, the Town shall have the right to take action, including entry, as may be necessary in order to disconnect or deactivate any such alarm. The Town shall not be responsible for any reasonable damage caused by any entry necessary to disconnect or deactivate an alarm.

12-11	Administrative Rules


The Chief of Police and Fire Chief shall determine police and fire responses to alarms, and such information shall be confidential for the protection of persons responding to alarms.
 
12-12	False Alarms - penalties


(1)	The first false alarm, as defined by section 3 of this Chapter, in a calendar year may result in a verbal warning.

(2)	The second false alarm, as defined by section 3 of this Chapter, in a calendar year may result in a written warning.

(3)	The third false alarm, as defined by section 3 of this Chapter, in a calendar year shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.

(4)	The fourth false alarm and subsequent false alarms, as defined by section 3 of this Chapter, in a calendar year shall be considered a First Degree civil violation.

12-13	Repeat Violations of this Chapter


Repeated violation of this Chapter may result in the revocation of the permit by the Chief of Police.


12-14	Limitation of Liability


The Town of Manchester and its officers shall not be under any obligation or duty to an alarm user, or to any other person hereunder, by reason of this Chapter. The Town of Manchester specifically disclaims liability for any damages or injuries that may be caused by failure to respond to an alarm or for a delayed response to an alarm.

12-15	Failure to Report An Activated Alarm


(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person charged with the maintenance, supervision or operation of a public building or building open to the public to not report an alarm to public safety personnel or take action so that an alarm is not reported to public safety personnel.

(2)	It shall be unlawful for any person to take action so that an alarm in a building open to the public is not reported to public safety personnel.

(3)	A violation of this section shall be considered a First Degree criminal violation .
 
12-16	Providing False Reports of Emergencies


(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally report or cause an alarm to report an emergency situation unless an emergency situation exists or the person has reasonable belief that an emergency situation may exist.

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a First Degree criminal violation.


12-17	Exemptions


The Town pf Manchester and the Manchester School District are qempt from this Chapter, except sections 12 and 13.

12-18- Enforcement Officer


Sworn officers of the Manchester Police Department are hereby designated as the enforcement authority for this Chapter.









 


Chair of the Selectboard
 
I	I
Date of Enactment by Selectboard
 



Attested,  Town of Manchester  Town Clerk:


UMM.:'if- ,
Town Clerk














6
 
 
 
CHAPTER XIII
ROADWAYS, BRIDGES, SIDEWALKS, PARKING LOTS AND STREETLIGHTS




 
13-1

13-2

13-3

13-4

13-5

13-6

13-7

13-8

13-9

13-10

13-11



13-12

13-13

13-14

13-15

13-16

13-17

13-18

13-19

13-20

13-21

13-22

13-23

13-24

13-25
 
Authority to Enact Chapter Purpose of Chapter Definitions
Maintenance and Repairs of Town Roadways, Sidewalks, Parking Lots and Streetlights Town Roadways - general
Town Roadways - maintenance

Application to Accept a Roadway as Town Roadway Standards for Town Roadways
Standards for Town Sidewalks Town Roadway Signage
Use of Town Roadways, Rights of Way, Sidewalks and Parking Lots for Solicitation - prohibition
Use of Town Sidewalks

Use of Town Sidewalks for Dining

Skateboarding, Rollerblading and Rollerskating on Town Roadways and Sidewalks Maintenance of Culverts
Removal of Snow and Ice and Debris from Town Sidewalks

Plowing of Snow and Ice and Depositing of Debris onto Town Roadways and Sidewalks Discharge of Water onto Town Roadways and Rights of Way
Removal of Trees from Town Rights of Way Streetlights
Private Signage in Town Rights of Way Naming of Public and Private Roadways Street Numbering of Properties Maintenance of Grassed Rights of Way Enforcement
 
13-1	Authority to Enact Chapter


This Chapter was duly adopted by the Legislative Body of the Town, the Selectboard, in accordance with

24 V.S .A. 2291 (1), (2), (3), (4) and (16); and 24 V.S .A. 4421.


13-2	Purpose of Chapter


This Chapter has been adopted in order to provide for public safety and convenience, and to provide for the maintenance, repair and improvement of Town owned roadways, bridges, sidewalks, parking lots and streetlights.

13-3	Definitions


Public sidewalk shall mean any sidewalk owned and maintained by the Town of Manchester or any sidewalk adjacent to a public roadway and located on a commercially permitted parcel and used by pedestrians as part of the sidewalk network.

Town parking lots shall mean the parking lot located off of Memorial Avenue, and referred to as 32-50-50 on the Town's tax map; and the parking lot located at the intersection of Elm Street and Highland Avenue, and referred to as 37-50-35 on the Town's tax map.

Right of way shall mean any public right of way, owned by the Town of Manchester and the State of Vermont either by implied consent or by deed. Whenever a public right of way is controlled by the Town through implied consent, the right of way shall be three rods in width, and one-and-a-halfrods from the centerline of the roadway or the presumed center of the roadway.

Road Commissioner shall mean the duly appointed Town Manager.


Traveled roadway, traveled way and roadway shall mean the portion of a right of way improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic.

13-4	Maintenance and Repairs of Town Roadways, Sidewalks, Parking Lots and Streetlights


Unless otherwise provided for in these Ordinances, maintenance and repairs of Town roadways, sidewalks, parking lots and streetlights shall be performed by the Department of Public Works under the supervision of
 
the Director of Public Works as provided for in this Chapter; provided, that streetlights provided for by the electric utility shall be maintained and repaired by the electric utility.

13-5	Town Roadways - general


The Town shall maintain the following roadways within the borders of the Town of Manchester, not including the Village of Manchester:

Class  1 Roadways:


Town Highway 1-1: Rt. 7A (Main Street) from Ways Lane to Beech Street


Town Highway 1-2: Rt. 11/30 (Depot Street) from Dufresne Pond Road to Rt. 7A (Main Street)


Town Highway 1-3: Rt. 30 (Bonnet Street) from Rt. 7A (Main Street) to (and including) the bridge across the West Branch of the Battenkill River

Class 2 Roadways:


Town Highway 2-4: River Road from the Village of Manchester to the Sunderland Town Line Town Highway 2-5: Center Hill Road
Town Highway 2-6: Richville Road Town Highway 2-7: North Road
Town Highway 2-8: High Meadow Way


Town Highway 2-9: Union Street from Richville Road to (but not including) the bridge across the Battenkill River

Town Highway 2-10: Bamumville Road from Rt. 7A to the Winhall Town Line Town Highway 2-11: East Manchester Road
Class 3 Roadways:


Town Highway 3-8: Highland Avenue
 
Town Highway 3-9: Spruce Street


Town Highway 3-10 : Elm Street


Town Highway 3-11: Three Maple Drive from West Road to the Dorset Town Line Town Highway 3-12: Wideawake Road
Town Highway 3-13: [Intentionally omitted]


Town Highway 3-14: Pinetree Lane in its entirety from Beartown Road for a distance of 0.34 miles Town Highway 3-15: Cross Road
Town Highway 3-16: Pat Kelley Road, from the intersection with Bonnet Street for a distance of 0.04 miles Town Highway 3-17: [Intentionally omitted}
Town Highway 3-18: Mount Aeolus Road Town Highway 3-19: Windhill Road
Town Highway 3-20: Overlook Road Town Highway 3-21: Beech Street
Town Highway 3-22: Johnnycake Road from Barnumville Road for a distance of 0.58 miles Town Highway 3-23: Grandview Lane from Canterbury Lane for a distance of 0.09 miles Town Highway 3-24: Dufresne Pond Road from Depot Street for a distance of 0.38 miles Town Highway 3-25: Butternut Lane from Depot Street for a distance of 0.14 miles
Town Highway 3-26: Rootville Road from Depot Street for a distance of 0.60 miles Town Highway 3-27: [Intentionally omitted]
Town Highway 3-28: Lincoln Avenue from Richville Road for a distance of 0.23 miles


Town Highway 3-29: Memorial Avenue from Main Street for a distance of 0.11 miles to School Street
 
Town Highway 3-30: [Intentionally omitted}


Town Highway 3-31: Squires Road from North Road to the Dorset Town Line


Town Highway 3-32: Lye Brook Road from Richville Road for a distance of 0.34 miles Town Highway 3-33: Cass Terrace
Town Highway 3-34: [Intentionally omitted}


Town Highway 3-35: Muddy Lane from River Road to Main Street (Route 7A)


Town Highway 3-36: Silver Springs Lane from the intersection with Wilcox Lane for a distance of 0.73 miles

Town Highway 3-37: Bentley Hill Road from Route 7A for a distance of 0.52 miles


Town Highway 3-38: Bentley Hill Road from the Sunderland Town Line east for 0.13 miles to the intersection

Town Highway 3-39: [Intentionally omitted}


Town Highway 3-40: Park Place


Town Highway 3-41: Cemetery Avenue


Town Highway 3-42: Riverside Heights, from the intersection of Depot Street south for 0.20 miles Town Highway 3-43: School Street
Town Highway 3-44: Wyman Lane


Town Highway 3-45: Cottage Street, from the intersection of Depot Street south for 0.12 miles Town Highway 3-46: Mountain View Terrace
Town Highway 3-47: [Intentionally omitted]


Town Highway 3-48: Loretta Avenue, from the intersection with Depot Street south for 0.61 miles Town Highway 3-49: Applewood Lane
 
Town Highway 3-50: Silver Springs Lane, from the intersection of Main Street/Route 7A west for approximately 0.80 miles but not including Wilcox Lane (discontinued in 2015)

Town Highway 3-51: Lathrop Lane from the border of the Town of Sunderland north for 0.16 miles Town Highway 3-52: Hillcrest Road
Town Highway 3-53: Jennifer Lane Town Highway 3-54: Hillvale Road Town Highway 3-55: Powderhom Road
Town Highway 3-56: Canterbury Lane from Bamumville Road north for 0.45 miles


Town Highway 3-57: Village View Road from the intersection with Canterbury Lane for 0.33 miles Town Highway 3-58: Ledges Lane from the intersection of Overlook Road for 0.11 miles
Town Highway 3-59: [Intentionally omitted}


Town Highway 3-60: Middle Road in its entirety (a distance of 0.07 miles) Town Highway 3-61: Upper Road in its entirety (a distance of 0.22 miles) Town Highway 3-62: Brookside Road and Hills Way
Town Highway 3-63: Birch Hill Drive


Town Highway 3-64: Deer Meadow Road


Town Highway 3-65: Airport Road from the intersection of Richville Road for 0.16 miles Town Highway 3-66: Poplar Lane
Town Highway 3-67: Nottingham Road Town Highway 3-68: Little John Road Town Highway 3-69: Bond Street
Town Highway 3-70: Leland Drive
 
Town Highway 3-71 : [Inten tionally omitted} Town Highway 3-72: New Ireland Road Town Highway 3-73: [Intentionally omitted} Town Highway 3-74: [Intentionally omitted} Town Highway 3-75: Peace Street
Town Highway 3-76: Roberts Road


Town Highway 3-77: Glen Road
Town Highway 3-78 : Benson Road	 
Town Highway 3-79: Bromley Brook Road   ·


Town Highway 3-80: Bromley Brook Road Town Highway 3-81 : Woods Point Road
Town Highway 3-82: Natural Form Way (formerly Applejack Road) Town Highway 3-83: Irene Way (accepted September 30, 2014) Class 4 Roadways:
Town Highway 4-10: Elm Street Extension from Elm Street to Depot Street (also known as Skunk Hollow) Town Highway 4-13 : Beartown Road from Three Maple Drive to Camptown Road, a private roadway  Town Highway 4-16: Pat Kelley Road
Town Highway 4-26: Rootville Road 0.60 miles from the intersection of Depot Street to the Town of Winhall

Town Highway 4-34: Sugarhouse Lane from the intersection of Richville Road for 640 feet (reclassified in 2015)

Town Highway 4-37 : Bentley Hill Road from the Sunderland Town Line for a distance of 1.00 miles
 
Town Trails:


Beartown Road from Camptown Road (a private roadway) to the Sandgate Town Line


Rootville Road from 0.6 miles from the intersection of East Manchester Road to the Winhall Town Line


13-6	Town Roadways - maintenance


(1)	The Town shall provide winter and summer maintenance of Class 1, Class 2 and Class 3 roadways.


(2)	The Town shall provide limited summer maintenance and drainage maintenance, at the discretion of the Road Commissioner, of Class 4 roadways; and shall not provide winter maintenance of Class 4 roadways.

(3)	The Town shall provide no maintenance of Town trails except as otherwise expressly authorized by the Road Commissioner.

13-7	Application to Accept a Roadway as Town Roadway


(1)	A proponent who has a legal interest in a parcel of land or right of way may apply to the Selectboard, in writing, for the Town to accept a parcel ofland or right of way as a Town roadway. An application shall be considered complete when it is accompanied by proof from an attorney licensed in the State of Vermont that the proponent has a legal right to convey the parcel or right of way, a survey of the parcel or right of way by a surveyor licensed in the State of Vermont, engineering plans (if applicable), certification from a licensed engineer that the roadway being proposed as a Town roadway meets the conditions of section 8 of this Chapter, and a non-refundable fee of $1,000.00, which shall be applied to any costs associated with the review of engineering plans, right of way documents and surveys, and construction inspection .

(2)	When the requirements of subsection 1 of this section are satisfied the Selectboard may consider the acceptance of the roadway as a Town roadway at a warned public meeting pursuant to state law.

13-8	Standards for Town Roadways


(1)	The Town of Manchester hereby adopts the Agency of Transportation Town Road and Bridge Standards.
 
_  (2)	The  Selectboard  may  consider  acceptance  of  a roadway  as a  Town roadway  if the following  criteria

are satisfied :


(a)	The right of way shall be at least three rods wide (49.5 feet). The traveled way shall be paved and at least twenty feet wide to include two, ten foot lanes. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the Town from requiring a wider roadway based on projected or potential traffic volume.

(b)	The shoulder of the roadway shall be at least two feet wide on both sides of the traveled way.

(c)	The roadway shall be laid out in a manner so that the roadway does not exceed a grade of 9 percent.

(d)	The roadway subbase shall be excavated to firm soil, as determined by the Director of Public Works . All unstable materials shall be removed. The Director of Public Works may require independent testing to ensure that compaction of the subbase is at least 95%.

(e)	The roadway base shall be not less than twelve inches of material acceptable to the Director of Public Works, and six inches of crushed gravel acceptable to the Director of Public Works.

(f)	The roadway shall be paved with three inches of %-inch diameter stone bituminous asphalt base; and two inches of 'ii-inch diameter stone bituminous asphalt topcoat. At the discretion of the Director of Public Works, the Town may require a so-called tack coat between the base and topcoat.

(g)	At the discretion of the Director of Public Works, any shoulders with a slope greater than 1:3 shall require the installation of acceptable guardrail, to the most recent standards adopted by the Agency of Transportation.

(h)	The roadway shall have a stormwater plan, based on a hydro-study conducted by a qualified professional, and acceptable to the Town engineer and the Director of Public Works. The plan shall include ditches, catch basins, culverts, drainage piping, stormwater discharge areas and retention areas, treatment systems and other such related infrastructure.

(i)	At the discretion of the Director of Public Works, the Town may require the removal of

vegetation, including trees that infringe on the right of way or may be a safety hazard, dead or dying
 
trees, brush, large stones, and any other obstacles that infringe upon the traveled way or may create

safety hazards .


(j)	Areas outside of the shoulder but within the right of way shall be stabilized with plantings or stone, at the discretion of the Director of Public Works.

(k)	At the discretion of the Selectboard, the Town may require granite curbing, concrete sidewalks and street lighting in downtown and densely developed areas.

(I)	At the discretion of the Selectboard, the Town may require roadway markings that may include centerlines, shoulder lines, stop bars and other such markings and roadway signage, all to the standards set forth in the most recent edition of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.

(m)	For roadways that terminate at the end thereof, a so-called cul de sac, the roadway shall include an adequate radius, which shall not have a radius of less than thirty feet or more than forty feet, depending the intensity of the approved development and projected traffic flows. The Town . shall not allow more than two access points off of a cul de sac, at locations approved by the Director of Public Works.

(3)	The construction of the right of way shall be based on engineering plans submitted by a licensed engineer and approved by the Town engineer and to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works. Such engineering plans shall include, but are not limited to, roadway elevations and slope of the roadway.

(4)	The cost of construction inspection by the Director of Public Works and the Town engineer, and costs related to the review and approval of engineering plans by the Director of Public Works and Town engineer, and legal costs associated with review of legal documents by legal counsel shall be reimbursed to the Town by the applicant; provided the the application fee collected under 13-7 (1) of this Chapter shall be applied to any reimbursement sought under this subsection.

13-9	Standards for Town Sidewalks


(1)	All public sidewalks and curbing constructed after the enactment of this Chapter shall conform to the Vermont Agency of Transportation (VAOT) Standard Specifications for Construction (current edition), except as added or amended herein.
 
(2)	All public sidewalks and curbing constructed after the enactment of this Chapter shall comply with

applicable regulations from the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).


(3)	Public sidewalks built after the enactment of this Chapter shall be not less than sixty inches in width and constructed of concrete. The Town Manager may approve a width less than sixty inches, but not less than thirty-six inches, whenever it is not practical to construct sidewalks sixty inches in width.

(4)	Notwithstanding subsection 3 of this section, public sidewalks on Depot Street (from Main Street to Highland Avenue), Main Street (from Ways Lane to Park Street), Bonnet Street (from Main Street to
School Street), and Memorial Avenue (from Main Street to School Street) built after July 1, 2016 shall be seventy-two inches in width, whenever practical, and constructed of concrete. The Town Manager may approve a width less than seventy-two inches, but not less than forty-eight inches, whenever it is not practical to construct sidewalks seventy-two inches in width.

(5)	Public sidewalks shall be 4,000 psi concrete with a minimum thickness of five inches. The concrete thickness shall be increased to 8-inches at all driveway crossings. All sidewalks shall be constructed with steel mesh (six by six inches) to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works.

(6)	Public sidewalks shall extend across all driveways (both commercial and residential). Driveway crossings shall comply with VAOT Standard C-2A, Type 2 or Standard C-2B if a grass strip is included.

(7)	All commercial driveway crossings on public sidewalks shall include a detectable warning surface on each side of the crossing. Detectable warning surfaces shall be a pattern of truncated domes conforming to VAOT Standard C-3A and shall be cast iron, colored or painted a contrasting color (rust or brick color).

(8)	All curbing required as part of a public sidewalk shall be split face granite with a Yi-inch rounded edge. All granite curb shall be set in 2,500 psi concrete with a minimum of 6-inches of concrete under the curb and on each side of the curb, extending up to the top of the road subbase.

(9)	The sidewalk subbase on a public sidewalk shall be fine crushed gravel (1 Yi-inch minus) placed to a minimum depth of 12 inches and compacted to 95% of maximum dry density as determined by the Modified Proctor Method .
 
(10)	Expansion joints are required every 20 feet and dummy joints shall be formed every five feet between the expansion joints on public sidewalks.

(11)	All public sidewalks shall have a broom finish and shall be sealed after the concrete has cured.


(12)	Whenever feasible, there shall be a grass or landscaped buffer not less than thirty-six inches wide

between the sidewalk and roadway.


(13)	A public sidewalk may incorporate dyed concrete, stampings (textures) or other decorative features; provided that the surface complies with the American with Disabilities Act (ADA) and are approved by the Director of Public Works.

(14)	Sidewalk repairs or replacements shall comply with all requirements listed above and the following additional requirements:

(a)	The width of the repaired or replaced sections of sidewalk shall be determined by the Public Works Director, dependent on the location and fimits of the repair or replacement.

(b)	All new sections of sidewalk shall be pinned to the existing sidewalk using 2-foot long #4

steel dowels placed every 18-inches. The dowels shall be drilled I foot into the existing slab.


(15)	The Development Review Board, at its sole discretion, may require as a condition of approval the improvement, repair, replacement or construction of public sidewalks that comply with the requirement of this section.

13-10  Town Roadway Signage


(I)	Roadway signage erected by the Department of Public Works shall comply with the most recent version of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.

(2)	Only the Department of Public Works and the Village Highway Department shall be authorized to erect, maintain and remove roadway signage. The Director of Public Works may authorize the erection of signage for certain purposes. It shall be unlawful for any other person to tamper with, remove or otherwise alter a roadway sign erected by the Town of Manchester and Village of Manchester. A violation of this subsection shall be considered a Second Degree criminal violation. Any police officer of the Manchester Police Department shall be the enforcing authority for this subsection.
 
13-11  Use of Town Roadways, Rights of Way, Sidewalks and Parking Lots for Solicitation -

prohibition


(1)	No person, organization, corporation or other entity shall solicit funds, fundraise , or sell goods or services on Town roadways , rights of way, sidewalks, crosswalks or parking lots unless approved by the Selectboard at a public meeting .

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.


(3)	The enforcing officers for this section shall be any officer of the Manchester Police Department or any Municipal Compliance Officer.

13-12  Use of Town Sidewalks


(1)	No person, organization, corporation or other entity shall use Town roadways, rights of way, sidewalks or parking lots to display merchandise for sale, except as may be provided by through a majority vote of the Selectboard on the so-called "sidewalk sales" weekend.

(2)	Notwithstanding section 13 of this Chapter, no person, organization, corporation or other entity shall install or place items, including benches, flower pots, steps and stairs, signage, poles, or other such
items, either permanently or temporarily on Town sidewalks or rights of way without a permit issued by the Director of Public Works .

(3)	It shall be illegal for any person to stand, bicycle or walk in the middle of any roundabout inside of the yellow centerline .

(4)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.


13-13	Use of Town Sidewalks for Dining


(1)	Notwithstanding section 12 of this Chapter, the legal owner of a building, or business with the consent of the landowner, in the Commercial 1 and Commercial 3 zoning districts may submit a license application to the Selectboard, on a form approved by the Town Manager, to use a portion of the
Town-owned sidewalk for outdoor dining.


(2)	Any license issued must allow for the safe passing of pedestrians, as well as compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act and other access standards, regulations and laws. The licensed business
 
shall not under any circumstances limit walking areas of Town sidewalks to less than sixty inches in width. This minimum width shall include the area dedicated to seats, tables and service areas, as well as the area normally used to pull seats in and out of tables for seating purposes.

(3)	The Selectboard shall not approve license applications where the sidewalk is not located directly in front of and abutting the property used to operate the business.

(4)	The landowner and/or business shall comply with all Sewer and Water regulations, zoning bylaws, and shall be current with all payments to the Town, including zoning fees, water and sewer fees and use fees, and tax payments .

(5)	The primary purpose of any licensed business shall be the sale of prepared foods to consume on

site. Business activities on the Town-owned sidewalk shall be limited exclusively to the serving of food and beverages at outdoor seating. Any other sale or display of merchandise inside the Town's right-of-way, including sidewalks, is strictly prohibited except as provided for in section 12, subsection 1 of this Chapter.

(6)	Use of sidewalks for dining shall begin no sooner than May 15 of any year and no later than November  15 of any year and shall not exceed six (6) months in length. Businesses must reapply each year, at least 30 days prior to any planned use.

(7)	Patrons shall be seated only after 8:00 AM and no later than 10:00 PM.


(8)	No cooking or preparing of food is allowed on Town property including sidewalks. Alcoholic beverages shall be served at the table by a server. The licensed business is not permitted to establish a bar on Town-owned sidewalks, whereby customers may order alcoholic beverages  directly from a bartender.

(9)	Before approving a license, the Selectboard, through the Town Manager, shall seek the advice of the Zoning Administrator, Design Advisory Review Board, Chief of Police,and Director of Public Works. The Finance Director shall certify whether the business and/or property owner is current on all payments and obligations to the Town of Manchester.

(10)	The Selectboard may allow equipment, defined as tables, chairs, fencing, umbrellas or awnings, and other items necessary to maintain outdoor seating including temporary serving equipment and a hostess station.
 
(11)	No equipment may be fastened to the Town sidewalk or Town property. Awnings must be affixed to building and not Town sidewalk and must be retracted whenever not in use.

(12)	All equipment shall be approved by the Design Advisory Review Board. Equipment shall be durable, commercial-grade and kept in a state of good repairs. Whenever possible, equipment shall be constructed from polished chrome-looking metal or black metal. Logos on equipment, including umbrellas and awnings, are not permitted.

(13)	All equipment shall be removed or otherwise stored in an agreed upon area no later than 11:00 PM each night and until 7:00 AM, or whenever the equipment is not being used; provided, that no equipment may be located on Town sidewalks prior to May 15 nor after November 15.

(14)	The licensed business and landowner shall acknowledge that the Town is providing use of a portion of the Town-owned sidewalk at no cost, and that the Town is not serving in any capacity as a landlord or business partner or associate and the landowner assumes any and all liability associated with the use of Town-owned sidewalks.

(15)	The licensed business and landowner shall provide the Town a valid certificate of insurance naming the Town as an additionally insured in an amount not less than $1,000,000. The business shall maintain insurance that covers accidents and incidents related to the serving of food, and related to alcohol if the business intends to serve alcoholic beverages.

(16)	The licensed business and/or landowner shall agree to hold harmless and indemnify the Town of Manchester, its agents and employees from any claims that arise from the sale, serving and consumption of food and beverages, including alcoholic beverages, and that the Town is not responsible for any damage or theft of property, to and by patrons, employees and the licensed business resulting from the use of
Town-owned sidewalks.


(17)	The licensed business and landowner are responsible for providing any lighting necessary to safely serve food and beverages; provided, that all lighting shall be approved by the Development Review Board after the recommendation by the Design Advisory Review Board.
 
(18)	The licensed business may display an informational sign within the licensed sidewalk area during hours of operation; provided that it is allowable under Chapter III and that the sign does not exceed two square feet.

(19)	The licensed business and landowner shall be responsible for any damage to Town-owned sidewalks and street lighting that results from the use of the Town-owned sidewalk . The licensed business and/or landowner is responsible for all maintenance related to the use of the sidewalk, including daily
removal of trash, debris and food, and washing sidewalks. The licensed business and/or landowner shall not dispose of waste in Town-owned trash receptacles. The licensed business shall not use Town-owned electrical outlets for electrical service.

(20)	The licensed business shall ensure that noise levels are reasonable. Police Officers of the Manchester Police Department, at their sole discretion, may temporarily suspend the use of Town-owned sidewalks when an Offic.er determines that noise levels are unreasonable or when the Officer determines that a safety issue exists.

(21)	The Town Manager, at his or her sole discretion, may suspend a license issued by the Selectboard for non-compliance with this section or for safety reasons. The decision of the Town Manager to suspend a license may be appealed to the Selectboard.

(22)	A violation ofthis section shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation .


(23)	The enforcing officers for this section shall be any Municipal Compliance Officer.


13-14	Bicycling, Skateboarding, Rollerblading and Rollerskating on Town Roadways and Sidewalks


(1)	It shall be unlawful to skateboard, rollerblade or rollerskate on Town roadways, public sidewalks, Town parking lots, parking lots for commercial businesses on Main Street between Equinox Terrace and Memorial Avenue; Depot Street from Main Street to Richville Road; Bonnet Street from Main Street to School Street; and on the sidewalks of the Factory Point Town Green and Adams Park.

(2)	It shall be unlawful to ride a bicycle on public sidewalks on Main Street between Equinox Terrace and Memorial Avenue; Depot Street from Main Street to Richville Road; Bonnet Street from Main Street to School Street; and on the sidewalks of the Factory Point Town Green and Adams Park; provided, that a
 
person may walk a bicycle on a Town sidewalk in the aforementioned designated areas; provided further, bicycles shall yield to and not interfere with pedestrians on sidewalks.

(3)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation.


(4)	The enforcing officers for this section shall be any officer of the Manchester Police Department and Municipal Compliance Officer.

13-15	Maintenance of Culverts


(1)	Culverts under private driveways, private roadways and access roads shall be maintained by the property owner, including replacement of the culvert whenever necessary and removal of debris and ice.

(2)	Whenever the Director of Public Works determines that an emergency situation exists that may jeopardize public safety or public or private property, the Director may order certain repairs to private culverts; provided, that the property owner shall reimburse the Town for any and all repairs, including but not limited to labor, use of equipment and materials.

(3)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation.


(4)	The enforcing officers for this section shall be any Municipal Compliance Officer.


13-16	Removal of Snow and Ice and Debris from Town Sidewalks


(1)	Pursuant to 24 V.S.A. 2291 (2), every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person having charge of any building or lot abutting any public way or public place shall remove the snow and ice and other debris from the sidewalk in front of such building or lot.

(2)	In case the snow and ice on the sidewalk shall be frozen hard enough that it cannot be removed without damage to the sidewalk, the person having charge of any building or lot shall, within the time specified, cause the sidewalk abutting the said premises to be treated with acceptable material, as determined by the Director of Public Works, and shall, as soon thereafter as the weather shall permit, thoroughly clean the sidewalk.

(3)	Snow or ice that falls or accumulates during the day (except Sundays) before 5:00 P.M. shall be removed within three hours after the same has fallen or accumulated. Snow and ice that falls or
 
accumulates on Sunday or after 5:00 P.M. on other days shall be removed before 10:00 A.M. the following day.

(4)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation. Violations shall be issued to the owner of the building or property.

(5)	The enforcing officers for this section shall be any Municipal Compliance Officer.


13-17	Plowing of Snow and Ice and Depositing of Debris onto Town Roadways and Sidewalks


(1)	No person shall plow or deposit snow or ice onto Town roadways and sidewalks or cause the

depositing of debris or rubbish onto Town roadways , sidewalks and rights of way.
(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.	 

(3)	The enforcing officers for this section shall be any Municipal Compliance Officer.


13-18	Discharge of Water onto To·wn Roadways and Rights of Way


(1)	The owners of any properties that abut a Town roadway or right of way, shall be required to maintain culverts, catch basins, other such drainage infrastructure, driveways and private roads so that water does not drain onto Town roadways, rights of way and sidewalks.

(2)	It shall be illegal to discharge water from private properties onto Town roadways, rights of way and sidewalks . A violation of this subsection shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation .

(3)	If a violation of subsection 2 of this section creates a safety hazard through the discharge of excessive water or the accumulation of ice it shall be considered a First Degree civil violation.

(4)	The enforcing officers for this section shall be any Municipal Compliance Officer.


13-19	Removal of Trees from Town Rights of Way


(1)	No person, except Town employees and contractors authorized by the Town, shall remove trees from the right of way controlled or owned by the Town. A tree for the purposes of this section shall include any trees greater than four inches in diameter.
 
(2)	Notwithstanding subsection 1 of this Section, upon the approval of the tree warden, a private party that is qualified and insured may remove a tree from the public right of way.

(3)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation. In addition, the Town shall require any person that removes a tree from the public right of way to replace the tree with a suitable replacement. Each tree removed shall be considered a separate violation under this section.

(4)	The enforcing officers for this section shall be any Municipal Compliance Officer.


13-20	Streetlights


(1)	Streetlights owned, operated or paid for using Town funds shall be installed only on public roadways, Town-owned parking lots and Town owned or operated properties. Any streetlights owned, operated or paid for using Town funds shall be for public good and public safety, and shall provide safety to motorist and pedestrians and not for private benefit.

(2)	No streetlight shall be installed in the Town of Manchester on public rights of way without the permissi on of the Road Commissioner.

13-21	Private Signage in Town Rights of Way


(1)	It shall be illegal to post any signs or notice in the Town right of way. The Town of Manchester is hereby exempt from this subsection.

(2)	Notwithstanding subsection 1 of this section, political signage posted in the right of way directly adjacent to a parcel owned by the person posting a political sign inside the Town right of way shall be exempt from this section; provided, that the number of signs does not exceed five signs, that the size of any sign does not exceed four square feet, that the signage does not infringe on traffic or public safety, and that all signage is removed not more than forty-eight hours after the election. Political signage shall not be permitted in the Town right of way on Depot Street from Highland Avenue to Main Street; on Main Street, between Ways Lane and Cemetery Avenue; and Bonnet Street, from Main Street to School Street.

(3)	Notwithstanding any other section to the contrary, it shall be illegal for any person or organization to post any sign to a Town-owned highway sign, Town-owned street light pole, Town-owned bench, bridge railings and abutments, guardrails, trees located in the Town right of way, in the middle of any roundabout
 
or on any utility pole located within the Town right of way. The Town of Manchester is exempt from this subsection.

(4)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation . The Department of Public Works, Manchester Police Department , Town Manager, Zoning Administrator and Municipal Compliance Officer shall be authorized to remove any signage in the Town right of way that violations this section.

(5)	The enforcing officers for this section shall be any Municipal Compliance Officer.


13-22	Naming of Public and Private Roadways


(1)	The Selectboard, at a public meeting, shall be authorized to name and rename any of the following roadways, public or private, within the Town of Manchester.

(a)	All public roads in the Town of Manchester.


(b)	All private roads and driveways not owned by the Town of Manchester that serve three or more structures on three or more parcels.

(c)	Any private road or driveway of any length that has three or more E911 addresses.


(d)	Any private road or driveway having one or more E911 addresses ifthe Selectboard determines that the roadway or driveway has the potential for future development.

(2)	Whenever the Selectboard names a roadway under subsection 1 of this section, the name of the roadway shall be filed with the Town Clerk of the Town of Manchester.

(3)	A proponent of a new subdivision or private owner(s) of a roadway shall provide the Selectboard at least three distinct names for each roadway required to be named under subsection 1 of this section.

(4)	The Selectboard shall consider the following whenever naming the roadway:


(a)	All roads, public and private, shall have a separate and distinct name in order to avoid confusion.
 
(b)	All roads shall be named using geographic designations, historic owners and families who owned the property, physical features of the adjacent land, and national, state or local historic persons.

(c)	Whenever the Selectboard names a roadway, the Selectboard shall assign roadways with the appropriate road naming suffix (for example, Road, Street, or Lane).

(d)	Compliance with the standards of the of the Vermont Enhanced 911 Board.


(5)	Notwithstanding subsection 3 of this section, the Selectboard may decline to select any of the proposed roadway names provided by a proponent, and may request additional proposed names or name the roadway itself.

(6)	Upon the naming or renaming of a roadway by the Selectboard, the Town Manager shall inform the E911 Coordinator, Police Department, Fire Department and Department of Public Works of the roadway name.

(7)	No later than thirty days after an action by the Selectboard naming or renaming a roadway, the Department of Public Works shall erect appropriate signage, in compliance with the most recent version of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, designating the roadway with the name approved by the Selectboard. When erecting signage for private roadways, the sign shall include the word "private" or "PVT" to indicate that the roadway is privately owned. In the case that a person or organization petitions  the Selectboard to rename a roadway, the person or organization shall be responsible for reimbursing the Town of Manchester for the cost of the new signage, other materials including fasteners and posts, and labor.

13-23	Street Numbering of Properties


(1)	The duly appointed Zoning Administrator shall serve as the E911 Coordinator for the Town of Manchester and the Village of Manchester, and shall be charged with numbering properties based on most recent Addressing Standards of the Vermont Enhanced 911 Board, unless the Selectboard elects to appoint another individual as the E911 Coordinator.

(2)	The E911 coordinator shall maintain records related to this section.
 
(3)	The owner or occupant or person in charge of any building shall display the E911 address assigned by the E9l1 coordinator in compliance with the following standards:

(a)	No later than 30 days after the assignment of the E911 address by the E911 Coordinator the owner or occupant shall display the E911 assigned numbers.

(b)	Numbers shall be displayed on the primary structure on the parcel. The E911 coordinator may, at his or her sole discretion, approve the posting of E911 numbers on a freestanding sign or a mailbox.

(c)	Numbers shall not be more than fifty feet and visible from the roadway, public or private, that serves the parcel.

(d)	Numbers shall be at least four inches in height.


(e)	Numbers shall be legible and distinguishable from the street


(4)	Notwithstanding  clause (3) (b) of this section, for buildings that are occupied by more than one business or have more than one residential dwelling, unit numbers shall be assigned and affixed to the primary entrance to each business or residential dwelling.

(5)	The owner or occupant or person in charge of any building shall remove any numbers that are not E911 numbers and may cause confusion.

(6)	The owner or occupant or person in charge of any building shall be responsible for the ongoing maintenance of E911 address numbers erected under subsection 3 of this section.

(7)	The cost of erecting and maintaining E911 numbers shall be borne by the owner of the property.


(8)	The Zoning Administrator shall not issue a certificate of occupancy until such time as the E911 ·

address numbers are posted in compliance with this section.


(9)	The Fire Chief and Chief of Police shall notify the E911 Coordinator whenever the Fire Chief or Chief of Police become aware of any parcel that is not in compliance with the requirements of this section.
 
(10)	The E911 Coordinator may issue one written warning to the owner of any parcel that is not in compliance with this section. The owner of the property shall take action to correct any deficiencies within fourteen calendar days of the E911 Coordinator issuing the written warning.

(11)	A violation ofthis section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation.


(12)	The E911 Coordinator shall be the enforcement authority of this section.


13-24	Maintenance of Grassed Rights of Way


(1)	In order to maintain public safety, abutters of rights of way owned or controlled by the Town of Manchester in the Commercial 1 and Commercial 3 zoning districts shall maintain the grassed portion of rights of way including keeping the grass at a height of less than eight inches.

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation.


13-25	Enforcement


Unless otherwise specifically authorized in this Chapter, the enforcing authority of this Chapter shall be any Municipal Compliance Officer.







 

Chair of the Selectboard	Date of Enactment by Selectboard




Attested, Town of Manchester Town Clerk:


av:tL	.
Town Clerk
 
CHAPTER XIV
ROAD CONSTRUCTION, ROAD OPENING AND ROAD ACCESS



 
14-1

14-2

14-3

14-4

14-5

14-6

14-7

14-8

14-9

14-10

14-11

14-12

14-13

14-14

14-15
 
Authority to Enact Chapter Purpose of Chapter Definitions
Road Opening Permit Traffic Control
Excavation of Public Roadways and Parking Lots Connecting to Town Drainage Systems
Road Access Permits - General

Road Access Permit - Industrial and Commercial Driveways Road Access Permit - Residential Driveways
Road Access Permit - Temporary

Road Access License for Disabled Residents Mailboxes and Other Items in Town Rights of Way Appeals
Enforcement
 
14-1	Authority to Enact Chapter


This Chapter was duly adopted by the Legislative Body of the Town, the Selectboard, in accordance with 24 VS.A . §2291 (6) and 19 VS.A. §304.

14-2	Purpose of Chapter


The purpose of this Chapter is to protect public safety during the course of any construction activity within the Town right of way, and to ensure that any portion of roadway, sidewalk, curbing, drainage system, or lawn impacted by construction is restored to a safe condition and conforms to acceptable standards.

14-3	Definitions


Access point shall mean any intersection of a private driveway with a Town-owned or controlled roadway or Town-owned parking lot.

Permittee shall mean a party that receives a permit from the Town of Manchester authorized under this Chapter.

Road opening shall mean excavating, digging, modifying or other similar construction activities in the Town right of way, or on a public roadway or sidewalk.

14-4	Road Opening Permit


(1)	It shall be illegal to make alterations, excavate or otherwise perform construction on Town roadways, bridges, sidewalks and within rights of way without the express written approval by means of a permit issued by the Director of Public Works.

(2)	Applications for opening a Town roadway, sidewalk or constructing within a Town roadway shall be made to the Director of Public Works on an application approved by the Town Manager. All applications shall include fees established in this Chapter and in Addendum A.

(3)	The Director of Public Works shall charge a non-refundable application fee established in  ' Addendum A; provided, that a distinct fee shall be charged for disturbing up to 100 square feet of surface within the right of way, between 101 square feet and 500 square feet of surface within the right of way, and for more than 500 square feet of surface within the right of way.
 
(4)	Work performed by the Town , including the Sewer Department and Water Department, or by an agent or contractor of the Town shall be exempt from any fee authorized under this Section.

(5)	A violation of this section shall be considered a First Degree civil violation.


14-5	Traffic Control


(1)	Whenever construction in the Town right of way, as authorized under section 4 of this Chapter, includes detouring or alteration of traffic patterns, the Director of Public Works may, at his or her sole discretion, require traffic control and a traffic control plan that shall include appropriate signage. Traffic control may only be performed by sworn police officers and individuals certified in traffic control.

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.


14-6	Excavation of Public Roadways and Parking Lots


(1)	Any person who excavates a Town roadway shall be required to restore or repair the subsurface and pavement surface to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works. Any person who patches a roadway under a permit issued under this Chapter shall be required to repair any pavement patches and trench  settling for a period of five years from the dates of the construction that required the pavement patch or trenching .

(2)	The Director of Public Works shall require so-called flowable fill on any deep excavation, as determined by the Director of Public Works, on Town Class 1 and Class 2 roadways whenever an excavation trench runs perpendicular to the traveled way or anytime the Director of Public Works determines that flowable fill will benefit the restoration of the roadway surface.

(3)	The Director of Public Works may require so-called flowable fill on any excavation on Town Class 1 and Class 2 roadways whenever an excavation trench runs with the flow of traffic.

(4)	Flowable fill shall not be required on large construction projects, as determined by the Director of Public Works, whereby the project includes paving and on Class 3 roadways, Class 4 roadways, Town trails and Town-owned parking lots, unless the Director of Public Works finds special circumstances that warrant the use of flowable fill in certain areas.
 
(5)	Whenever flowable fill is not required, the Director of Public Works may require, at the sole

expense of the perrnittee, independent tests to ensure compaction to not less than 95%.


14-7	Connecting to Town Drainage Systems


(1)	It shall be illegal to connect to the Town-owned storrnwater drainage system without the express written approval by means of a permit issued by the Director of Public Works. Any connection to the storrnwater system owned or maintained by the Town shall be at the sole discretion of the Town.

(2)	Applications for connecting to the Town-owned storrnwater system shall be made to the Director of Public Works on. an application approved by the Town Manager. All applications shall include a
non-refundable $250.00 application fee.


(3)	The Director of Public Works may require the applicant to upgrade the Town-owned drainage system, at the sole expense of the perrnittee and including engineering, onsite supervision, administrative costs and construction costs.

(4)	Notwithstanding subsection 3 of this Section, the decision of the Director of Public Works to allow a permitted connection to the Town-owned storrnwater system shall consider the ability of the system to handle current demands, the proposed flow by the application and the need for the Town in the future to maintain capacity in the system.

(5)	In addition to the fee required in subsection 2 of this Section and any improvements required by the Director of Public Works by the perrnittee, before any connection approved by the Director of Public Works is made by the perrnittee, the Director shall require the payment of a fee based on the gallonage that the connection is designed to discharge into the Town-owned system. The fee shall be established in
Addendum A.


(6)	The perrnittee shall retain all liability related to the discharge of contaminated materials into the Town-owned storrnwater drainage system .

(7)	The perrnittee shall be responsible for the construction and maintenance of the drainage system authorized to connect to the Town-owned system, including the connection to the Town-owned storrnwater drainage system.
 
(8)	The Director may consider only an application to connect to the Town-owned stormwater drainage system whenever an applicant proves that handling stormwater on the property of the applicant is highly impractical.

(9)	Under no circumstances shall stormwater drainage be permitted to discharge into the Town's sewer system.

(10)	Any violation of this section or the terms of any permit issued by the Director of Public Works may result in the disconnection of the permitted connection at the sole discretion of the Town of Manchester.

(11)	A violation of this section shall be considered a First Degree civil violation.


14-8	Road Access Permits - General


(1)	It shall be illegal to access, through an access point, a roadway owned or operated by the Town of Manchester or a Town-owned parking lot without the express written approval by means of a permit issued by the Director of Public Works.

(2)	Applications for road access shall be made to the Director of Public Works on an application approved by the Town Manager. All applications shall include fees established in this Chapter and in Addendum A. The exact location of the proposed road access shall be indicated clearly on a map or survey submitted by the applicant to the Director of Public Works .

(3)	All road accesses shall be built to Vermont Agency of Transportation standards specifications B-71, "STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL DRIVES" as amended from time to time.

(4)	Unless otherwise waived by the Director of Public Works, all accesses shall include a minimum eighteen (18) inch polyethylene driveway culvert. It shall be the exclusive responsibility of the applicant or landowner to maintain and replace the culvert. The Director may require a culvert larger than eighteen inches at his or her sole discretion. All culverts shall be constructed to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works .

(5)	Unless otherwise waived by the Director of Public Works, all culverts installed under subsection 4 of this section shall have adequate headwalls on each end of the culvert, constructed from concrete or
 
another material approved by the Director of Public Works . All headwalls shall be constructed to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works.

(6)	Visibility from the access point and the public roadway will be a minimum of one-hundred and fifty feet in all directions, without obstruction. Trees, brush, fences, posts and other structures that obstruct clear vision shall be removed by the property owner, as required by the Director of Public Works. The property owner shall continue to clear trees, brush and other visual obstructions, as required by the Director of
Public Works. No access shall be constructed closer than one-hundred and fifty feet to a sharp curve or blind area.

(7)	Whenever possible, driveway access points shall be inverted away from the Town roadway for a minimum of 25 feet for safe starting and stopping and in order to avoid water being discharged onto the Town roadway.

(8)	All access points shall, whenever possible, enter the Town roadway perpendicular to the existing Town roadway.

(9)	The applicant or owner shall be responsible for the costs of installing and maintaining any driveway culvert, ditch, or other improvement required as a condition of an access point approval unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the Road Commissioner. Ifthe Town replaces a failed driveway culvert in the
course of an emergency, the Town shall not accept on-going responsibility for maintenance of the replaced culvert. Furthermore, the property owner shall be required to reimburse the Town for the cost of the culvert, materials, labor and equipment.

(10)	Violation of any condition established in this Chapter or in a permit issued under this Chapter shall be grounds for the revocation of the permit by the Selectboard and the physical closure of the access.

(11)	All permits issued under this Chapter shall be completed within two years from the date of approval, or such permit shall be void.

(12)	Whenever two or more separate and distinct property owners propose to use one shared access point onto a Town roadway, the Director shall charge the applicants a total of fifty percent of the overall  combined fee otherwise authorized in Addendum A.
 
(13)	Access points used for the sole purpose of gaining access to fields for agricultural purposes shall be exempt from any fees otherwise authorized in this Chapter, but shall be required to obtain a permit from the Director of Public Works.

(14)	The Director of Public Works may, at his or her sole discretion, require as part of a permit issued, at the applicant's sole expense, that the applicant pave all or a portion of the driveway with asphalt or other similar material and provide continued maintenance, in order to help ensure that material from the
driveway is not deposited into the Town roadway or right of way.


(15)	The Director of Public Works may, at his or her sole discretion, require as part of a permit issued, at the owner's expense including ongoing electric costs, proper street lighting at the intersection of the access point and a Town roadway whenever the Director deems that traffic flows from the access point may  require lighting.

(16)	Whenever practical and feasible, a Town-owned or controlled sidewalk, publically accessible sidewalk or a sidewalk that is part of the Town's public sidewalk network shall continue through road access so as to provide for the continuation of the sidewalk through the road access.

14-9	Road Access Permit- Industrial and Commercial Driveways


(1)	In addition to the requirements and conditions of section 8 of this Chapter, the Director of Public Works may issue a permit to access a Town roadway for access from any parcel zoned as a commercial or industrial.

(2)	Unless otherwise approved by the Director of Public Works, commercial and industrial access points approved under this section shall not be wider than 26 feet wide. The Director of Public Works shall charge an additional $100 for each additional foot of access in excess of 26 feet.

(3)	A violation of this section shall be considered a First Degree civil violation.


14-10	Road Access Permit - Residential Driveways


(1)	In addition to the requirements and conditions of section 8 of this Chapter, the Director of Public Works may issue a permit to access a Town roadway for access from any parcel zoned residential.

(2)	Residential access points may not exceed 24 feet in width .
 
(3)	The Director of Public Works shall not grant any residential parcel, as defined by the Town's zoning bylaws, more than one access point, except as authorized by section 11 of this Chapter.

(4)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.


14-11	Road Access Permit - Temporary


(1)	It shall be illegal for any person, except authorized employees and agents of the Town of Manchester, to block a Town-owned or 1:own controlled roadway, bridge, sidewalk or right of way, except as provided for in this section and in Chapter X.

(2)	The Director of Public Works may grant a temporary permit, which shall expire on a specific date determined by the Director, to access Town-owned or Town-controlled roadways, sidewalks or rights of way for construction and repairs of properties that require use of the Town roadway, bridge, sidewalk or right of way, for delivery of special equipment or merchandise and other purposes determined by the Director of Public Works.

(3)	The Permittee authorized in subsection 2 of this section shall be responsible for the safety of the area, erecting and maintaining appropriate signage, securing equipment, and traffic control. The Director of Public Works may impose certain conditions and requirements in order to maintain public safety, health and convemence.

(4)	Permittee shall be responsible for obtaining any and all safety and construction permits from state and federal agencies.

(5)	Permittees shall provide the Town of Manchester a valid certificate of insurance for general liability and worker's compensation insurance naming the Town of Manchester as an additional insured in an amount set by the Director of Public Works but not less than $1,000,000.

(4)	The Director shall collect the base fee established in Addendum A as well as the per day fee established inAddendum A.

(5)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.
 
14-12	Road Access License for Disabled Residents


(1)	The Director of Public Works may grant an annual license, which shall expire on December 31 of each year, for an additional access point for a residential or commercial property when an owner or tenant provides evidence that the additional access point is medically necessary by an individual who regularly uses the property to ensure the safe access of the property. The annual fee for a license granted under this section shall be established in Addendum A

(2)	An application filed under this section shall include documentation from a physician, licensed in the State of Vermont, documenting in detail the medical necessity for an additional access point and the estimated duration of the need . The application shall also include stamped plans from an engineer, licensed in the State of Vermont, showing the design of the access point , configuration of the driveway and elements that necessitate the additional access point. The Director of Public Works may require additional
information .


(3)	Whenever a license expires and is not renewed within fourteen days of expiration, whenever the medical need for the additional access point is no longer present, or the property is sold to a person not having a medical need for the additional access point , the licensed access point shall be removed within fourteen days, or as soon as practical, by and at the sole expense of the owner of the property, including but not limited to the restoration of any ditches, replacement of culverts and the repairs of any pavement, to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works.

14-13	Mailboxes and Other Items in Town Rights of Way


(1)	The Director of Public Works may require that the owner of a mailbox relocate, at the owner's expense, any mailbox placed in the Town right of way whenever the Director determines, at his or her sole discretion, that the mailbox is creating an infringement to maintenance, obstructs traffic or that the mailbox is creating a public safety issue.

(2)	Mailboxes located in the Town right of way shall be maintained by the property owner. Any mailboxes and posts damaged as a result of normal snow removal activities shall be repaired at the expense of the property owner.
 
(3)	Other privately owned items, such as signs, posts, fences and other similar items, shall not be permitted in the Town right of way.

14-14	Appeals


Any person or organization aggrieved by the decision of the Director of Public Works may appeal, in writing, to the Road Commissioner within seven calendar days of the decision of the Director of Public Works.

14-15	Enforcement


Any Municipal Compliance Officers is hereby designated as the enforcement authority of this Chapter.








 
-{  \
 
r'>
'_
 
/(	)
=·	I	I

Chair of the Selectboard	Date of Enactment by Selectboard




Attested,  Town of Manchester  Town Clerk:



 
Town Clerk
 
CHAPTER XV OPERATION OF VEHICLES




15-1	Authority to Enact Chapter

15-2	Purpose of Chapter

15-3	Definitions

15-4	Parking - general requirements and prohibitions 15-5	Two Hour Parking Zones
15-6	No Parking Zones

15-7	Special Parking Regulations

15-8	Handicap Parking Spaces - Designation and Penalties 15-9	Impounding of Vehicles
15-10	Crosswalks

15-11	Stop Signs

15-12	Yield Signs

15-13	Establishment  of Speed Limits and Penalties 15-14	No Passing Zones
15-15	Obstructing Town Roadways and Rights of Way 15-16	Bicycle Lanes
15-17	Posted Roads and Overweight Permits 15-18	Enforcement
 
15-1	Authority to Enact Chapter


This Chapter was duly adopted by the Legislative Body of the Town, the Selectboard, in accordance with

23 V.S .A. §§ 1007 & 1008 and 24 V.S.A . 2291 (4).


15-2	Purpose of Chapter


This Chapter has been adopted in order to provide for public safety and convenience on Town owned roadways, bridges, sidewalks and crosswalks.

15-3	Definitions


Unless otherwise provided for herein, traveled roadway, traveled way and roadway shall mean the portion of a right of way improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic .

15-4	Parking - general requirements and prohibitions


(1)	Parking in any of the following manners is prohibited, and vehicles may be towed at the owner's expense:

(a)	On any roadway, in the public right of way and Town-owned parking lots between 1:00 AM and 6:00 AM from November 1 to March 31 of each year.

(b)	Within ten ( 10) feet of any fire hydrant.


(c)	Within twenty (20) feet of an intersection.


(d)	In front of or obstructing a private or public driveway or roadway.


(e)	More than six (6) inches from the curb or outside of the painted parking lines .


(f)	Across or within any public sidewalk, crosswalk or in any area off the roadway so as to block the passage of any pedestrian along the sidewalk or crosswalk.

(g)	Double parking, so-called, or obstructing the traveled way or otherwise obstructing the flow of traffic.

(h)	On the left side of a roadway in such a manner that the front of the parked vehicle is facing oncoming traffic.
 
(i)	Vehicles over fourteen feet in length shall not park in the parking spaces on the east side of Main Street approximately 260 feet from the intersection of Bonnet Street, and marked as COMPACT CARS ONLY.

15-5	Two-Hour Parking Zones


(1)	The Selectboard hereby establishes the following parking areas as two-hour parking zones:


(a)	Parking spaces on both sides of Main Street from the intersection of Bonnet Street to the intersection with Park Place, except spaces designated as handicap parking spaces.

(b)	Parking spaces on both sides Of Bonnet Street from the intersection of Main Street to School Street, except spaces designated as handicap parking spaces.

(c)	Parking spaces in the Town-owned parking lot at the intersection of Elm Street and Highland Avenue, except the spaces designated as handicap parking spaces.

(d)	Center Hill Road, from Main Street to Park Street, and Park Street.


(e)	Cemetery Avenue, in the dedicated parking spaces in front of the Manchester Community Library.

(2)	It shall be unlawful to park for more than two hours in any parking space in the parking zones established in subsection 1 of this section. Any violation of this section shall be punishable by the maximum fine established in state law.

15-6	No Parking Zones


Parking is prohibited on any of the following designated streets or portions thereof:


(a)	Parking in a manner on a Class II roadway as to limit the traveled way to less than 20 feet in total width.

(b)	Parking in a manner on a Class III and Class IV roadway as to limit the traveled way to less than 15 feet in total width.

(c)	Both sides of Depot Street, from the intersection with Dufresne Pond Road to the intersection of Main Street.
 
(d)	On the west side of Main Street, approximately 120 feet east of the intersection with Memorial Avenue to Beech Street.

(e)	On the east side of Main Street, from the intersection of Center Hill Road to Beech Street.


(f)	Both sides of Center Hill Road, from the intersection of Park Place to Depot Street.


(g)	Both sides of Union Street, from the Village boundary to Richville Road .


(h)	Both sides of Cottage Street, from Depot Street to the intersection of Wyman Lane.


(i)	Both sides of Wyman Lane.


(j)	Both sides of New Ireland Road from the intersection with Depot Street for 1,000 feet.


(k)	Both sides of Recreation Park Road, except the designated drop-off area in front of the Park House, which shall be for drop off and pick up only and not to exceed five minutes.

(1)	Both sides of School Street.


(m)	South side of Elm Street and Elm Street Extension.


(n)	On the east side of Highland Avenue from the intersection of Depot Street to Bamumville Road.

(o)	On the west side of Highland Avenue from the intersection of Depot Street north for a distance of 1,250 feet.

(p)	On the north and south side of Main Street, from the intersection of the Ways Lane to the intersection of Bonnet Street.

(q)	On both sides of Cemetery Avenue, except in designated parking spaces in front of the Manchester Community Library.

(r)	On both sides ofHillvale Drive, from the intersection of Main Street north for 270 feet to the first intersection.

(s)	On both sides of Village View Road from 9:00 PM to 6:00 AM.
 
15-7	Special Parking Regulations


The Town hereby adopts special parking regulations to provide for parallel parking and angled parking on portions of both sides of Main Street, on a portion of Center Hill Road, on a portion of Park Place, on a portion of Bonnet Street in certain designated areas. Markings shall be placed upon the curb or road for the purpose of designating parking spaces under the supervision of the Road Commission . All vehicles shall be parked within lines or markings and there shall not be more than one vehicle parked in any space.

15-8	Handicap Parking Spaces - Designation and Penalties


(1)	The Road Commissioner shall cause certain parking spaces on public roadways and in Town-owned parking lots to be reserved and used by handicapped persons . Handicap parking spaces shall be marked using generally acceptable standards.

(2)	A person, other than a person with a disability, who for his or her own purposes parks a vehicle in a space for persons with disabilities shall be fined the maximum amount allowable under 23 VS.A. 1749 for each violation.

(3)	Notwithstanding the fine established in subsection 2 ofthis section, a sworn police officer of the Manchester Police Department may cause the removal of a vehicle parked in violation subsection 2 of this section. The owner of the vehicle removed shall be responsible for any costs, including but not limited to towing and irnpoundment fees, which shall be payable before the vehicle is released to the owner.

15-9	Impounding of Vehicles


The Manchester Police Department may cause to be towed and may impound the vehicle of any owner who fails to pay three or more fines assessed under sections 3, 4, 5 and 7 of this Chapter after sixty or more
days. The vehicle shall not be released to the owner until the owner pays all fines and penalties, the cost of towing the vehicle, a storage fee of $12 per day and an administrative surcharge of $50.

15-10	Crosswalks


The Road Commissioner may establish crosswalks on public roadways within the Town of Manchester based on engineering studies, and may establish no parking zones near crosswalks in order to protect pedestrians.
 
15-11	Stop Signs


(1)	Stop signs shall be placed by the Department of Public Works at intersections for the control of traffic, as indicated within Stop/Yield Sign Ordinance; Stop/Yield Ordinance Map 1; Stop/Yield Ordinance Map 2; Stop/Yield Ordinance Map 3; and Stop/Yield Ordinance Map 4. The direction of the arrow indicates the roadway being controlled by the stop sign.

(2)	All motor vehicles and bicycles shall come to a full stop at STOP SIGNS before proceeding into any intersection.

(3)	A violation of subsection 2 of this section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation. In lieu of any penalty established under State law, a police officer may, at his or her sole discretion issue a citation under this subsection.

15-12	Yield Signs


(1)	Yield signs shall be placed by the Department of Public Works at intersections for the control of traffic, as as indicated on Stop/Yield Sign Ordinance; Stop/Yield Ordinance Map 1; Stop/Yield Ordinance Map 2; Stop/Yield Ordinance Map 3; and Stop/Yield Ordinance Map 4. The direction of the arrow indicates the roadway being controlled by the yield sign.

(2)	All motor vehicles and bicycles shall yield the right of way at YIELD SIGNS to traffic proceeding on designated through highways before proceeding into the intersection.

(3)	A violation of subsection 2 of this section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation. In lieu of any penalty established under State law, a police officer may, at his or her sole discretion issue a citation under this subsection.
 






 
 

·....
 
r-
3-·  --.--1
I	_ ,L>1l
 




 
 


 
··--..    ------------­
i
I
 
Town of Dorset
--i---------- -----
! ;
 

-   ---
 














I>







\..


I ---------.,I
,.,.,,........ "'---·------4	'
Manchester	J
--------,Village
I
I
(
I
 
•	Stop sfgns Yield Signs
Town Roads
A/Tr:Nm Roads
·Other Roads
N State Roads
.	· Prlva.te  Road$
 

Town of Manchester, Vermont
Stop .. Yield Ordinance
M.ap 1
 


 

Pruduced mil 1/tO by BCRC
 


 
,_...,_	Town of Dorset
-  r	----------
1	:ii!
 
---..._......:....
 
I	'I
!   I
I I	I
1	I
I
I
'•
I I I I

I
l
I








 














-,1
I
UNCGLNAV
/1
6   Stop S gns
Yield SigJlS TOl'm Roads j\/T n Roads Other Roads
j\/ st.ate Roads
. Private Roads
 


















Town of Manchester, Vermont Stop w   Vjeld Ordinance
Map2

>
•	Stop Signs
 
Yield Signs
Town Roads
N TCY1vn Roads
OtflerRoads
N St.ate Roads
·	Private Roads
 
Town of Manchester, Vermont
Stop  Yield Ordinance
Map3
 

 
Prod uca  10/i U10 b  BCRC
 

Manchester Village


 



Town of Sunderland
 

 
t  Slop Signs
Yield Signs Town Roads NTr::mn Roads
Other Roads
N State Roads
.·	/ Private Roads
 


Town of Manchester, Vermont Stop - Yield Ordinance
Map4
 
15-13	Establishment of Speed Limits and Penalties


(1)	The Selectboard has determined, on the basis of engineering and traffic investigation, that the speed limits hereafter provided for in the diagram entitled "Speed Ordinance: Town of Manchester, Vermont" are necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Manchester.
(2)	Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall pay penalties as promulgated by the State of Vermont and set forth in the State's Uniformed Traffic Compliant Waiver Schedule of Fines and
License Suspensions.                                                                                                                                                                
(3)	In lieu of the penalties established in subsection 2 of this Chapter, an officer of the Manchester Police Department may issue a citation to a driver who is driving 1 to 10 miles over the posted speed limit. A violation of this subsection shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.

(4)	In lieu of the penalties established in subsection 2 of this Chapter, an officer of the Manchester Police Department may issue a citation to a driver who is driving 11 to 15 miles over the posted speed limit. A violation of this subsection shall be considered a First Degree civil violation.
 

15-14	No Passing Zones


No passing shall be allowed in the following areas :


(a)	Main Street between the intersections of Ways Lanes and North Road


(b)	Depot Street between the intersections of Main Street and Dufresne Pond Road


(c)	Bonnet Street between the intersections of Main Street and the bridge over the West Branch of the Battenkill River

15-15	Obstructing Town Roadways and Rights of Way


(1)	It shall be illegal to obstruct Town roadways or place barriers of obstructions in the Town right of way without the permission of the Chief of Police or Public Works Director.

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.


15-16	Bicycle Lanes


(1)	It shall be illegal for motorized vehicles to drive in designated bike lanes, except to tum or to yield to emergency response vehicles.

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.


15-17	Posted Roads and Overweight Permits


(1)	The following roadways shall be posted for overweight truck traffic :


(a)	Bamumville Road - no through trucks over 24,000 pounds


(b)	Center Hill Road - no through trucks over 24,000 pounds


(c)	High Meadow Way - no through trucks over 24,000 pounds


(d)	Muddy Lane - no through trucks over 24,000 pounds


(e)	New Ireland Road - no through trucks over 24,000 pounds


(f)	Beech Street - no through trucks over 24,000 pounds
 
(2)	The Road Commissioner may restrict truck traffic on certain roads for emergencies and in March, April, and May.

(3)	Individual and fleet overweight truck permits shall be approved or disapproved by the Director of Public Work; provided, that the Director may approve permits with reasonable conditions and restrictions .

(4)	The Town shall collect the maximum fee allowable by state law for overweight permits.


(5)	A violation of subsections 1 and 2 of this section shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.

15-18	Enforcement


Sworn Police Officers of the Town of Manchester Police Department are hereby designated as the enforcement authority of this Chapter.




 	-
Chair of the Selectboard	Date of Enactment by Selectboard




Attested, Town of Manchester Town Clerk:



 
 
CHAPTER XVI
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY




16-1	Authority to Enact Chapter

16-2	Purpose of Chapter

16-3	Definitions

16-4	Public Safety Hazards

16-5	Dangerous Structures

16-6	Vacant Structures

16-7	Other Public Safety Hazards

16-8	Sewer Pump Stations - General

16-9	Sewer Pump Stations - Category 1 16-10	Sewer Pump Stations - Category 2 16-11	Sewer Pump Stations - Category 3 16-12	Service of Orders and Notices
16-13	Enforcement
 
16-1	Authority to Enact Chapter


18 VS .A. Chapter 11, 24 VS.A. Chapter 61 §2291 (14), and 2 VS.A. Chapter 133 § 5061,


16-2	Purpose of Chapter


The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the public health and public safety and to abate public nuisances.

16-3	Definitions


For purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply :


Board of Health shall mean the Selectboard and Health Officer, pursuant to 18 VS.A. §604.


Dangerous Building or Structure shall mean any building or structure or part thereof declared structurally

unsafe or hazardous by any duly constituted authority, whether it is occupied, unoccupied, or vacant.


Hazardous Conditions shall include, but not be limited to, situations where a property owner, tenant, any mortgagee in possession, or a designee of any of the foregoing allows : (1) trash to unreasonably accumulate or be discarded on a property in such a way that it causes an obvious hazard to public safety or public
health; (2) creation of an unsanitary condition likely to attract or harbor disease-carrying pests; (3) trees and other plant life to dangerously obscure drivers' views; (4) placement of appliances, cars, and other objects that might constitute an attractive nuisance to children or disease-carrying pests.

Health Officer shall mean any person nominated by the Selectboard to the Vermont Department of Health and subsequently appointed by the Commission of Health as the Town's Health Officer pursuant to 18
VS .A.  § 601. Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the appointment  of one or more assistant Health Officers.

Public Safety Inspector shall mean any person appointed by the Selectboard to administer Section 16-4 of this Chapter. Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the appointment of more than one Public Safety Inspector or an assistant Public Safety Inspector.

Sewer Pump Station shall mean any privately owned system designed to pump sewage from a tank or other containment system into the public sewer system, private sewer system or septic system.
 



Trash shall include rubbish, garbage, waste and refuse, including, but not limited to household wastes, food scraps, household appliances, automotive parts, automobiles, furniture, and yard clippings, but shall not include junk at a duly licensed junkyard .

Vacant Building or Structure shall mean any structure or building that is unoccupied by a person or occupied by unauthorized persons for one hundred twenty (120) days, excepting permitted warehouse or storage structures, garages, vacation or resort facilities or those buildings or structures only used on a seasonal basis, structures being newly constructed or rehabilitated within the terms of their zoning permits, structures being actively marketed for sale or lease, or structures receiving regular maintenance and utility services despite being unoccupied for 120 days or more.

16-4	Public Safety Hazards

(1)	Being that there exist in the Town of Manchester structures, buildings or premises that have become dangerous or unsafe and otherwise vacant, abandoned, and in disrepair, the selectboard finds and declares:


(a)	Structures or premises that become dangerous and unsafe must promptly be made safe and secure to protect the public safety.
(b)	Structures that are vacant and not properly secured are dangerous and unsafe in that they are extremely vulnerable to being set on fire by unauthorized persons.
(c)	Many structures or premises that are vacant, whether secured or not, are a blight on their neighborhoods, cause deterioration and instability in their neighborhoods, and have an adverse impact upon adjacent and nearby properties .
(d)	Structures that were previously used as residential units and have since become vacant have a significant and detrimental impact on the local housing market.
(e)	Structures that are vacant and not properly secured attract vagrants and criminals and are prime

·locations to conduct illegal criminal activities, including arson and drug use.

(f)	Structures that are vacant and unsecured pose serious threats to the public health and safety and therefore are declared to be public nuisances.
(g)	Immediate abatement of these conditions is necessary to prevent such public nuisances, prevent unsightly blight and the deterioration of neighborhoods with the consequent adverse impact on the
 
value of adjacent and nearby properties, secure the public safety and to ensure and enhance the

vitality and livability of our neighborhoods.

(h) Communication between owners of dangerous and vacant buildings or premises and the town is essential for effective allocation of public resources and the maintenance of public health, welfare, and safety in regards to such structures.

(2)	The purpose of this section and sections 16-5, 16-6, and 16-7, is to establish the reasonably necessary measures to abate the public nuisances, blight, negative housing market impact, and other harmful effects connected with dangerous and vacant or abandoned buildings, structures or premises and bring back into productive use consistent with the authority vested in the town to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public through the regulation of the construction, maintenance, repair, and alteration of buildings, structures, or premises within the town .

(3)	Enforcement Authority. The public safety inspector is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of sections 16-4, 16-5, 16-6 and 16-7. The inspector may take such measures as are necessary for the proper administration of the section, including, but not limited to, maintaining lists on the status of vacant buildings, structures, or premises . The inspector may delegate his/her powers and duties under this chapter to an appropriate administrator or any inspector so designated.

16-5	Dangerous Structures


(1)	A building or structure or part thereof that is or becomes dangerous or unsafe shall be made safe and secure. If the building cannot be made safe or secure, the owner shall take down and remove the building. An owner of such a dangerous or unsafe building or structure who would make safe or would take down and remove a such building or structure pursuant to this section shall comply with all applicable building, fire prevention, zoning ordinances, and any other applicable code or ordinance. No change of use or occupancy shall be compelled by reason of such reconstruction or restoration.

(2)	The inspector shall inspect a building or structure upon receiving information that the building or structure or anything attached or connected therewith is in violation of the specifications of all applicable public safety ordinances and codes or is otherwise in such unsafe condition that the public safety is endangered. Ifthe inspector has reason to believe that an emergency situation exists tending to create an
 
immediate danger to the health, welfare, or safety of the general public, the inspector shall enter and inspect the premises . Absent an emergency situation, if the owner of the vacant building or structure fails or refuses to consent to an inspection, the inspector shall seek a search warrant from the Vermont District Court for
the purpose of determining and ensuring the structural integrity of the building, the repairs necessary to ensure its structural integrity, that it will be safe for entry by police officers and firefighters in time of exigent circumstances or emergency, that the building and its contents will not present a hazard to the public.

(3)	If, in the inspector's judgment, the structure or building appears to endanger the public safety, the inspector shall in his/her discretion elect to commence action to abate as herein provided. To commence an abatement action, the inspector shall make a careful survey report based on his/her inspection of the premises , or if necessary based on an additional inspection and forthwith notify the owner to remove the condition or building or make the building or condition safe and secure in the time specified for in the notice. If it appears to the inspector that such structure would be especially dangerous, the inspector may affix a notice of dangerousness in a conspicuous space upon the structure's exterior walls which shall not
be removed or defaced without the inspector's authority.


(4)	Any person notified as provided in subsection (3) shall within the time specified commence to secure or remove such structure. If the public safety so requires, the inspector shall enter upon the premises and cause the structure to be made safe and secure and that passers-by are protected at the expense of the owner or person interested.

(5)	If the owner refuses or neglects to remove or make the building safe, the inspector shall cause it to be taken down or otherwise made safe, and the costs and charges incurred shall constitute a lien upon the real estate upon which such building is situated and shall be enforced within the time and in the manner provided for the collection of taxes on land, pursuant to 32 VS.A. § 5061, so long as the lien is recorded in the office where the land records are kept.

16-6	Vacant Structures


(1)	The owner of a vacant building or structure shall immediately remove all combustible waste and refuse therefrom in compliance with the applicable fire prevention codes and shall remove any waste,
 
rubbish or debris from the interior of the structure. The owner of a vacant building or structure shall also immediately remove any waste, rubbish, debris or excessive vegetation from the yards surrounding the vacant building or structure in accordance with the vacant building maintenance standards of this article.

(2)	The owner of a vacant building or structure shall immediately lock, barricade or secure all doors, windows and other openings in the building or structure to prohibit entry by unauthorized persons, in accordance with the vacant building maintenance standards of this article. The owner of a vacant building or structure shall provide the police department with a list of persons authorized to be present in the building and shall provide notices of trespass to the police authorizing the arrest for trespass of individuals not on the list. The owner shall update the authorized person list as needed.

(3)	The obligations of owners of a vacant building or structure are continuing obligations which are effective throughout the time of vacancy, as that term is defined in this article. The inspector shall have continuing abatement authority throughout the time of vacancy.

(4)	A vacant building or structure shall be deemed adequately protected from intrusion by trespassers and from deterioration by the weather if it satisfies the following vacant building maintenance standards:

(a)	Building openings: Doors, windows, areaways and other openings shall be weather-tight and secured against entry by birds, vermin and trespassers and free from graffiti. Missing or broken doors, windows and other such openings shall be covered by glass or other rigid transparent materials which are weather protected, and tightly fitted and secured to the opening.
(b)	Roofs: The roof and flashings shall be sound and tight, not admit moisture or have defects which might admit moisture, rain or roof drainage, and allow for drainage to prevent dampness or deterioration in the interior walls or interior of the building.
(c)	Drainage: The building storm drainage system shall be functional and installed in an approved manner, and allow discharge in an approved manner.
(d)	Building structure: The building shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and free from debris, rubbish and garbage. The building shall be sanitary. The building shall not pose a threat to
the public health and safety.
 
(e)	Structural members: The structural members shall be free of deterioration and capable of safely bearing imposed dead and live loads .
(f) Foundation walls: The foundation walls shall be maintained structurally sound and in a sanitary condition so as not to pose a threat to public health and safety, shall be capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and shall be free from open cracks and breaks, free from leaks, free from graffiti, and be animal and rat-proof
(g)	Exterior walls: The exterior walls shall be free of holes, breaks, free from graffiti, and loose or rotting materials. Exposed metal, wood, or other surfaces shall be protected from the elements and against decay, corrosion or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
(h)	Decorative features : The cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, fences, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be safe, anchored, and in good repair and free from graffiti. Exposed metal, wood, or other surfaces shall be protected from the elements and against decay, corrosion or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
(i)	Overhanging extensions : All balconies, canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, stairways, fire

escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts and similar features shall be in good repair, anchored, safe and sound, and free from graffiti. Exposed metal and wood surfaces shall be protected from the elements and against decay, corrosion or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment
(j) Chimneys and towers: Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks, and similar appurtenances shall be structurally safe and in good repair, and free from graffiti. Exposed metal and wood surfaces shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
(k)	Walkways: Walkways shall be safe for pedestrian travel.

(1)	Accessory and appurtenant structures: Accessory and appurtenant structures such as garages, sheds, and fences shall be free from safety, health, and fire hazards and shall comply with these vacant building maintenance standards.
 
(m)Premises: The premises upon which the structure or building is located shall be clean, safe, and sanitary, free from waste, rubbish , debris or excessive vegetation, and shall not pose a threat to the public health or safety.

16-7	Other Public Safety Hazards


(1)	In addition to buildings or structures, abandoned or neglected lands may pose hazards requiring abatement to protect the public safety. The following conditions shall not be allowed and if present on a property, the owner shall immediately abate such condition:

(a)	Trash accumulated or discarded on a property in such a way that it causes an obvious hazard to public safety or public health.
(b)	Unsanitary conditions on a property that attract or harbor disease-carrying pests.

(c)	Excessive vegetation on a property that dangerously obscures drivers' views or prevents or impedes emergency access or proper maintenance to buildings or structures in the vicinity.
(d)	The placement of appliances, cars, and other objects on a property that might constitute an attractive nuisance to children or disease-carrying pests.

(2)	The inspector shall inspect premises upon receiving information that it is in violation of this section or is otherwise in such unsafe condition that the public safety is endangered . If the inspector has reason to believe that an emergency situation exists tending to create an immediate danger to the health, welfare, or safety of the general public, the inspector shall enter and inspect the premises. Absent an emergency situation, if the owner of the premises fails or refuses to consent to an inspection, the inspector shall seek a search warrant from the Vermont District Court for the purpose of determining and ensuring that the premises will not present a hazard to the public.

(3)	If, in the inspector's judgment, the premises appears to endanger the public safety, the inspector shall in his/her discretion elect to commence action to abate as herein provided. To commence an abatement action, the inspector shall make a careful survey report based on his/her inspection of the premises, or if necessary based on an additional inspection and forthwith notify the owner to remove the condition or make the condition safe in the time specified for in the notice. If it appears to the inspector that such premises would be especially dangerous, the inspector may affix a notice of dangerousness in a
 
conspicuous space upon the premises which shall not be removed or defaced without the inspector 's authority.

(4)	Any person notified as provided in subsection (3) shall within the time specified commence to make the premises safe. Ifthe public safety so requires, the inspector shall enter upon the premises and cause it to be made safe and that passers-by are protected at the expense of the owner or person interested .

(5)	If the owner refuses or neglects to make the premises safe, the inspector shall cause it to be made safe, and the costs and charges incurred shall constitute a lien upon the real estate and shall be enforced within
the time and in the manner provided for the collection of taxes on land, pursuant to 32 VS.A. § 5061, so

long as the lien is recorded in the office where the land records are kept.


16-8	Sewer Pump Stations - General


(I)	Whereas privately owned Sewer Pump Stations represent a potential significant health hazard to the citizen of the Town of Manchester, the Board of Public Health hereby directs the Health Officer, effective January 1, 2017, to regulate and license all Sewer Pump Stations in the Town of Manchester in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter.

(2)	The Health Officer may promulgate rules and regulations consistent with this Chapter to ensure the effective and efficient regulation of sewer pump stations.

16-9	Sewer Pump Stations - Category 1


(1)	Category 1 Sewer Pump Station shall mean any Sewer Pump Station that handles or is designed to handle 2, 100 or more gallons per day and located within the designated Aquifer Protection Area .

(2)	On or before January 1, 2017 and each year thereafter, owners of Category 1 Sewer Pump Stations shall file a license application with the Town Health Officer, on a form approved by the Town Manager. The Health Officer shall approve or disapprove the application based on this Chapter.

(3)	The Health Officer shall charge an annual licensing fee of $250.00 to offset costs associated with licensing and inspections.

(4)	Effective January 1, 2017, the owner of a Category I Sewer Pump Station shall provide the Health Officer a valid certificate of insurance in an amount not less than $1,000,000 naming the Town of
 
Manchester as an additionally insured . It shall be the responsibility of the owner to maintain insurance coverage through the term of the license. The owner shall provide a copy of the certificate of insurance to the Health Officer.

(5)	Effective January 1, 2017, the Health Officer or a qualified engineer appointed by the Health  Officer shall inspect annually all Category 1 Pump Stations or at any time that the Health Officer has concerns about the operation or condition of the pump station. The Health Officer may order certain repairs or upgrades based on this Chapter and generally accepted standards in order to maintain and protect public health.

(6)	Effective January 1, 2017, all Category 1 Sewer Pump Stations shall be operated by a qualified operator licensed with the State of Vermont, who shall maintain adequate professional liability insurance in an amount not less than $1,000,000.

(7)	Effective January 1, 2018, all Category 1 Sewer Pump Stations shall have backup generators capable of powering the pump station and its equipment, including the pump for not less than 72 hours.

(8)	Effective January  1, 2018, all Category  1 Sewer Pump Stations shall have a backup pump and the capacity to install the backup pump in less than ti.venty-four hours.

(9)	Any violation of this section shall be considered a First Degree civil violation.


16-10	Sewer Pump Stations - Category 2


(1)	Category 2 Sewer Pump Station shall mean any Sewer Pump Station that handles or is designed to handle 2, 100 or more gallons per day or located within the designated Aquifer Protection Area and handles or designed to handle between 840 gallons per day and 2,099 gallons per day.

(2)	On or before January 1, 2017 and every two years thereafter, owners of Category 2 Sewer Pump Stations shall file a license application with the Town Health Officer, on a form approved by the Town Manager. The Health Officer shall approve or disapprove the application based on this Chapter.

(3)	The Health Officer shall charge a licensing fee of $125.00 to offset costs associated with licensing and inspections.
 
(4)	Effective January 1, 2017, the owner of a Category 2 Sewer Pump Station shall provide the Health Officer a valid certificate of insurance in an amount not less than $500,000 naming the Town of Manchester as an additionally insured. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to maintain insurance coverage
through the term of the license. The owner shall provide a copy of the certificate of insurance to the Health Officer.

(5)	Effective January 1, 2017, the Health Officer or a qualified engineer appointed by the Health Officer shall inspect all Category 2 Pump Stations as part of the licensing process or at any time that the Health Officer has concerns about the operation or condition of the pump station. The Health Officer may order certain repairs or upgrades based on this Chapter and generally accepted standards in order to maintain and protect public health.

(6)	·	Effective January 1, 2017, the Health Office may order, at his or her sole discretion, that a Category 2 Sewer Pump Station be operated by a qualified operator licensed with the State of Vermont, who shall maintain adequate professional liability insurance in an amount not less than $1,000,000.

(7)	Any violation of this section shall be considered a Second Degree civil violation.


16-11	Sewer Pump Stations - Category 3


(1)	Category 3 Sewer Pump Station shall mean any Sewer Pump Station not licensed under sections 9 or 10 of this Chapter and that handles or is designed to handle between 840 gallons per day and 2,099 gallons per day.

(2)	On or before January 1, 2017 and every five years thereafter, owners of Category 3 Sewer Pump Stations shall file a license application with the Tow'n Health Officer, on a form approved by the Town Manager. The Health Officer shall approve or disapprove the application based on this Chapter.

(3)	The Health Officer shall charge a licensing fee of $50.00 to offset costs associated with licensing and inspections.

(4)	Effective January 1, 2017, the owner of a Category 3 Sewer Pump Station shall provide the Health Officer a valid certificate of insurance in an amount not less than $250,000. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to maintain insurance coverage through the term of the license. The owner shall provide a copy of the certificate of insurance to the Health Officer.
 
(5)	Effective January 1, 2017, the Health Officer or a qualified engineer appointed by the Health Officer may inspect any Category 3 Pump Stations as part of the licensing process or at any time that the Health Officer has concerns about the operation or condition of the pump station. The Health Officer may order certain repairs or upgrades based on this Chapter and generally accepted standards in order to maintain and protect public health .

(6)	Any violation of this section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation.


16-12	Service of Orders and Notices


Any orders or notices authorized in this Chapter shall be served upon the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by first class mail. A copy of the order shall be provided to the Board of Health.

16-13	Enforcement


The Town Health Officer and the Public Safety Inspector shall be the enforcement authorities for this Chapter.










Chair of the Selectboard	Date of Enactment by Selectboard




Attested, Town of Manchester Town Clerk:



ff,_Uis:b
Town Clerk
 
CHAPTER XVIII
SOLID WASTE AND LITTERING




18-1	Authority to Enact Chapter

18-2	Purpose of Chapter

18-3	Definitions

18-4	Improper Disposal of Solid Waste 18-5	Improper Dumping of Solid Waste
18-6	Improper Disposal of Hazardous Waste

18-7	Unauthorized Disposal of Solid Waste in Town Trash and Recycling Containers 18-8	Enforcement  Officers
 
18-1	Authority to Enact Chapter


The Chapter has been promulgated under the authority granted to the Town's legislative body by 24 V.S.A. 2291 (12).

18-2	Purpose of Chapter


The Chapter has been adopted to protect public health, public safety and public welfare by prohibiting the the improper or unauthorized disposal of solid waste.

18-3	Definitions


Solid waste shall mean any discarded garbage, unwanted residential material, cigarette butts, commercial or industrial material, refuse, septage, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply plant, or pollution control facility and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contained gaseous materials resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, or agricultural operations and from community activities but does not include animal manure and absorbent bedding used for soil enrichment; high carbon bulking agents used in composting; or solid or dissolved materials in industrial discharges.

Hazardous waste shall mean any waste or combination of wastes of a solid, liquid, contained gaseous, or semi-solid form, including but not limited to those which are toxic, corrosive, ignitable, reactive, strong sensitizers, or which generate pressure through decomposition, heat or other means, which may cause, or contribute to, an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness, taking into account the toxicity of such waste, its persistence and degradability in nature, and its potential for assimilation, or concentration in tissue, and other factors that may otherwise cause or contribute to adverse acute or chronic effects on the health of persons or other living organisms, or any matter which may have an unusually destructive effect on water quality if discharged to ground or surface waters of the state.

18-4	Improper Disposal of Solid Waste


(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, or cause to be deposited, up to ten pounds at any time of any solid waste on public property, public rights of way, on private land of another, in the waters of the State of Vermont and in litter receptacles or dumpsters without permission for such disposal being granted by the owner of said receptacle or dumpster.
 
(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation.


18-5	Improper Dumping of Solid Waste


(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, or cause to be deposited, more than ten pounds at any time of any solid waste on public property, public rights of way, on private land of another, in the waters of the State of Vermont and in litter receptacles or dumpsters without permission for such disposal being granted by the owner of said receptacle or dumpster.

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a First Degree civil violation.


18-6	Improper Disposal of Hazardous Waste


(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, or cause to be deposited, any hazardous waste and medical waste on public property, public rights of way, on private land, and in the waters of the State of Vermont.

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a First Degree criminal violation. All violations  of

this section shall be reported to the Secretary of Environmental Affairs.


18-7	Unauthorized Disposal of Solid Waste in Town Trash and Recycling Containers


(1)	It shall be unlawful to dispose of solid waste generated by a residential property, for a business to dispose of its solid waste or dispose of solid waste in dumpsters, and litter and recycling receptacles maintained by the Town of Manchester and the Manchester School District in and around public buildings, Town parks and in rights of way.

(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation.


18-8	Enforcement Officers


Sworn Police Officers of the Town of Manchester Police Department and the Town Health Officer are hereby designated as the enforcement authorities of this Chapter.
 
0ci<-- -- 	
Chair of the Selectboard	Date of Enactment by Selectboard




Attested, Town of Manchester Town Clerk:



 



Town Clerk
 
J),,jlrk:, r>._)
 
CHAPTER XIX
SOLID WASTE VARIABLE RATE PRICING




19-1	Authority to Enact Chapter

19-2	Purpose of Chapter

19-3	Definitions

19-4	Variable Rate Pricing

19-5	Flat Fee

19-6	Filing of Pricing System

19-7	Registration and Reporting

19-8	Penalties

19-9	Enforcement
 
19-1	Authority to Enact Chapter


The authority for this Chapter is granted in 24 V.S.A. § 1971 (Title 24, Chapter 59, Section 1971), and 24

V.S.A. § 2202a (a) (Title 24, Chapter 61, Subchapter 8, Section 2202a), the power to adopt, amend, repeal, and enforce ordinances, and to manage and regulate the solid waste disposal within its boundaries. 24
V.S.A . § 2202a (d) requires municipalities implement a variable rate pricing system.


19-2	Purpose of Chapter


This Chapter is enacted to implement a variable rate pricing system to decrease the disposal of solid waste, increase recycling and composting, increase the diversion and reuse of valuable materials in the solid waste stream and otherwise encourage the responsible use of resources and the protection of the environment, and to provide for equitable and fair pricing for solid waste services.

19-3	Definitions


Collection shall mean the gathering, pickup, acceptance, and allowance to drop off municipal solid waste by both solid waste haulers and solid waste facilities such as transfer stations where drop off of municipal solid waste is permitted.

Facility shall mean any site or structure used for treating, storing, processing, recycling, transferring or disposal of municipal solid waste. A Facility may consist of a one or more treatment, storage, recycling, or disposal operations.

Hauler shall mean any person that collects, transports, or delivers solid waste generated within the Town of Manchester.

Mandatory Recyclables include those listed in the Universal Recycling Law such as paper, cardboard, glass, specified plastics and metal.

Municipal Solid Waste hereinafter referred to as "MSW," means combined household, commercial, and

industrial waste materials generated in a given area.
 
Organic Materials include food scraps, leaf and yard waste and other materials that can be diverted from landfills through composting, diverted for agricultural use or treated using anaerobic digestion.

Recycling Methodology means the method of collection used by the Hauler, i.e., single stream/dual stream, type of containers, truck type, and processing facility.

Variable rate pricing means a fee structure that charges for MSW Collection based on its weight or volume.


19-4	Variable Rate Pricing


(1)	Haulers and Facilities that provide Collection and/or drop-off disposal services for MSW to residential customers shall charge these customers for this service on the basis of the volume or weight of the MSW they produce, which is a pricing system commonly referred to as Variable Rate Pricing.

(2)	Each Hauler and Facility shall establish a unit-based price to be charged for the

Collection/drop-off disposal of each unit of MSW from residential customers. These may be based on a price per pound or a price for each 30-gallon bag or 30-gallon container that is collected or disposed of by a resident. Each larger unit of MSW, such as a 64-gallon container or a 50-gallon bag, shall carry an increased price .

(3)	The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to prohibit any Hauler or Facility from establishing rules and regulations regarding the safe maximum weight of bags or containers of  municipal solid waste materials.  A Hauler or Facility may refuse to collect or allow disposal of any bag or container which is overloaded or which contains a MSW greater than the rated or specified volume
or weight of such bag or container, or shall account for and bill the customer for the Collection of such excess MSW.

19-5	Flat Fee


(1)	In addition to the unit-based price charged per unit of MSW, Haulers and Facilities may, but are not required to, charge a flat fee to residential customers for the purpose of covering operational costs for collecting, transporting, and disposing of MSW.
 
(2)	Inthe event that a Hauler or Facility elects to establish a flat fee, all bills for services provided to residential customers shall clearly show both the flat fee and the unit-based price to maintain transparency.

(3)	Nothing herein shall prevent or prohibit a Hauler or Facility from charging additional fees for the Collection of materials such as food and yard residuals or bulky items; except however, that no Hauler or Facility may charge a separate line item fee on a bill to a residential customer for the Collection of mandated recyclables after July 1, 2015, in accordance with state statutes. A Hauler or Facility may incorporate the collection cost of mandated recyclables into the cost of the collection of solid waste and may adjust the charge for the collection of solid waste.

19-6	Filing of Pricing System


The Hauler or Facility shall file and submit evidence of their variable rate pricing system, including a breakdown of any and all fees including any flat fees, to the Town of Manchester along with their registration.

19-7	Registration and Reporting


Each hauler shall register with the Town of Manchester annually by December 31st and that registration will be valid for the next calendar year.  When registering, the hauler may be required to provide contact information, towns served, type of vehicle, vehicle identification number, license plate number for each vehicle, and the types of services offered including their Recycling Methodology and pay a registration fee as specified on the registration form. Haulers and Facilities shall report on the quantities of municipal solid waste, organics and mandated recyclables collected in the Town for each preceding quarter on April 151
July 151h, October 15th and January 15th of each year on forms to be provided by the Town.


19-8	Penalties


(1)	The first violation of this Chapter result in a written warning, issued by the enforcing officer.


(2)	Second and subsequent violations shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation.
 
19-9	Enforcement


For the purposes of this Chapter, the enforcing officer shall be any Municipal Compliance Officer.









 

Chair of the Selectboard	Date of Enactment by Selectboard




Attested, Town of Manchester Town Clerk:


 

Town Clerk
 
CHAPTER XX PUBLIC NUISANCES


20-1	Authority to Enact Chapter

20-2	Purpose of Chapter

20-3	Dust and Debris - prohibition

20-4	Fencing Around Swimming Pools

20-5	Jumping and Diving Off of Town Bridges and Structures 20-6	Smoking Near Entrances to Town Buildings
20-7	Enforcement
 
20-1	Authority to Enact Chapter


This Chapter was duly adopted by the Legislative Body of the Town, the Selectboard, in accordance with 24 V.S.A. § 2291 (14).

20-2	Purpose of Chapter


This Chapter has been adopted for the purpose of providing for the public health, safety and welfare, to define particular types of public nuisances and to abate public nuisances.  The nuisances herein described are not intended to be a complete list of all activities that constitute public nuisances.

20-3	Dust and Debris - prohibitions


(1)	It shall be unlawful to intentionally deposit debris onto public streets, sidewalks and adjacent properties owned by another person as a result of maintenance or construction activities .

(2)	Whenever motorized leaf blowers or sweepers are used on a parcel in the Commercial 1, Commercial 2, Commercial 3 zoning districts the person performing the work shall be responsible for mitigating dust from becoming airborne.

(3)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation.


20-4	Fencing Around Swimming Pools


(1)	Outdoor swimming pools constructed after August 1, 2017 and located on a parcel two acres and smaller, or less than fifty feet from an adjacent property shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall of not less than forty-eight inches in height which shall be constructed so as not to have openings, holes or gaps larger than four inches in any dimension, except for doors and gates. A dwelling house or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure. All gates and doors opening through an enclosure shall be equipped with latching devices for keeping such gates or doors securely closed at all times when not in use for ingress and egress. This section shall not apply to pools that are above ground with walls at least
forty-eight inches high and temporary pools with a volume less than 1,500 gallon capacity .


(2)	Effective July 1, 2019, outdoor swimming pools constructed prior to August 1, 2017 and located on a parcel two acres and smaller, or less than fifty feet from an adjacent property shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall of not less than forty-eight inches in height which shall be constructed so as
 
not to have openings, holes or gaps larger than four inches in any dimension, except for doors and gates. A dwelling house or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure. All gates and doors opening through an enclosure shall be equipped with latching devices for keeping such gates or doors securely closed at all times when not in use for ingress and egress. This section shall not apply to pools that are above ground with walls at least forty-eight inches high and temporary pools with a volume less than 1,500 gallon capacity.

(3)	The Municipal Compliance Officer may authorize modifications in individual cases upon showing of good cause with respect to the requirements of enclosing swimming pools so long as the degree of protection afforded by substitute devices or structures is not less than the protection sought by this section.

(4)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation.

20-5	Jumping and Diving Off of Town Bridges and Structures


(1)	It shall be illegal to jump or dive from Town bridges and structures into rivers, streams and ponds.


(2)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation.


20-6	Smoking Near Entrances to Town Buildings


(1)	It shall be unlawful to smoke tobacco, smoke any other substance, or use tobacco substitutes within fifty (50) feet from an external doorway, and intake air vent of Town Hall and the Public Safety Facility.

(2)	It shall be unlawful to use tobacco substitutes in Town owned buildings.


(3)	A violation of this section shall be considered a Third Degree civil violation.


20-7	Enforcement


(1)	The enforcement authority for sections 5 and 6 of this Chapter shall be any sworn officer of the Manchester Police Department.

(2)	The enforcement authority for section 3, 4, 5 and 6 of this Chapter shall be any Municipal Compliance Officer.
 

 	03/o<f>->lci013=

Chair of the Selectboard	Date of Enactment by Selectboard



Attested,  Town of Manchester Town Clerk:
r1	,
Town Clerk





























 
 
ADDENDUM A - General Fee Schedule



Description	
Fee	
Comment

GENERAL  FEES		

Recording Fee	
$10.00	
Per page

Photocopying of Town Documents (not recorded with Town Clerk)	
$0.05	
Per page; Town records only

Photocopying of Town Records (recorded with Town Clerk)	
$1.00	
Per page

Copy of Town Ordinances	
$15.00	

Returned Check Fee	
$35.00	
Per check

CHAPTER IV - TOWN PARKS		
See Addendum B

CHAPTER V - FACTORY POINT CEMETERY		

Sale of Conventional Lot	
$800.00	
Deeded purchase

Sale of Family Cremation Lot	
$600.00	
Deeded purchase

Sale of  Individual Cremation Lot	
$200.00	
Deeded purchase

Burial - Conventional	
$700.00	
Base rate - see below

Burial - Cremation	
$300.00	
Base rate - see below

Burial - Conventional (veteran and public safety)	
$500.00	
Base rate - see below

Burial - Cremation (veteran and public safety)	
$200.00	
Base rate - see below

Burial - Conventional (Weekends/Holidays)	
$200.00	
Additional fee for Town designated holidays

Burials - Cremation (Weekends/Holidays)	
$100.00	
Additional fee for Town designated holidays

Burial - Conventional (Winter)	
$200.00	
Additional fee - 11/15 to 4/15

Burials - Cremation (Wmter)	
$100.00	
Additional fee - 11/15 to 4/15

Wmter Vault Entombment	
$200.00	
Applies only to burials not at Factory Point

Headstone Guarantee	
$300.00	
Refundable fee

Corner Markers	
$250.00	
Includes markers and installation

Installation of Government Marker	
$50.00	
Installation only

CHAPTER VI - DOG LICENSING			
 























 























For access for more than 3 residential units
 


Road Access Permit - Commercial and Industrial	
$250.00	
For up to 26 feet; additional fee of$ I 00.00 per foot	
for access more than 26 feet.

Road Access Permit - Temporary	
$10.00	
Per day

Road Access License - Disabled Residents	
$50.00	
Per year	



 


APPROVED BY THE SELECTBOARD :
 


'-=-"
 
Cf 5:--
 


-	DATE:	December 6. 2016
 
Ivan C. Beattie, Chair
 
ADDENDUM B - Parks and Recreation Department Fee Schedule

Description	Resident 1	Non-Resident	Comments	-

Field Rental -Applejack Stadium (night)	N IA	$600.00	3 hours; includes  lighting

Field Rental -Applejack Stadium (day)	N IA	$400.00	3 hours; no lights

Field Rental - Eckhardt Field or McClellan Field	N IA	$10.00	Per hour; local, construction participants

Field Rental - Eckhardt Field or McClellan Field	N IA	$15.00	Per hour; local, construction non-participants

Field Rental - Eckhardt Field or McClellan Field	N IA	$20.00	Per hour ; all others

Field Rental - Varsity Baseball Field	$7.50	$10.00	Per hour

Field Rental - Softball Field	$7.50	$10.00	Per hour

Field Rental- Youth Baseball Fields	$4.00	$6.00	Per hour

Field Rental - Knapp Field	$7.50	$10.00	Per hour

Field Rental - Lions Field	$4.00	$6.00	Per hour

Field Rental - Pool Field	$4.00	$6.00	Per hour
Activity Rm. - Day	$15.00	$30.00	Per hour	-
Activity Rm. - Night/Weekend	$25.00	$40.00	Per hour

Activity Rm. Commercial - Day	$40.00	$40.00	Per hour

Activity Rm. Commercial - Night	$50.00	$50.00	Per hour

Activity Rm. - Deposit	$100.00	$100.00	For damage and cleaning - refundable

Outdoor Pavilion Rental	$15.00	$30.00	3 hours

Basketball Court Rental	$5.00	$10.00	Per hour

Tennis Court Rental	$5.00	$10.00	Per hour; per court

Applejack Admission - Adult	$5.00	$5.00	18 to 64 years of age

Applejack Admission - Youth & Senior Citizen	$3.00	$3.00	Under 18 years of age; 65 and older

Pool - Day Pass -Adult	$6.00	$10.00	18 to 64 years of age




1 Local sports organizations approved by the Selectboard shall be charged at the Resident rate for field usage .
 









65 and older	-










































 
APPROVED  BY THE SELECTBOARD:
 


Ivan C. Beattie, Chair
 
ADDENDUM B - Parks and Recreation Department Fee Schedule























































organizations approved by the Selectboard shall be charged at the Resident rate for field usage.
 

 
D BY THE SELECTBOARD:	 	
 
DATE:	_February 8, 2020
 
Ivan C. Beattie, Chair
 
ADDENDUM D - Planning and Zoning Fee Schedule
 













 
D BY THE SELECTBOARD:	 	
 
DATE:  	
 
Ivan C. Beattie, Chair
 
ADDENDUM E PENALTIES AND FINES INDEX
















































UNOFFICIAL - Updated December 7, 2016
 
it on Recreation Park Road (over 15 MPH)	IV	18   2nd Degree	Civil	MCO / PO

hicles on paths and grassed areas and fields	IV	19   2nd Degree	Civil	MCO / PO

mit on Recreation Park Road (5 tons and 2 axles)	IV	20   2rd Degree	Civil	MCO / PO

m of Town Parks	IV	21   2nd Degree	Criminal	MCO / PO

ized Vending at Town Parks	IV	22   1st Degree	Civil	MCO / PO

ized use of Town swimming pool	IV	23 (7)   2nd Degree	Civil	MCO / PO

hours, camping, sleeping, loitering, vending	V	5 (1)   2nd Degree	Civil	MCO / PO

g with or disturbing a funeral or burial	V	5 (2)   1st Degree	Criminal	PO

nd damaging graves and headstones	V	5 (3)   1st Degree	Criminal	PO

ized signage at Cemetery	V	5 (4)   3rd Degree	Civil	MCO

domestic animals in Cemetery (prohibition)	V	5 (7)   3rd Degree	Civil	MCO

ized access to vault at Cemetery	V	5 (8)   2nd Degree	Civil	MCO

it in Cemetery (10 MPH) and parking on grass	V	5 (9)   3rd Degree	Civil	MCO

tion of alcohol and smoking of tobacco and marijuana	V	5 (10)   2nd Degree	Civil	MCO

ized excavation and interment at Cemetery	V	7 (1)   2nd Degree	Civil	MCO

nt of non-human remains in Cemetery (prohibition)	V	7 (2)   2nd Degree	Civil	MCO

thout proper authorization/paperwork	V	7 (10)   2nd Degree	Civil	MCO

ized private sale of plot	V	8 (5)   2nd Degree	Civil	MCO

ed dog - current year	VI	4   2nd Degree	Civil	MCO / HO / PO /

ed dog - previous year	VI	5   2nd Degree	Civil	MCO / PO/ HO /

inoculate dogs and cats against rabies	VI	6   2nd Degree	Civil	MCO / HO / PO /

ing at large	VI	7 (1)   2nd Degree	Civil	MCO / HO / PO /


UNOFFICIAL - Updated December 7, 2016
 




















































UNOFFICIAL - Updated December 7, 2016
 
d fire in Commercial 1, 2 and 3 (not including propane)	XI	4 (8)(b)   3rd Degree	Civil	MCO / PO

d fire less than 20 feet from structure over 120 sq. ft.	XI	4 (8)(c)   3rd Degree	Civil	MCO / PO















































UNOFFICIAL - Updated December 7, 2016
 
maintain culverts	XIII	15   3rd Degree	Civil	MCO

remove snow/ice/debris from sidewalks	XIII	16   3rd Degree	Civil	MCO

snow/ice and depositing debris into roadways	XIII	17   2nd Degree	Civil	MCO

e of water into roadways	XIII	18 (2)   2nd Degree	Civil	MCO

e of water into roadways - hazardous	XIII	18 (3)   1st Degree	Civil	MCO

ized removal of trees from Town right of way	XIII	19   2nd Degree	Civil	MCO

ized signage in Town right of way (and roundabouts)	XIII	21   3rd Degree	Civil	MCO

maintain grassed right of way in C-1 and C-3	XIII	24   3rd Degree	Civil	MCO


obtain road opening permit	XIV	4   1st Degree	Civil	MCO


use appropriate traffic control	XIV	5   2nd Degree	Civil	MCO


ized connection to Town drainage system	XIV	7   1st Degree	Civil	MCO


ized road access - industrial and commercial	XIV	9   1st Degree	Civil	MCO


ized road access - residential	XIV	10   2nd Degree	Civil	MCO


ized road access - temporary	XIV	11   2nd Degree	Civil	MCO


rking: 1:00 AM to 6:00 AM 11/1 to 3/31	XV	4 (1)(a)   Max. state fine *	Civil	PO


rking: 10 feet from hydrant	XV	4 (1)(b)   Max. state fine *	Civil	PO


rking: 20 feet from intersection	XV	4 (1)(c)   Max. state fine *	Civil	PO





UNOFFICIAL - Updated December 7, 2016
 




















































UNOFFICIAL - Updated December 7, 2016
 




















































UNOFFICIAL - Updated December 7, 2016
 




















































UNOFFICIAL - Updated December 7, 2016
 
not a comprehensive guide to penalties and fines that exist in the Ordinances of the Town of Manchester.

ine for parking is established through 23 V.S.A. § 1749 (Penalty): not to exceed $5.00 for the first violation and not to exceed $15.00 for the second or s n 30 days of a previous violation. A person violating a handicapped parking ordinance may be fined not more than $25.00 for each offense.

ITATIONS:

alties – general

re penalties are specified for violation of any chapter or provision thereof, they shall continue to apply unless and until amended. If a monetary fine is sp r provision thereof which is greater than the penalty amount set forth in this Section and Sections 17, 18, 19 or 20 of this Chapter, the provision that pro ty shall control.

ations of this Ordinance shall be divided into civil violations and criminal violations.

penalty for Civil Violations shall not exceed $800.00 per violation, and the penalty for Criminal Violations shall not exceed $500.00 per violation. Each violated shall constitute a separate violation; provided nonetheless, that when the specific and separate actions of an individual violate this Ordinance e onstitute a separate violation.

never this Ordinance does not specify if a violation is a First Degree Violation, Second Degree Violation or a Third Degree Violation, the violation shall civil, Third Degree Violation.

the purposes of establishing the number of previous violations in order to determine if a violation is a “First Violation”, “Second Violation”, or “Third any violation of a specific chapter of this Ordinance in the previous two calendar years (730 days) shall constitute a violation. The term “Third and Sub ree or more violations.

one who commits five or more violations of any specific Chapter in a two-year period may be considered a habitual offender, punished as a First Degree













UNOFFICIAL - Updated December 7, 2016
 
alties – Civil Violations

ations of this Ordinance that are classified as Civil Violations shall be established as follows:














l Violations – Waiver Fees

as defined by Section 5 of this Chapter, for Civil Violations are established as follows:





























UNOFFICIAL - Updated December 7, 2016
 
alties – Criminal Violations

ations of this Ordinance that are classified as Criminal Violations shall be established as follows:














inal Violations – Waiver Fees

as defined by section 5 of this Chapter, for Criminal Violations are established as follows:





























UNOFFICIAL - Updated December 7, 2016
 
alties – Criminal Violations (Incarceration)

the penalties established in sections 20 and 21 of this Chapter for Criminal Violations, the following incarceration in a house of correction may apply fo this Code:














































UNOFFICIAL - Updated December 7, 2016
 
ADDENDUM C - Sewer Department Fee Schedule



Description	
Fee	
Comment

Quarterly Sewer User Fee	
$0.0043	
Per gallon; minimum quarter charge shall be $27.00.

Quarterly minimum charge for no metered water	
$83.50	
		

Car Wash Connection Fee	
$2,500.00	
Per quarter, per wash bay when no water connection.

Sewer District Assessment Fee	
$0.005683	
For $100.00 of assessed value. Quarterly assessment on Grand List value of property.

Minimum Connection Permit Fee	
$50.00	
Minimum permit fee if no increase in gallonage.

Residential Connection Fee (per gallon)	
$12.00	
Based on gallons per day (GPD) based on Table M-1; no credit for low flow.

Commercial Connection Fee (per gallon)	
$12.00	
Based on gallons per day (GPD) based on Table M-1; no credit for low flow.

Industrial Connection Fee (per gallon)	
$12.00	
Based on gallons per day (GPD) based on Table M-1; no credit for low flow.

Request for Ability to Serve determination (residential)	
$25.00	
Application fee for Ability To Serve.

Request for Ability to Serve determination (commercial and industrial)	
$50.00	
Application fee for Ability To Serve.

Labor rate for special services - regular time	
$40.00	
Per hour.

Labor rate for special services - overtime	
$50.00	
Per hour. Minimum four hours unless waived by Town Manager.




 
APPROVED BY THE BOARD OF SEWER COMMISSIONERS:
 


Ivan C. Beattie, Chair
 















 
 
Water Department Fee Schedule


















































 



APPROVED BY THE BOARD OF WATER COMMISSIONERS:
 




Ivan C. Beattie, Chair
 
-	---
 


DATE:   10/31  !?.d i '
I	I
 
MANCHESTER BOARD OF WATER COMMISSIONERS SPECIAL  REGULATION
CREATION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DISTRICT RELATIVE TO FIRE PROTECTION




WHEREAS, the 2018 Manchester Town Meeting approved Article  14, which reads as follows:

ARTICLE 14.  Shall the Town vote, pursuant to 24 V.S.A. Chapter 87, to authorize the creation of a special assessment district in order tofinance  a portion  of water main projects  that increase or improve water service that in part provides  enhanced fire protection; provided,  that the district shall include all developed properties  within 1,000feet  of afire hydrant served by the Towns water distribution system or the parcel is served by the Town water system; provided,  that the assessment shall be based on the real assessed value of parcels in the district and funds  collected shall be dedicated to the Water Department; and, provided,  that this article shall befurther  defined by regulations promulgated  by the Board of Water Commissioners through the rulemaking process?
WHEREAS, the Board of Water Commissioners and the Water Department are committed to further enhancements to the Town-owned water system, including the replacement of water mains with diameters less than eight inches in order to provide fire protection to the residents of the Town of Manchester and Village of Manchester that reside near fire hydrants; and,
WHEREAS, improvements to the Town-owned water system require substantial public investment, which includes borrowing and the use of the Water Department Capital Reserve Fund; and,
WHEREAS, parcels near water hydrants are generally eligible for lower property insurance rates, whether or not the property is connected to the Town-owned public water system and financially contributing to the maintenance, improvement and expansion of the system; and,
WHEREAS, parcels near water hydrants enjoy the benefit of enhanced fire protection from the Manchester Fire Department and others, whether or not the property is connected to the Town-owned public water system and financially contributing to the maintenance, improvement and expansion of the system; and,
WHEREAS, the Board of Water Commissioners has determined that including parcels not connected to the public water (as well as parcels connected) but within one thousand feet of a hydrant for the purposes of financing a portion of water system improvements designed to provide enhanced fire protection is fair and equitable.
 
THEREFORE, be it resolved that the Board of Water Commissioners hereby enacts the following Special Regulation that creates the Manchester Fire Protection Special Assessment District, defines membership in the Special District, established the rules for the Special District, the rates of the Special District and any exemptions and the appeal process:
SECTION 1. Establishment of the Manchester Fire Protection Special Assessment District

As authorized by vote of the electorate at Town Meeting, the Board of Water Commissioners hereby creates a special assessment district, pursuant to 24 VS.A. Chapter 87, entitled the Manchester Fire Protection Special Assessment District and referred to herein as the Special District.
SECTION 2. Parcels in the Manchester Fire Protection Special Assessment District

The follow parcels are hereby included the Special District unless otherwise exempted herein:

(a)	All parcels connected to the public water system owned and operated by the Town of Manchester and its Water Department; and,
(b)	All parcels in the Town of Manchester and Village of Manchester within one thousand feet of a hydrant connected to the Town-owned water system and as further defined herein.
(i)	All parcels or a portion of a parcel one thousand feet or less from a fire hydrant (including active and inactive hydrants) shall be included in the Special District. For the purposes of this Regulation, the Special District shall include all parcels which are subject to property taxes; or exempt from property taxes by statute or by vote of town meeting.
(ii)	The distance from a hydrant shall be measured along public and private rights-of-ways and other areas that may be accessible by the Fire Department during fires and other emergencies from the hydrant to the nearest boundary of the parcel.
SECTION 3. Special District Rates

(a)	All fees authorized by this Special Regulation shall be included in utility (water and/or sewer) bills for the period of service beginning on January 1 through March 31, 2019, and each billing period thereafter.
(b)	In determining the value of a parcel, the Town shall use the real value of the parcel, as defined in 32 VS.A. Section 3481, from the Grand List effective as of April 1 for the prior fiscal year.
(c)	The Board of Water Commissioners hereby sets the following rates, per $100 of value, for parcels in the Special District, subject to any further amendments by the Board of Water Commissioners:
Fiscal Year 2019 $0.004138
 
Fiscal Year 2020 $0.004138 Fiscal Year 2021 $0.004483
Fiscal Year 2022 and thereafter $0.005173

(d)	All fees collected herein shall be exclusively dedicated to the Water Department for the purposes of making capital improvements to the Manchester public water system that in part increase water flow or fire protection; provided, that allowable expenses shall include debt services related to the capital projects.
SECTION 4. Billing, Penalties and Interest Charges

(a)	In the case that the parcel is directly served by the public water system, the fee established under this Special Regulation shall be included on the quarterly water bill.
(b)	In the case that the parcel is not directly served by the public water system, the Town shall create a quarterly bill for the assessment fee and mail it to the owner of the parcel.
(c)	Fees established under this Special Regulation that are not paid within thirty (30) days of date of issue shall be subject to a 1.5% interest charge per month, or portion thereof. Customers who are delinquent in the payment of the assessment fee established under this Special Regulation shall be subject to: (1) water disconnection as specified under the provisions of Section 5141 of Title 24 of the Vermont Statutes, whenever possible; and/or (2) a lien being placed on the delinquent property.
SECTION 5. Appeals to Board of Water Commissioners

(a)	The owner of a parcel included in the Special District may appeal in writing to the Board of Water Commissioners for an exemption from inclusion in the Special District. The Board of Water Commissioners shall consider the appeal at its next regularly scheduled public meeting based on the following conditions:
(1)	The Board of Water Commissioners may exempt a parcel from any Special District fees whenever the Board finds that it is not feasible or practical to provide fire protection to the parcel or a portion of the parcel from the public water distribution system now or in the future based on future improvements to the system.
(2)	The Board of Water Commissioners may also exempt a parcel from any Special District fees whenever the Board finds that the parcel has no structures or the parcel has only one structure and the footprint of the structure is 120 square feet or less and not designed or used for human habitation.
 
(b)	The owner of a parcel included in the Special District may also appeal in writing to the Board of Water Commissioners the determination that the parcel or a portion of the parcel is one thousand feet or less from a hydrant. If the appeal is favorable to the owner and the parcel is removed from the Special District nothing in this section shall prohibit the parcel from being included in the Special District if the Town installs a hydrant one thousand feet or less from the parcel or a portion of the parcel at a future date.
SECTION 6. Exempt Parcels

(a)	The following parcels are hereby exempt from any Special District fees:

(i)	Any parcel with a real value of less than $20,000; or,

(ii)	Any parcel in which the primary function of the parcel is a cemetery for human remains operated by a government entity or not-for-profit organization.
(b)	Parcels owned by the same person or entity that are contiguous shall not be exempt for the purposes of clause (a)(i) of this section if the combined value of the parcels is greater than $20,000. For the purposes of this section contiguous shall mean parcels that share a common border, otherwise touch or are adjacent to each other with a public or private right-of-way separating the parcels.
SECTION 7. Severability Clause


Each section of this Special Regulation is an independent section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof.




Approved by the Board of Water Commissioners on December 18, 2018:


Ivan C. Beattie, Chair, Board of Water Commissioners
