Town of Rutland Ordinance
Abatement of Fire Hazards
Key Box Systems
1. The following structures shall be equipped with a key lock box at or near the main entrance or
other such location required by the Town Fire Chief, or his/her designee:
A. New commercial or new industrial structures to be protected by an automatic alarm system
or automatic suppression system or renovations which include an automatic alarm system
or automatic suppression system.
B. New multi-family residential structures that have a restricted access through locked doors
and have a common corridor for access to the living units or renovations, which include an
automatic alarm system or automatic suppression system.
C. New governmental structures and new nursing care facilities or renovations which include
an automatic alarm system or automatic suppression system.
2. All newly constructed or renovated structures subject to this section shall have the key lock box
installed and operational before the issuance of the occupancy permit.
3. The Town Fire Chief, or his/her designee, shall designate the type of key lock box system to be
implemented within the city and shall have the authority to require structures to use the
designated system.
4. The owner or operator of the structure required to have a key lock box shall at all times, keep a
key in the lock box that will allow for access to the structure, or other keys required by the Town
Fire Chief, or his/her designee.
5. Penalties – Any building owner violating this requirement shall, after receiving due notice by
the Town Fire Chief, or his/her designee, be subject to a civil penalty of up to one thousand
dollars ($1,000).
i
TOWN OF RUTLAND
FLOOD HAZARD AREA REGULATIONS
I. Statutory Authorization ............................................................................ 1
II. Statement of Purpose ............................................................................. 1
III. Lands to Which These Regulations Apply ............................................... 1
IV. Determination of Base Flood Elevations and Floodway Limit .................. 1
A. Base Flood Elevation (BFE) and Floodway Limits ................................ 1
B. Special Flood Hazard Areas where Floodways have not been
determined .................................................................................................. 2
C. Interpretation of Special Flood Hazard Area Boundaries and Elevations
2
V. Development Permit, Conditional Use Approval, and Exemptions ........... 3
A. Permit Required .................................................................................. 3
B. Permitted Development ....................................................................... 3
C. Conditional Use Approval ................................................................... 3
D. Exempt Open Space Uses ................................................................... 4
VI. Development Standards ......................................................................... 4
A. Floodway Areas .................................................................................. 4
B. All Special Flood Hazard Areas ........................................................... 5
VII. Variances to the Development Standards ............................................... 7
VIII. Administration ................................................................................... 7
A. Administrative Officer and Board of Adjustment ................................. 7
B. Application Requirements ................................................................... 7
C. Conditional Use and Variance Application Requirements .................... 7
ii
D. Referrals ............................................................................................. 7
E. Records .............................................................................................. 7
F. Effective Date of Permits ........................................................................ 7
G. Hearings ............................................................................................. 7
H. Decisions ............................................................................................ 7
I. Appeals. ................................................................................................ 7
IX. Enforcement and Penalties ........................................................................ 7
IX. Other Provisions .................................................................................... 7
A. Warning of Disclaimer of Liability ....................................................... 7
B. Validity and Severability .......................................................................... 7
C. Precedence of Regulation ......................................................................... 7
D. Fees ................................................................................................... 7
E. Amendments ...................................................................................... 7
F. Severability ............................................................................................ 7
G. Effective Date ..................................................................................... 7
X. Definitions ............................................................................................. 7
1
I. Statutory Authorization
To effect the purposes of 10 V.S.A. Chapter 32, and in accordance with 24 V.S.A.
§ 4424, there is hereby established regulations for areas of special flood hazard
in the Town of Rutland, Vermont.
II. Statement of Purpose
It is the purpose of this regulation to:
A. Minimize and prevent the loss of life and property, the disruption of
commerce, the impairment of the tax base, and the extraordinary public
expenditures and demands on public services that result from flooding
and other flood related hazards; and
B. Ensure that the design and construction of development in flood and other
hazard areas are accomplished in a manner that minimizes or eliminates
the potential for flood and loss or damage to life and property; and
C. Manage all flood hazard areas designated pursuant to 10 V.S.A. § 753; and
D. Make the state, municipalities, and individuals eligible for federal flood
insurance and other federal disaster recovery and hazard mitigation funds
as may be available.
III. Lands to Which These Regulations Apply
These regulations shall apply to all areas in the Town of Rutland, Vermont
identified as areas of special flood hazard in and on the most current flood
insurance studies and maps published by the Department of Homeland Security
(DHS), Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP), as provided by the Secretary of the Agency of Natural
Resources pursuant to 10 V.S.A. § 753, which are hereby adopted by reference
and declared to be part of these regulations.
IV. Determination of Base Flood Elevations and Floodway Limit
A. Base Flood Elevation (BFE) and Floodway Limits
Where available, base flood elevations and floodway limits provided by the NFIP
and in the Flood Insurance Study and accompanying flood insurance maps
shall be used to administer and enforce these regulations.
In special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations have not been
provided by the NFIP in the Flood Insurance Study and accompanying flood
insurance maps, it is the applicant’s responsibility to develop the base flood
2
elevation at the site. The applicant shall use data provided by FEMA or
available from State or Federal agencies.
B. Special Flood Hazard Areas where Floodways have not been
determined
1. In Zones A, AE, AH, and A1 – A30 where floodways have not been
determined, development or other encroachments shall not be
permitted unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated encroachment, will not increase the water surface elevation
of the base flood more than 1.00 foot at any point within the
community. The demonstration must be supported by technical data
that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles and
certified by a registered professional engineer.
2. in Zone A, where neither base flood elevations nor floodways have been
determined, development or other encroachments shall not be
permitted unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated encroachment, will not increase the water surface elevation
of the base flood more than 1.00 foot at any point within the
community. The demonstration must be supported by technical data
that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles and
certified by a registered professional engineer.
C. Interpretation of Special Flood Hazard Area Boundaries and
Elevations
1. The administrative officer shall determine the relationship of a proposed
development to the area of special flood hazard, using, where available (e.g.
Zones Al through A30, AE and AH), the base flood elevations and floodway
limits provided by the NFIP in the Flood Insurance Study and
accompanying maps.
2. Rulings by FEMA, including without limitation, a Letter of Map
Amendment or Letter of Map Revision, shall be considered sufficient proof
for the purposes of this bylaw.
3. If uncertainty exists with respect to the horizontal boundaries on the map,
the location of the boundary shall first be determined by the
Administrative Officer (AO).
3
V. Development Permit, Conditional Use Approval, and Exemptions
A. Permit Required
A permit is required from the Administrative Officer for all proposed fill,
construction or other development, including new or substantially improved
structures, the placement of manufactured homes or recreational vehicles,
and storage of chemicals, explosives, flammable liquids, or other hazardous
or toxic materials, in all areas covered by this bylaw. Development needing
conditional use approval or a variance must have such.
B. Permitted Development
The following activities in special flood hazard areas, but outside the
regulatory floodway require permit from the Administrative Officer:
1. non-substantial improvements to existing structures that do not
involve fill and do not decrease structure setbacks from any stream;
2. at-grade parking areas that meet the requirements in Article VI;
3. small accessory structures such as fences, sheds, or utilities that meet
the requirements in Article VI; or
4. utilities that do not involve fill and that meet the requirements in Article
VI and FEMA Guidance 348 Protecting Building Utilities From Flood
Damage
C. Conditional Use Approval
Excepted for permitted development as set forth in subsection B above or
otherwise exempt under subsection D below, all other development or
substantial improvements in a special flood hazard area shall be permitted
only upon the granting of a conditional use approval by the Conditional use
approval by the Board of Adjustment: Development that requires conditionaluse
approval includes without limitation:
1. Any new or substantial improvement, elevation, or flood proofing of
existing structures,
2. improvements to existing roads or drainage,
3. grading, excavation, or the creation of a pond,
4. bridges, culverts, public utilities, stabilization projects, or public
projects which are functionally dependent on stream access or stream
crossing,
4
In granting conditional use approval, the Board shall use the standards for
development set out below in Section VI.
D. Exempt Open Space Uses
The following open space uses within special flood hazard areas shall be
exempt from any permit requirement under these bylaws provided that they
do not require the erection of structures; storage of materials and equipment
and importing fill from outside the flood hazard area; do not require the
channel modification or relocation; do not obstruct flood flows; do not
increase the flood level within the floodway during the occurrence of the base
flood or increase off-site damage potential; do not propose the construction of
water supply or sanitary sewer or on-site waste disposal systems:
1. Agricultural uses, such as general farming, pasture, orchard, grazing,
outdoor plant nurseries, truck farming and forestry.
2. Recreation uses, such as parks, campgrounds, picnic grounds, tennis
courts. golf courses, golf driving ranges, archery and shooting ranges,
hiking and riding trails, hunting and fishing areas, game farms, fish
hatcheries, wildlife sanctuaries, nature preserves, swimming area and
boat launching sites.
3. Residential uses, such as lawns, gardens, unpaved areas and play
areas.
VI. Development Standards
A. Floodway Areas
1. Development or other encroachments within the regulatory floodway,
as determined by Section VI.A, is prohibited unless it has been
demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice by a registered
professional engineer certifying that the proposed development will not
result in increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood.
i. The requirements of this subsection are additive to the
requirements of subsection B below. In the event of any
inconsistency between the requirements subsections A and
subsection B, subsection A shall control.
2. Junkyards, on-site wastewater disposal systems, and storage facilities
for floatable materials, chemicals, explosives, flammable liquids, or
other hazardous or toxic materials, are prohibited within the floodway.
5
B. All Special Flood Hazard Areas (within mapped Floodway Areas,
the following Section B provisions are additive to the Section A provisions
above).
1. All Development - All development shall be reasonably safe from
flooding and:
(a) Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the structure during the occurrence of
the base flood,
(b) constructed with materials resistant to flood damage,
(c) constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage, and
(d) constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
2. Residential Development:
(a) New construction and existing buildings to be substantially improved
that are located in Zones A, A1-30, AE, and AH shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation.
(b) Manufactured homes to be placed and existing manufactured homes
to be substantially improved that are:
(i) located in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, outside of
a manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or in a
manufactured home park or subdivision which has incurred
substantial damage from a flood shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
elevated to no less than one foot above the base flood elevation and
be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system
to resist floatation, collapse, and lateral movement during the
occurrence of the base flood.
(ii) located in an existing manufactured home park, where elevating a
replacement home to or above base flood elevation is not possible,
the lowest floor shall be supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less
than 48 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to
an adequately anchored system to resist floatation, collapse, and
lateral movement.
6
(c) Residential construction located within Zones A, AH and AO shall have
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide
floodwater around and away from the proposed structures.
3. Non-residential Development:
(a) New construction located in Zones A, A1-30, AE, and AH shall have
the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood
elevation.
(b) Existing buildings to be substantially improved located in Zones A, A1-
30, AE, and AH shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the base flood elevation or together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base flood
elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components
having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and effects of buoyancy.
(c) A permit for a building proposed to be flood proofed shall not be issued
until a registered professional engineer or architect has reviewed the
structural design, specifications and plans, and has certified that the
design and proposed methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this
subsection.
(d) Non-residential construction located within Zones AH and AO shall
have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide
floodwater around and away from the proposed structures.
4. Subdivisions:
(a) New subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including
proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) that are
greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, shall include
base flood elevation data.
(b) Subdivisions (including manufactured home parks) shall be designed
to assure:
(i) such proposals minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area,
(ii) public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and
water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage, and
(iii) adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
7
5. Enclosed Areas Below the Lowest Floor:
(a) Enclosed areas below the lowest floor which are subject to flooding shall
be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage.
(b) New construction and existing buildings to be substantially improved
with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
(c) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total
net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all
openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may
be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
6. Recreational Vehicles: Recreational Vehicles placed on sites with
special flood hazard areas shall either:
(a) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
(b) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
(c) be permitted in accordance with the elevation and anchoring
requirements for “manufactured homes” in section 2(B)(ii) above .
7. Accessory Structures: A small accessory building that represents a
minimal investment need not be elevated to the base flood elevation
provided the structure meets the following requirements:
(a) The structure must only be used for parking or storage,
(b) The structure must have the required openings to allow floodwaters in
and out,
(c) The structure must be constructed using flood resistant materials
below the Base Flood Elevation,
(d) The structure must be adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse,
and lateral movement, and
(e) All building utility equipment including electrical and heating must be
elevated or flood proofed.
8
8. Water Supply Systems: New and replacement water supply systems
shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems.
9. Sanitary Sewage Systems: New and replacement sanitary sewage
systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood
waters.
10. On-Site Waste Disposal Systems: On-site wastewater disposal
systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
11. Watercourse Carrying Capacity: The flood carrying capacity within
any altered or relocated portion of a watercourse shall be maintained.
VII. Variances to the Development Standards
A. Variances to the above standards may be granted in writing by the Board
of Adjustment only in accordance with requirements 24 V.S.A. § 4469 and
44 CFR Section 60.6, and after a notice and hearing as provided in Section
VIII G.
B. A variance shall specify the development standard(s) with which the
variance applicant will not be required to comply. In all other respects,
these flood hazard regulations shall apply to the property subject to the
variance.
C. Any variance issued will inform the applicant in writing over the signature
of a community official that the issuance of a variance to construct a
structure below the base flood elevation increases risk to life and property
and will result in increased flood insurance premiums up to amounts as
high as $25 for $100 of coverage. Such notification shall be maintained
with a record of all variance actions.
VIII. Administration
A. Administrative Officer and Board of Adjustment
There is hereby established an Administrative Officer (AO) and a Board of
Adjustment to be appointed by the Selectboard as specified under 24 V.S.A.
§4448 and §4460.
The Board of Adjustment, in the exercise of its functions shall have the
following powers, in addition to those specifically provided for elsewhere in
law:
1. appeals from a decision of the administrative officer
9
2. review of a request for a variance.
3. review of an application for a conditional-use permit.
All permitted development shall carry a condition that requires the applicant
to obtain all necessary permits from those government agencies from which
approval is required by Federal, State or Municipal law before work can begin.
B. Application Requirements
All applications for development shall include:
1. the name and contact information for the owner of the property,
including any agents authorized to act on their behalf;
2. a thorough description of the proposed development;
3. general location map including the address of the property, tax parcel
ID, relative locations of the existing development and the nearest public
road;
4. where applicable locate the proposed development, any water bodies,
special flood hazard areas, floodways, the shortest horizontal distance
from the proposed development to the center line of stream, shortest
horizontal distance to top of bank of any stream, any existing and
proposed drainage, any proposed fill, and pre and post development
grades, and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor, as referenced to
the same vertical datum as the elevation on the current special flood
hazard maps;
5. two copies of the application;
6. the appropriate fee; and
7. A Vermont Agency of Natural Resources Project Review Sheet for the
proposal. The Project Review Sheet should identify all State and
Federal agencies from which permit approval is required for the
proposal, and shall be filed as a required attachment to the Town
permit application. The identified permits, or letters indicating that
such permits are not required, shall be submitted to the Administrative
Officer and attached to the permit application before work can begin.
C. Conditional Use and Variance Application Requirements
For applicants seeking conditional use approval or a variance, the following also
need to be provided in addition to the information required by subsection B
above:
1. a list of abutters names and mailing addresses;
2. a statement of purpose and need for the proposed development;
10
3. a description of the alternatives considered to the proposed
development, including alternate locations on site, especially outside of
the hazard area;
4. elevations of any proposed development;
5. such pertinent information as identified in the regulations or deemed
necessary by the Board of Adjustment for determining the suitability of
the proposed development for the site;
6. copies of the application sufficient for the file, the Board of Adjustment
members, the State National Flood Insurance Program Coordinator,
and additional parties such as the VT DEC Stream Alteration Engineer
and adjacent communities if affected under SectionVIII A.; and
7. any additional fees required.
D. Referrals
Upon receipt of an application for a permit (with any fees as determined by
the Selectboard) the Administrative Officer shall submit a copy of the
application and supporting information to the State National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP) Coordinator at the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources,
Department of Environmental Conservation, River Management Program in
accordance with 24 V.S.A. § 4424(D). A permit may be issued only following
receipt of comments from the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources , or after
30 days have elapsed from the date the application was mailed to the Agency,
whichever is sooner.
If the applicant is seeking a permit for the alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, copies of the application shall also be submitted to the adjacent
communities, and the Stream Alteration Engineer at the Vermont Agency of
Natural Resources, Department of Environmental Conservation, River
Management Section, and the Army Corps of Engineers. Copies of such
notice shall be provided to the State National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)
Coordinator at the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources, Department of
Environmental Conservation. A permit may be issued only following receipt
of comments from the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources, or after 30 days
have elapsed from the date the application was mailed to the Agency,
whichever is sooner.
E. Records
1. Within three days following the issuance of a permit, the Administrative
Officer shall:
a) deliver a copy of the permit and any accompanying conditional approval
to the Listers of the municipality; and
11
b) post a copy of the permit in at least one public place in the municipality
until the expiration of 15 days from the date of issuance of the permit.
2. Within 30 days after a municipal land use permit has been issued or
within 30 days of the issuance of any notice of violation, the
Administrative Officer shall:
a) deliver the original or a legible copy of the permit, or notice of permit,
and any approvals to the town clerk for recording in the land records
as provided in 24 V.S.A., § 1154(a);
b) file a copy of the permit and any approvals in the Town office in a
location where all municipal land use permits shall be kept; and,
c) the Administrative Officer may charge the applicant for the cost of the
recording fees as required by law.
3. The Administrative Officer shall properly file and maintain a record of:
a) all permits issued in areas covered by this bylaw;
b) the as-built elevation (consistent with the datum of the elevation on the
current Special Flood Hazard Maps for the community) of the lowest
floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved
buildings in areas of special flood hazard;
c) the as-built elevation (consistent with the datum of the elevation on the
current Special Flood Hazard Maps for the community) to which
buildings have been floodproofed in areas of special flood hazard;
d) all floodproofing certifications required under this regulation; and,
e) All variances, notices of alleged violation, and conditional use approvals,
including justification for their issuance.
F. Effective Date of Permits
1. Each permit issued shall contain a statement of the period of time
within which an appeal may be taken and shall require posting of a
notice of permit on a form prescribed by the municipality within view
from the public right-of-way most nearly adjacent to the subject
property until the time for appeal in has passed.
2. No permit issued pursuant to this section shall take effect until 15 days
after issuance.
3. In the event that a notice of appeal a decision by the Administrative
Officer is properly filed, no such permit shall take effect until
adjudication of that appeal is complete.
12
4. Each permit shall be valid for a period of two years.
G. Hearings
1. At least 15 days notice shall be provided before the date of the hearing
by all the following:
a) publication of the date, place, and purpose of the hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality affected;
b) posting of the same information in three or more public places
within the municipality in conformance with location
requirements of 1 V.S.A. § 312(c)(2), including posting within
view from the public right-of-way most nearly adjacent to the
property for which an application is made; and,
c) Written notification to the applicant and to owners of all
properties adjoining the property subject to development, without
regard to any public right-of-way, as well as to the parties in
VIII.C above if not done so already. The notification shall include
a description of the proposed project and shall be accompanied
by information that clearly informs the recipient where additional
information may be obtained, and that participation in the local
proceeding is a prerequisite to the right to take any subsequent
appeal.
2. The applicant is required to bear the cost of the public notice and
publishing as set forth in this subsection F. The applicant also bears
the responsibility to notify adjoining landowners either by certified mail,
return receipt requested, or by written notice hand delivered or mailed
to the last known address supported by a sworn certificate of service.
The applicant shall return the certified receipts and/or sworn
certificates of service to the Administrative Officer in advance of the first
hearing on the application.
3. The Board of Adjustment may recess the proceedings on any
application pending submission of additional information. The Board
should close the evidence promptly after all parties have submitted the
requested information, adjourn the hearing, and may deliberate prior
to issuing its decision.
H. Decisions
1. Decisions by the Administrative Officer to approve or deny an
application shall be issued in writing within 30 days of a complete
application.
13
2. In addition to the application requirements set forth in subsection ___
above, an application an application shall not be considered complete
until the Administrative Office receives comments on the application
from the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources , or after 30 days have
elapsed from the date the application was mailed to the Agency,
whichever is sooner.
3. If the Administrative Officer fails to act with regard to a complete
application for a permit within 30 days, whether by issuing a decision
or by making a referral to the Board of Adjustment and/or the Agency
of Natural Resources under Section VIII C above, the application shall
be deemed approved on the 31st day.
4. Applications that require Conditional Use approval shall be referred to
the Board of Adjustment.
5. Decisions of the Board of Adjustment for variance or conditional use
approval shall be issued in writing within 45 days after the
adjournment of the final hearing. Failure to issue a decision within this
period shall be deemed approval and shall be effective on the 46th day.
6. Conditional use approvals shall assure that all necessary permits must
be also received from those government agencies from which approval
is required by Federal, State or Municipal law prior to the issuance of
a permit.
7. The Board of Adjustment shall consider comments from the NFIP
Coordinator at DEC.
8. Approvals shall include a statement of the factual basis on which the
Board has made its conclusions regarding how the proposed
development will meet the development standards, and a statement of
the conclusions.
9. In rendering a decision in favor of the applicant, the Board of
Adjustment may attach additional reasonable conditions and
safeguards as it deems necessary to implement the purposes of this
bylaw and the municipal plan then in effect.
10. In rendering a decision in favor of the applicant, the Board of
Adjustment may also attach conditions regarding the submission of a
bond, escrow account, or other surety in a form acceptable to the
legislative body of the municipality to assure one or more of the
following: the completion of the project, adequate stabilization, or
protection of public facilities that may be affected by a project.
11. Any decision shall be sent by certified mail within the 45-day period
to the applicant, and the appellant. Copies of the decision shall also be
mailed to every person or body appearing and having been heard at the
hearing and a copy of the decision shall be filed with the Administrative
14
Officer and the clerk of the municipality as a part of the public records
of the municipality.
I. Appeals.
1. An interested person as defined by 24 V.S.A. § 4465(b) may appeal any
decision or act taken by the Administrative Officer by filing a notice of
appeal with the secretary of the Board of Adjustment, or with the Town
Clerk if no such secretary has been elected.
2. This notice of appeal must be filed within 15 days of the date of that
decision or act, and a copy of the notice of appeal shall also be filed
with the Administrative Officer.
3. A notice of appeal shall be in writing and shall include the name and
address of the appellant, a brief description of the property with respect
to which the appeal is taken, a reference to the regulatory provisions
applicable to that appeal, the relief requested by the appellant, and the
alleged grounds why the requested relief is believed proper under the
circumstances.
4. The Board of Adjustment shall set a date and place for a public hearing
of an appeal under this chapter that shall be within 60 days of the filing
of the notice of appeal.
5. The Board shall give public notice of the hearing as specified in Section
VIII F.
6. Any person or body empowered to take an appeal with respect to the
property at issue may appear and be heard in person or be represented
by an agent or attorney at the hearing.
7. Any hearing held under this section may be adjourned by the Board
from time to time; provided, however, that the date and place of the
adjourned hearing shall be announced at the hearing. All hearings
shall be open to the public and the rules of evidence applicable at these
hearings shall be the same as the rules of evidence applicable in
contested cases in hearings before administrative agencies as set forth
in 3 V.S.A. § 810.
8. An interested person may appeal a decision of the Board of Adjustment
to the Environmental Court in accordance with 24 V.S.A. 4471.
IX. Enforcement and Penalties
A. The Administrative Officer shall administer the bylaws literally and shall not
have the power to permit any land development that is not in conformance
with these bylaws.
15
B. No enforcement action may be brought under this section unless the alleged
offender has had at least seven days’ warning by certified mail. An
enforcement action may be brought without the seven-day notice period and
opportunity to cure if the alleged offender repeats the violation of the bylaw
or ordinance after the seven-day notice period and within the next succeeding
12 months.
C. When the Administrative Officer issues a notice of violation, the
Administrative Officer shall mail a copy of the notice of violation to the Agency
of Natural Resources NFIP Coordinator.
D. A notice of violation shall state that:
1. a violation exists;
2. that the alleged offender has an opportunity to cure the violation within
seven days of receipt;
3. that failure to cure the violation may result in fines and/or loss of flood
insurance;
4. that the alleged offender will not be entitled to an additional warning
notice for a violation occurring after the seven days within the next
succeeding 12 months; and,
5. that the notice of violation may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment
as specified under VIII. G;
E. If the violation is not remedied within 7 days, or after all appeals have been
resolved, the Administrative Officer shall:
1. file a copy of the notice of violation in the municipal land use permit
files;
2. file a copy of the notice of violation with the Town Clerk for filing in the
land records;
3. submit a declaration to the Administrator of the National Flood
Insurance Program requesting a denial of flood insurance to the
violator. The declaration shall consist of: (a) the name of the property
owner and address or legal description of the property sufficient to
confirm its identity or location, (b) a clear and unequivocal declaration
that the property is in violation of a cited State or local law, regulation,
or ordinance, (c) a clear statement that the Administrative Officer
making the declaration has authority to do so and a citation to that
authority, (d) evidence that the property owner has been provided notice
of the violation and the prospective denial of insurance, and (e) a clear
16
statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to Section
1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended.
F. An enforcement action, injunction, or other enforcement proceeding relating
to the failure to obtain or comply with the terms of and conditions of any
permit required by these bylaws, may be instituted under sections 1974a or
4452 of Title 24 of the Vermont Statutes Annotated.
G. All fines collected for the violation of this bylaw shall be paid over to the Town
of Rutland. In default of payment of the fine, the person, the members of any
partnership, or the principal officers of the corporation shall each pay double
the amount of the fine.
H. Pursuant to 24 V.S.A. § 1974a, any person who violates a provision of this
civil ordinance shall be subject to civil penalty of up to $500.00 per day for
each day that such violation continues. Each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense under this Ordinance. The Administrative
Officer, or designee, of the Town of Rutland shall be authorized to act as
Issuing Municipal Official to issue and pursue before Judicial Bureau a
municipal complaint (“municipal ticket”).
1. Civil Penalties – An issuing Municipal Official is authorized to recover civil
penalties in the following amounts for each violation:
First offense $100.00
Second offense $200.00
Third offense $400.00
Fourth offense and higher $500.00
2. Waiver Fee – an issuing Municipal Official is authorized to recover a waiver
fee, in lieu of a civil penalty in the following amount, for any person who
declines to contest a municipal complaint and pay the waiver fee:
First offense $50.00
Second offense $100.00
Third offense $200.00
Fourth offense and higher $250.00
I. Other relief – In addition to the enforcement procedures available before the
Judicial Bureau, the Administrative Officer is authorized to commence a civil
action before the Environmental Court for any purpose authorized by 24
V.S.A. § 1974a or § 4452 including without limitation, where the penalty for
all continuing civil ordinance violations is greater than $500.00 and/or to
seek injunctive relief.
17
IX. Other Provisions
A. Warning of Disclaimer of Liability
This regulation does not imply that land outside of the areas of special flood
hazard or land use permitted within such districts will be free from flooding
or flood damages. This regulation shall not create liability on the part of the
Town of Rutland_ or any town official or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this regulation or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
B. Validity and Severability
If any portion of this regulation is held unconstitutional or invalid by a
competent court, the remainder of this regulation shall not be affected.
C. Precedence of Regulation
The provisions of this regulation shall not in any way impair or remove the
necessity of compliance with any other applicable regulations. Where This
regulation imposes a greater restriction, the provisions of this
Regulation shall take precedence.
D. Fees
Fees may be established from time to time by the Board of Selectmen in the
exercise of its discretion in amounts necessary to cover all costs of the
Administrator Officer and/or Board of Adjustment for such items as processing
applications, including costs of material, administrative time, reasonable
overhead such as postage, telephone, and the hiring of appropriate professionals
to review various aspects of an application, etc.
E. Amendments
Any provision of this Regulation, may be amended or repealed subject to the
provisions of 24 V.S.A., Chapter 117.
F. Severability
If any provision of this regulation is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions or applications of this regulation, which can be given effect
without the invalid provision or application.
G. Effective Date
This Regulation shall take effect upon approval of a majority of members of the
Selectboard at a meeting held after the final public hearing and shall be effective
18
21 days after adoption, in accordance with procedures contained in 24 V.S.A.
§ 4442.
X. Definitions
A Zone means that portion of the SFHA subject to a one percent chance of
being equaled or exceeded by flooding in any given year. In the A Zone the
base floodplain is mapped by approximate methods, i.e. BFEs are not
determined. This is often called the unnumbered A Zone or approximate A
Zone.
Administrative Officer means the person appointed by the Selectboard to
administer and implement the provisions of these regulations.
AH zone is an area of 100-year shallow flooding where depths are between 1
and 3 feet (usually shallow ponding), base flood elevations are shown.
Accessory Structure means a structure which is: 1) detached from and clearly
incidental and subordinate to the principal use of or structure on a lot, 2) located
on the same lot as the principal structure or use, and 3) clearly and customarily
related to the principal structure or use. For residential uses these include, but
may not be limited to garages, garden and tool sheds, and playhouses.
Appropriate Municipal Panel (AMP) means a planning commission performing
development review, a board of adjustment, a development review board, or a
legislative body performing development review.
Area of Special Flood Hazard is synonymous in meaning with the phrase
“special flood hazard area” for the purposes of these regulations.
Base Flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (commonly referred to as the 100-year flood).
Base Flood Elevation (BFE) the height of the base flood, usually in feet, in
relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929, the North American
Vertical Datum of 1988, or other datum referenced in the Flood Insurance
19
Study report, or average depth of the
base flood, usually in feet, above the
ground surface.
Basement means any area of the
building having its floor elevation (below
ground level) on all sides.
BFE see Base Flood Elevation
Channel means an area that contains
continuously or periodic flowing water
that is confined by banks and a
streambed.
Channel width (or bankfull width) is the
width of a stream channel when flowing
at a bankfull discharge. The bankfull
discharge is the flow of water that first
overtops the natural banks. This flow
occurs, on average, about once every 1 to
2 years.
Common plan of development is where a structure will be refurbished over a
period of time. Such work might be planned unit by unit.
Critical Facilities - includes police stations, fire and rescue facilities, hospitals,
shelters, schools, nursing homes, water supply and waste treatment facilities,
and other structures the community identifies as essential to the health and
welfare of the population and that are especially important following a disaster.
For example, the type and location of a business may raise its status to a Critical
Facility, such as a grocery or gas station that survive a flood and now are the
only points for food and gas.
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective
date of the initial floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means
the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
20
the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading
or the pouring of concrete pads).
Fill means any placed material that changes the natural grade, increases the
elevation, or diminishes the flood storage capacity at the site.
FIRM see Flood Insurance Rate Map
Flood means (a) a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from: the overflow of inland or tidal
waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source; and mudslides which are proximately caused by flooding and are
akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land
areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the
path of the current. (b) The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a
lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such
as flash flood or abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on
which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special
flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study (generic) means an examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface
elevations or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) and /or flood related erosion hazards.
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) is the official hydraulic & hydrologic report
provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the FIRM,
FHBM (where applicable) and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source (see definition of “flood”).
Flood proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot at any
point. Towns with established base flood elevations (BFEs) on Flood Insurance
21
Rate Maps please note that the extent of FEMA floodways may be shown on a
separate series of panels.
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The
term includes only docking facilities, port facilities, that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship
repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.
Historic Structure means any structure that is: (a) Listed individually in the
National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of
the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district; (c) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or (d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either: (i) By an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior or (ii) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states
without approved programs.
Interested person means any one of the following:
(1) A person owning title to property, or a municipality or solid waste
management district empowered to condemn it or an interest in it, affected by a
bylaw, who alleges that the bylaw imposes on the property unreasonable or
inappropriate restrictions of present or potential use under the particular
circumstances of the case.
(2) The municipality that has a plan or a bylaw at issue in an appeal brought
under this chapter or any municipality that adjoins that municipality.
(3) A person owning or occupying property in the immediate neighborhood of a
property that is the subject of any decision or act taken under this chapter, who
can demonstrate a physical or environmental impact on the person’s interest
under the criteria reviewed, and who alleges that the decision or act, if confirmed,
will not be in accord with the policies, purposes, or terms of the plan or bylaw of
that municipality.
(4) Any ten persons who may be any combination of voters or real property
owners within a municipality listed in subdivision (2) of this subsection above
who, by signed petition to the appropriate municipal panel of a municipality, the
plan or a bylaw of which is at issue in any appeal brought under this title, allege
that any relief requested by a person under this title, if granted, will not be in
22
accord with the policies, purposes, or terms of the plan or bylaw of that
municipality. This petition to the appropriate municipal panel must designate
one person to serve as the representative of the petitioners regarding all matters
related to the appeal.
(5) Any department and administrative subdivision of this state owning property
or any interest in property within a municipality listed in subdivision (2) of this
subsection, and the agency of commerce and community development of this
state.
Legislative body means the Selectboard in the case of a town, the trustees in
the case of an incorporated village, and the mayor, alderpersons, and city
council members in the case of a city, and the supervisor in the case of an
unorganized town or gore.
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
basement, except an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement
area is not considered a building’s lowest floor provided that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation
design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
“manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle”.
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.
Minor improvement means any repairs, reconstruction, or improvement of a
structure (other than customary maintenance), the cost of which is less than
fifty (50) percent of the market value of the existing structure.
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates,
structures, including manufactured homes, for which the “start of construction”
commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31,
1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures. For regulation under this bylaw, new construction means structures
for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
23
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
Non-residential Includes, but is not limited to: small business concerns,
churches, schools, nursing homes, farm buildings (including grain bins and
silos), pool houses, clubhouses, recreational buildings, government buildings,
mercantile structures, agricultural and industrial structures, and warehouses.
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: (a) Built on a single chassis; (b)
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(d) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory floodway means the Floodway in the Town of Rutland identified in
and on the most current flood insurance studies and maps published by the
Department of Homeland Security, Federal Emergency Management Agency, and
the channel of the watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the
water surface elevation more than 1.00 feet at any point.
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) is the land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given
year. For purposes of these regulations, the term “area of special flood hazard”
“is synonymous in meaning with the phrase “special flood hazard area”. Maps
of this area are available for viewing in the town clerk’s office or acquired online
from the FEMA Map Service Center.
The Special Flood Hazard Area may be
designated a Zone A on the Flood
Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). Zone
A is the flood insurance rate zone that
corresponds to the 100-year
floodplains that are determined in the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) by
approximate methods. Because
detailed hydraulic analyses are not
performed for such areas, no BFEs or
depths are shown within this zone.
After detailed ratemaking has been
completed in preparation for
publication of the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM), Zone A usually is refined
into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, or AE.
Zones AE and A1-A30 are the flood
insurance rate zones that correspond
to the 100-year floodplains that are
24
determined in the FIS by detailed methods. In most instances, BFEs derived
from the detailed hydraulic analyses are shown at selected intervals within this
zone. Zone AH is the flood insurance rate zone that corresponds to the areas of
100-year shallow flooding with a constant water-surface elevation (usually
areas of ponding) where average depths are between 1 and 3 feet. The BFEs
derived from the detailed hydraulic analyses are shown at selected intervals
within this zone. The extent of floodways may be shown on separate map
panels in communities that have established BFEs.
Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footing, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, regardless whether that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
Structure means, for regulatory purposes under this bylaw, a walled and roofed
building, as well as a manufactured home, and any related built systems,
including a gas or liquid storage tanks. Structure, for insurance purposes,
means: (a) A building with two or more outside rigid walls and a fully secured
roof, that is affixed to a permanent site; (b) A manufactured home (“a
manufactured home,” also known as a mobile home, is a structure: built on a
permanent chassis, transported to its site in one or more sections, and affixed
to a permanent foundation); or (c) A travel trailer without wheels, built on a
chassis and affixed to a permanent foundation, that is regulated under the
community’s floodplain management and building ordinances or laws. For the
latter purpose, “structure” does not mean a recreational vehicle or a park trailer
or other similar vehicle, except as described in (c) of this definition, or a gas or
liquid storage tank.
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged conditions
would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred.
25
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
or other improvement of a structure after the date of adoption of this bylaw, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure
before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes
structures which have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (a) Any
project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or
local health, sanitary, or safety code specification which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions or (b) Any alteration of a “historic structure”,
provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as a “historic structure”. For the purposes of determining
“substantial improvement” value and exceptions in (a) only and no other
purpose, the Administrative Officer is “the local code enforcement official”.
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this bylaw. A structure or other development without the
elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required in 44 CFR 60.3 is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Walkout-on-grade basement means a basement whose floor is at ground level
on at least one side of the house, usually with a door on that side. This is not
considered a "basement" as defined by these regulations.
456241.1
Page 1 of 3
Chapter 196
VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN
[Adopted 6-1-1993]
§ 196-1. Definitions.
§ 196-2. Operation of ATVs.
§ 196-3. Prohibition against constituting a public nuisance.
§ 196-4. Stopping f o r law enforcement officers.
§ 196-5. Exemptions.
§ 196-6. Severability.
§ 196-7. Violations and penalties.
§ 196-8. Enforcement.
§ 196-9. When effective.
§ 196-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE or ATV Any non-highway recreational vehicle, except
snowmobiles, when used for cross-country travel on trails or when used on any one (1) of
the following or a combination thereof; land, water, snow, ice, marsh, swampland and
natural terrain.
NON-HIGHWY RECREATIONAL VEHICLE— Any vehicle propelled or drawn by
power other than muscular power, when used off of public highways for recreational
purposes, including but not limited to motorcycles, mopeds, dirt bikes and any vehicle or
device designed or intended for or capable of operation off of public highways.
OPERATE, OPERATING and OPERATION — As applied to all - terrain vehicles, the
operation thereof on any lands within the town other than on public highways. "Operate"
includes an attempt to operate and shall be construed to cover all matters and things
connected with the presence and use of all-terrain vehicles, whether they are at motion or
at rest.
PUBLIC HIGHWAY- A state highway or a town highway.
PERSON — Includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association or other
incorporated or
unincorporated entity.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any operating of an all-terrain vehicle in such a manner as to
create, alone or in
combination with other all-terrain vehicles and/or other normal background sound, a
sound level in excess of eighty-five (85) dBA when measured at any point which is fifty
(50) feet from the exterior wall of a residence; or a sound level in excess of eighty-five
(85) dBA when measured at any point on or within ten (10) feet of a real property line,
Page 2 of 3
where the distance from such point of measurement to the exterior wall of a residence is
less than fifty (50) feet.
SOUND LEVEL — The sound pressure level measured in decibels with a sound level
meter set for A-weighing. "Sound level" is expressed in dBA.
SOUND LEVEL METER— An instrument for the measurement of sound levels, which
conforms to the
American National Standard Institute (ANSI) standards for a Type 2 sound meter.
RESIDENCE — Any single-family dwelling, duplex, multi family dwelling (including
but not limited to
apartment buildings and buildings containing condominium units) or other building
containing quarters where persons reside, now existing and hereafter constructed.
§ 196-2. Operation of ATVs.
No person shall operate all-terrain vehicle or cause, suffer, allow or permit any person to
operate one (1) or more all-terrain vehicles in such a manner as to create, alone or in
combination with other all - terrain vehicles and/or other normal background sound, a
sound level in excess of eighty-five (85) dBA when measured at any point which is fifty
(50) feet from the exterior wall of a residence; or a sound level in excess of eighty-five
(85) dBA when measured at any point on or within ten (10) feet of a real property line,
where the distance from such point of measurement to the exterior wall of a residence is
less than fifty (50) feet.
§ 196-3. Prohibition against constituting a public nuisance.
No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle, or cause, suffer, allow or permit any person
to operate one or more all-terrain vehicles, in such a manner as to constitute a public
nuisance.
§ 196-4. Stopping for law enforcement officers.
A person who is or has been operating an all-terrain vehicle shall, when signaled to do so
by a law enforcement officer, bring his or her all-terrain vehicle to a full stop and, upon
request, furnish his or her name, address, driver's license, and any registration applicable
to such vehicle.
§ 196-5. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to operation of ATVs as follows:
A. During town sponsored or conducted competitions or events.
B. For non-recreational purposes, including but not limited to logging, farming and
other commercial purposes.
Page 3 of 3
C. During rescue operations.
D. For official use by federal, state, or municipal officials or employees in the
performance of official duties.
E. On public highways.
§ 196-6. Severability.
The invalidity of any section of this chapter or of any portion thereof shall not invalidate
any other section or portion thereof. If any portion of any section is deemed invalid, the
finding of in validity shall be limited to the smallest possible portion of the section in
question, and as much as possible of the section in
question shall remain in full force and effect. Where a limitation, restriction, requirement
or standard is deemed invalid, the next most restrictive limitation, restriction, requirement
or standard that may be deemed valid shall be deemed implied and shall be applied in lieu
of the provision deemed invalid. In the event that any provision of this chapter is less
strict than any provision of state law or any other ordinance, the stricter provision shall
control.
§196-7. Violations and penalties.
A person who violates this chapter shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars
($500.).
§ 196-8. Enforcement.
The town may enforce this chapter by bringing an action for injunctive relief to abate or
enjoin any violation. This remedy shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any fines
provided for violation in § 196-7 above.
§ 196-9. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect sixty (60) days after its adoption, in accordance with 24
V.S.A. § 1972.
Chapter 125
Dogs
[Adopted 3-30-1998]
§ 125-1. Statutory authority.
§ 125-2. Definitions.
§ 125-3. License required.
§ 125-4. Nuisances prohibited.
§ 125-5. Running at large prohibited.
§ 125-6. Vicious dogs prohibited.
§ 125-7. Dogs in heat to be confined.
§ 125-8. Complaint procedure; hearing.
§ 125-9. Failure to comply.
§ 125-10. Impoundment.
§ 125-11. Reasonable methods for capture authorized.
§ 125-12. Release from pound.
§ 125-13. Conditions for release; charges.
§ 125-14. Violations and penalties.
§ 125-15. Severability.
§ 125-16. Previous provisions repealed.
§ 125-17. When effective.
§ 125-1. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to 20 V.SA. § 3549, 24 V.S.A. § 2291(10) and 24 V.S.A. § 1971 the following
chapter is promulgated in order to regulate the keeping of dogs in the Town of Rutland.
This chapter is designated as a civil ordinance pursuant to 24 V.S.A. § 1971(b).
§ 125-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DOG— Includes both male and female domestic dogs (canis familiaris) and wolfhybrids
as defined in 20 V.S.A § 3545(8).
DOG CREATING A NUISANCE — A dog which causes damage to personal
property, harasses a pedestrian, bicyclist or other passerby, obstructs traffic, barks
excessively, or repeatedly scatters refuse, or otherwise becomes a nuisance or
creates a disturbance.
DOG RUNNING AT LARGE — A dog which is not on the property of its owner or
keeper and is not:
A. On a leash.
B. On or within a vehicle.
C. Engaged in hunting with its owner or keeper.
D. a dog which is clearly under the verbal command of its owner or keeper.
[Amended 6-2-2015]
DOMESTIC ANIMAL— An animal identified in 6 V.S.A. § 1151(2). Where
applicable, the definitions of particular animals provided by 6 V.S.A. §
1151 shall control. The term "domestic animal" shall also include an
animal defined as a "domestic pet" or "pet" by 20 V.S.A.§ 3541(3).
ISSUING MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL — A constable of the Town of Rutland, the
Town Attorney, town grand juror, poundkeeper, any law enforcement
official certified by the Vermont Criminal Justice Training Council, and any
other person designated by the Board of Selectmen to issue and pursue
before the Traffic and Municipal Ordinance Bureau a municipal complaint
to enforce this chapter.
[Amended 12-31-2013]
OWNER or KEEPER— Any person(s) who owns, harbors, keeps, or permits any
dog to be kept in or about their buildings of premises or who is in actual
or constructive possession of a dog in the Town of Rutland.
PERSON — A natural person, corporation, partnership, unincorporated
association or other legal entity; or an agent thereof.
POUND and POUNDKEEPER— The pound and poundkeeper shall be that place
and that person, respectively, designated from time to time by the
Selectmen of the Town of Rutland to detain dogs seized by an issuing
municipal official in the enforcement of this chapter.
VICIOUS DOG — A dog which causes reasonable fear of bodily injury by
attacking or threatening to attack any domestic animal or any person,
except a person who is in the act of committing unlawful (criminal)
trespass or other criminal act upon the private property or person of the
owner or keeper of the dog.
§ 125-3. License required.
A person who is the owner of a dog more than six months old shall annually on or before
April 1 cause the dog to be licensed as required by 20 V.S.A., Chapter 193, Subchapter
2. The failure of a dog owner to comply with 20 V.S.A., Chapter 193, Subchapter 2 shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 125-4. Nuisances prohibited.
An owner or keeper shall not permit a dog to create a nuisance as defined in §
125-2.
§ 125-5. Running at large prohibited.
An owner or keeper shall not allow a dog to run at large within the limits of the Town
of Rutland as defined in § 125-2.
§ 125-6. Vicious dogs prohibited.
A person shall not own or keep a vicious dog as defined in § 125-2, except upon such
terms and conditions as ordered by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 125-7. Dogs in heat to be confined.
An owner or keeper shall not permit a female dog in heat to be outside of a building or
a secured enclosure.
§ 125-8. Complaint procedure; hearing.
A. A person who claims that a dog is a vicious dog or is a dog creating a nuisance
may file a written complaint with the Board of Selectmen. The complaint shall
contain the name, address and telephone number of the complainant, the time,
date and place of each occurrence relied upon in support of the claim, an
identification of the domestic animal threatened or attacked, the name and address
of any victim or victims and any other facts which may assist the Board of
Selectmen in conducting the investigation required by Subsection B of this
section.
B. The Board of Selectmen, upon receiving the complaint, shall investigate the
charges and hold a hearing on the
matter. The Selectmen may also hold such a hearing on their own motion, without
receiving a complaint, if they have reason to believe a dog is vicious or is creating
a nuisance. I f the owner or keeper of the dog which is the subject of the hearing
can be ascertained, the owner or keeper shall be provided with a written notice of
the time, date place of hearing and the facts of the complaint.
C. Following the hearing, the Board of Selectmen shall issue a determination as to
whether the dog is a vicious dog as defined in § 125-2 or is a dog creating a
nuisance as defined in § 125-2. Upon so finding, the Selectmen may issue an
order for the protection of persons, domestic animals, and/or property as the facts
and circumstances of the case may require; including, without limitation, that the
dog be muzzled, chained, confined, or disposed of in a humane way. I f the owner
or keeper of the dog can be ascertained, the order shall be sent to the owner or
keeper by certified mail, return receipt requested.
D. Nothing contained in this section shall require proceedings before or an order
from the Board of Selectmen as a precondition to enforcement of this chapter by
an issuing municipal official pursuant to §§ 125-10 through 125-14 (inclusive) of
this chapter.
§ 125-9. Failure to comply.
A violation of or failure to comply with an order of the Board of Selectmen issued
pursuant to this chapter shall itself constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 125-10. Impoundment.
A. Where issuing municipal official finds a dog to be in violation of this chapter or
of an order of the Selectmen, the issuing municipal official may impound the dog
at the town pound and/or may issue to the owner or keeper of the dog a municipal
complaint pursuant to 24 V.SA. § 1977.
B. Upon the filing of a complaint under § 125-8A, an issuing municipal official may
impound a dog which is claimed to be a vicious dog pending a determination of the
Board of Selectmen pursuant to § 125-8C.
§ 125-11. Reasonable methods for capture authorized.
An issuing municipal official may use all reasonable methods, including the use of
tranquilizing and marking apparatus, for catching and impounding dogs claimed to be
vicious pursuant to § 125-8A or found to be in violation of this chapter or of an order
of the Selectmen.
§ 125-12. Release from pound.
A. In the event that a dog is impounded, the procedure for securing the release of a dog
from the pound shall be as follows: A. Upon delivery to the pound, the issuing
municipal official shall notify the dog owner, if the dog is licensed and has identifying
tags. Notice shall be sufficient if given to its owner by certified mail. The dog shall be
held for five working days unless claimed earlier.
B. If the dog is unlicensed, the issuing municipal official shall notify the owner or
keeper, if known, and shall post a notice containing a description of the dog on a
bulletin board in the Town Clerk's office for five working days.
C. I f the owner does not claim the dog within five working days, the dog shall be
given to whomever pays all charges, costs, and fees as provided in Subsection A.
D. I f no person claims the dog within five working days of the mailing of the
certified notice or posting, then the town may cause the dog to be humanely
destroyed.
E. The owner or keeper of any impounded dog shall not remove the dog from the
pound until it is properly licensed, and proof is given to the pound keeper and to
the issuing municipal official of the administration of any immunization or shots
as required by law, including, but not limited to, rabies inoculation.
F. Where a dog that is claimed to be vicious is impounded pursuant to § 125-lOB,
the owner or keeper shall not remove the dog from the pound except on such
terms and conditions as ordered by the Board of Selectmen.
G. Where the Board of Selectmen have determined an impounded dog to be vicious
pursuant to § 125-8C, the owner or keeper shall not remove the dog from the
pound except on such terms and conditions as ordered by the Board of Selectmen;
however, the foregoing provision as to release from the pound shall not apply to a
vicious dog which the Selectmen have ordered to be humanely destroyed.
§ 125-13. Conditions for release; charges.
A. The owner or keeper of a dog which has been impounded or a person claiming an
impounded dog pursuant to § 125-1IC shall not remove such dog from the pound
until he or she has paid the pound keeper’s charges for taking and keeping the dog;
an impoundment fee of $50 to the town, to cover the administrative costs of
enforcing this chapter; any license fees; and the cost of any immunization or shots
as required by law, including but not limited to rabies inoculation.
B. Each impoundment fee and any expenses the town incurs in impounding, keeping
or humanely destroying any such dog shall be a charge and claim of the town
against the owner or keeper of such dog, collectible by action of the town, and the
town shall have a lien on such animal for such fee and all expenses so incurred.
§ 125-14. Violations and penalties.
A. A civil penalty of not more than $500 may be imposed for a violation of this civil
ordinance. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate violation
of this chapter.
B. An issuing municipal official is authorized to recover by the issuance of a municipal
complaint civil penalties in the following amounts for each violation of this chapter:
1. First violation: $50.
2. Second violation: $100.
3. Third violation: $300.
4. Fourth and subsequent violations: $500.
C. In lieu of the civil penalties provided in Subsection B, an issuing municipal official
is authorized to recover a waiver fee in the following amount from any person to
whom a municipal complaint is issued who declines to contest the municipal traffic
complaint and pays the waiver fee:
1. First violation: $25.
2. Second violation: $50.
3. Third violation: $150.
4. Fourth and subsequent violations: $250.
D. Other relief. In addition to the enforcement procedures available before the Traffic
and Municipal Ordinance Bureau, the Town of Rutland may pursue any remedy
authorized by law, including without limitation the maintenance of a civil action
in superior court pursuant to 24 V.S.A. § 1974a(b) to obtain injunctive and other
appropriate relief.
§ 125-15. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable. I f any provision of this chapter, or its
application to any person or circumstances or within any part of the town is held invalid,
illegal, or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity shall not
apply to any other portion of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application thereof.
§ 125-16. Previous provisions repealed.
The town's previous Dog Ordinance, as amended, and designated as Chapter 125, §
125-1 through § 125-11 of the Code of the Town of Rutland, is hereby repealed
effective as of the effective date of this chapter.
§ 125-17. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective sixty days after adoption as provided in 24 V.S.A. §
1972.
Page 1 of 4
TOWN OF RUTLAND ORDINANCE
DRIVING WHILE OPERATING PORTABLE ELECTRONIC DEVICES
I. AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE
A. Pursuant to 24 V.S.A. 2291(4), (14), and (15), and 13 V.S.A. 572510, the
Select Board of the Town of Rutland hereby adopts and promulgates the following
Ordinance in order to regulate the use of portable electronic devices in conjunction with the
operation and use of motor vehicles on public highways in the Town of Rutland.
B. The Select Board finds that the use of handheld portable electronic devices while operating
a motor vehicle distracts the operator's attention from the road thereby increases the risks of
accident, property damage, and bodily injury. Therefore, the use of handheld portable
electronic devices while operating a motor vehicle constitutes a public nuisance.
C. The Select Board adopts and promulgates this Ordinance in order to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the public, including without limitation, the health, safety, or welfare of
the drivers and passengers of motor vehicles on the Town's public highways, and pedestrians
and bicycle riders with whom motor vehicle operators share the public highways of the Town
of Rutland.
D. This Ordinance is designated as a civil ordinance pursuant to 24 V.S.A. 1971(b)
II. DEFINTIONS
Hand-free use - The use of a portable electronic device without use of either hand by
employing an internal feature of, or an attachment to, the device.
Highway(s) - are only such as are laid out in the Town of Rutland in the manner prescribed
by statute; or roads which have been constructed for public travel over land which has been
conveyed to and accepted by the Town of Rutland or to the State by deed of a fee or easement
interest; or roads which have been dedicated to the public use and accepted by the city or
town in which such roads are located; or such as may be from time to time laid out by the
Agency or town. However, the lack of a certificate of completion of a State or town highway
shall not alone constitute conclusive evidence that the highway is not public. The term
"highway" includes rights-of-way, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, areas to
accommodate utilities authorized by law to locate within highway limits, areas used to
mitigate the environmental impacts of highway construction, vegetation, scenic
enhancements, and structures.
Operating - Operating a motor vehicle on a public highway, including while temporarily
stationary because of traffic, a traffic control device, or other temporary delays. "Operating"
does not include operating a motor vehicle with or without the motor running when the
operator has moved the vehicle to the side of or off the
Page 2 of 4
public highway and has halted in a location where the vehicle can safely and lawfully remain
stationary.
Portable electronic device - A portable electronic or computing device, including a cellular
telephone, personal digital assistant (PDA), or laptop computer. "Portable electronic device"
does not include a two-way or Citizens Band radio, or equipment used by a licensed
Amateur Radio operator in accordance with 47 C.F.R. part 97.
Securely mounted - The device is placed in an accessory or location in the vehicle, other
than the operator's hands, where the device will remain stationary under typical driving
conditions.
Texting - The reading or the manual composing or sending of electronic communications,
including text messages, instant messages, or e-mails, using a portable electronic device. Use
of a global positioning or navigation system shall be governed by Article V (B)(5) of this
Ordinance.
III. ENTERTAINMENT PICTURE VISIBLE TO THE OPERATOR
A person shall not operate upon a highway in the Town of Rutland a moving motor vehicle
carrying or having installed a screen or other device transmitting a moving entertainment
picture that is visible to the operator.
IV. JUNIOR OPERATOR USE OF PORTABLE ELECTRONIC DEVICES
A. A person under 18 years of age shall not use any portable electronic device while
operating a moving motor vehicle in a place open temporarily or permanently to public or
general circulation of vehicles.
B. A person under 18 years of age shall not use any portable electronic device while operating
a motor vehicle on a highway, including while the vehicle is stationary unless otherwise
provided in subsection (c) below.
C. The prohibitions of this Article IV shall not apply when use of a portable electronic device
is necessary for a person to communicate with law enforcement or emergency service
personnel under emergency circumstances.
V. HANDHELD USE OF PORTABLE ELECTRONIC DEVICE PROHIBITED
A. Use of handheld portable electronic device prohibited. A person shall not:
1. Use a portable electronic device while operating a moving motor vehicle in a
place open temporarily or permanently to public or general circulation of
vehicles.
Page 3 of 4
2. Use a portable electronic device while operating a motor vehicle on a highway
in Vermont, including while the vehicle is stationary unless otherwise
provided in subsection (B) below.
B. The prohibitions of this Article V shall not apply:
1. To hands-free use.
2. To activation or deactivation of hands-free use, as long as any accessory for securely
mounting the device is not affixed to the windshield in violation of 23 V.S.A. 51125.
3. When use of a portable electronic device is necessary for a person to communicate with
law enforcement or emergency service personnel under emergency circumstances.
4. To use of an ignition interlock device, as defined in 23 V.S.A. {1200.
5. To use of a global positioning or navigation system if it is installed by the
manufacturer or securely mounted in the vehicle in a manner that does not violate 23
V.S.A. {1125.
6. To operators of commercial motor vehicles. The use of handheld mobile telephones
and texting while operating a commercial motor vehicle shall be governed by the
provisions Chapter 39 of Title 23 of the Vermont Statutes Annotated.
C. A person shall not be issued more than one complaint for any violation of Article IV,
Article V, or Article VI of this Ordinance that arises from the same incident.
VI. TEXTING PROHIBITED
A. A person shall not engage in texting while operating a moving motor vehicle in a place
open temporarily or permanently to public or general circulation of vehicles.
B. A person shall not engage in texting while operating a motor vehicle on a
highway, including while the vehicle is stationary unless otherwise provided under this
section:
C. A person who violates this section commits a traffic violation as defined in section 2302
of this title and shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $ 100.00 and not more than $
200.00 for a first violation, and of not less than $ 250.00 and not more than $ 500.00 for a
second or subsequent violation within any two-year period.
D. The prohibitions of this Article VI shall not apply when use of a portable electronic device
is necessary for a person to communicate with law enforcement or emergency service
personnel under emergency circumstances.
Page 4 of 4
VII. ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS, and PENALTIES
A. A civil penalty of not more than $800 may be imposed for a violation of this Ordinance.
B. A town constable or other law enforcement officer is authorized to recover by the issuance
of a municipal complaint for a violation of this Ordinance a civil penalty of $400 for a first
violation and $800 for a second or subsequent violation within any two-year period.
C. In lieu of the civil penalties provided in subsection B of this Article, a town constable or
other law enforcement officer is authorized to recover a waiver fee in the following amount,
from any person to whom a municipal complaint is issued, who declines to contest the
municipal complaint and pays the waiver fee of $200 for a first violation and $400 for a second
or subsequent violation within any two-year period.
D. A person who violates this Ordinance shall be subject to all surcharges, court costs, and
any other assessment established and/or administered by the Vermont Judicial Bureau and, in
the event of a failure to pay an amount due, 4 V.S.A.
VIII. SEVERIBILITY
The provisions of this Ordinance are severable. If any provision of this Ordinance, or its
application to any person or circumstances or within any part of the Town of Rutland is held
invalid, illegal, or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity shall not
apply to any other portion of this Ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application thereof.
IX. EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall become effective sixty (60) days after adoption as provided in 24 V.S.A.
1972.
700893.1


Town of Rutland
Fire Department Alarm Systems
§ 100. Definitions and word usage
§ 101. Regulations
§ 102. Permit required, application procedure
§ 103. Issuance of permit
§ 104. Types of permit; fees; exemptions
§ 105. Excessive false alarms
§ 106. Limitation on liability of Town
§ 100. Definitions and word usage
1. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the
singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
2. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein.
A. Alarm installation - The design, positioning, repair, alteration, maintenance, and
operation of alarm systems causing a signal to be sounded in the event of a
hazard, intrusion or the occurrence of a predetermined inimical event to which
the Fire Department are expected to respond.
B. Alarm system - Any combination or assembly of electronic devices or a single
device at a premise or location, designed to transmit to Rutland Town dispatch
provider, either directly or through an intermediary, a warning signaling a
hazard, intrusion or fire to which police or fire are expected to respond. In this
chapter, the term "alarm system" shall apply to all electronic security systems,
fire alarm systems, services and alarms defined herein by which police or fire
are notified and expected to respond and includes any fire suppression system.
[Amended 7-5-2016]
C. Alarm user - Any person who owns and/or operates an alarm system within the
Town of Rutland, except for alarm systems on motor vehicles.
D. Answering service - A telephone answering service which provides the service
of receiving emergency signals from alarm systems and thereafter immediately
relaying the message by live voice to the communications center of the Town of
Rutland. Central alarm station - Any facility which is privately owned that
owns or leases alarm systems, which facility is staffed by employees who
receive, record, or validate alarm signals and relay information about such
signals to Town of Rutland dispatch of a predetermined inimical event. Direct
alarm - Any alarm system, which is directly connected to the alarm processing
unit of the Town of Rutland.
E. False alarm - Any activation of an alarm system to which police or fire respond
where an emergency situation does not exist. Such terminology does not
include alarms caused by electrical storms, floods, hurricanes, or other violent
events of nature.
F. Local alarm - Any alarm system not connected to the Town of Rutland alarm
monitoring facility or to a private central alarm station or answering service that
is designed to activate an audible and/or visual signaling device at the premises
or location within which the alarm system is installed.
G. Manual alarm - Any alarm system in which activation of the alarm is initiated
by the direct action of the public, alarm user, their agents or employees and is
installed with the purpose of eliciting a response to an emergency situation.
H. Person - Any natural person, corporation, unincorporated association, or other
legal entity.
§ 101. Regulations
1. Every alarm user shall provide to the Town of Rutland the names and telephone numbers
of at least two (2) persons, in addition to the alarm user, who can be reached at any time,
day or night, and who are authorized to respond to an emergency signal transmitted by an
alarm system.
2. No alarm system directly connected to the Town of Rutland alarm monitoring facility shall
be tested, worked on or demonstrated without first notifying the Town of Rutland.
3. Within six (6) months from the effective date of this ordinance, all alarm systems which
use an audible horn, siren or other audible device shall be equipped with a device which
will terminate such horn, siren or bell or other audible device within fifteen (15) minutes
after activation of the alarm system.
4. A permit number used to identify the origin of the alarm signal shall be assigned by the
Town of Rutland and applied to the alarm permit at the time of issuance.
5. No automatic dial alarms. No alarm system shall automatically select a telephone line
connected to the Town of Rutland alarm monitoring facility which reproduces a
prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the emergency
situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. No person shall have a self-dialing
telephone alarm system connected to his/her telephone, which automatically calls the Town
of Rutland alarm monitoring facility.
6. All fire alarm systems shall comply with the BOCA Fire Prevention Code, 1999 Edition,
together with all amendments and cumulative supplements hereafter, and the NFPA 101
Life Safety Code, 2009 Edition or the most recent edition. All fire alarm systems
including but not limited to fire suppression systems shall comply with the current NFPA
101 life safety code as adopted by the State of Vermont. [Amended 7-5-2016]
7. Plans for alarm systems directly connected to the Town of Rutland shall be submitted to the
fire or police department for approval prior to any work being done. The Town of Rutland
shall have up to ten (10) working days to review plans and issue a permit for the system.
8. Fire alarm system plans shall include the floor plan with device locations, the wiring riser
diagram, the complete equipment list and specifications, and the type of occupancy, usual
hazards, or unusual building features.
§ 102. Permit required; application procedure
1. Permit required. No person shall operate or have installed an alarm system within the
Town of Rutland without first acquiring a permit from the city.
2. Existing alarm systems. Users of alarm systems presently operating shall conform to
this ordinance prior to continued operation thereof. The chief of police, fire chief or
their designee shall formulate a reasonable period of time not to exceed six (6) months
within which users may be expected to comply with established requirements.
3. Permit application requirements. Upon application to him/her, the chief of police, fire
chief or their designee is hereby authorized to issue a permit to an applicant to have
installed and to operate within the Town of Rutland an alarm system, subject to the
following provisions:
A. Alarm user permit application and installation forms are available at the police
or fire department. Alarm users will complete the application form and return it,
together with the installation form (to be completed by the installer performing
the installation), to the police or fire department before an alarm permit may be
issued.
B. Alarm users are responsible for notifying the police or fire department of any
anticipated changes in the design, purpose or termination of any alarm system
described in the original application for permit. The standard installation form
may be used for this purpose and must be filed with the police or fire
department prior to any change-taking place.
4. Any person who shall violate a provision of this section shall be subject to a civil
penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $500. Each Day that said violation occurs
shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 103. Issuance of permit
1. The chief of police, fire chief or their designee shall determine whether permit and
installation applications conform to the requirements of this ordinance.
2. The chief of police, fire chief or their designee, upon receipt of the permit fee required
and upon compliance by the applicant with this ordinance, shall issue a permit to have
installed and/or to operate the proposed alarm system.
3. Alarm users to whom a permit has been issued shall keep said permit within the
protected premises/location for which the permit was issued. Any alarm permit issued
under this ordinance shall be made available for inspection upon demand of any
authorized Town of Rutland representative.
§ 104. Types of permit; fees; exemptions
1. A residential permit shall include all private dwellings, summer (vacation) residences,
individual apartments, rental property, or condominium units occupied by the applicant,
for which the applicant shall pay the Town of Rutland a permit fee of twenty-five
dollars ($25.00).
2. A commercial permit shall include all businesses, corporations, or unincorporated
associations, for which the applicant will pay to the Town of Rutland a permit fee of
seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
3. A separate commercial permit shall be required for each alarm system owned or leased
by a business, corporation, incorporated association, or other legal entity, which exists
at a separate premises/location.
4. A new permit shall be required upon the change of ownership or upon a new
installation of an alarm system.
5. All alarms directly connected to the Town of Rutland will pay an annual fee of one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). The fee will be billed by the Town of Rutland
treasurer's office. If not paid within thirty (30) days, it will become a general bill of the
Town of Rutland and collected like all general bills.
6. All federal, state, county, local government, and other agencies as approved by the
Select Board shall be exempt form permit fees and service charges. However, they
shall comply with all other requests of the Fire chief or his/her designee as shall
concern the operation of their alarm systems.
§ 104. Excessive false alarms
1. Excessive false alarms shall mean more than two (2) false alarms from the same alarm
system within a calendar year.
2. Any alarm user having an alarm system on his/her premises/location who fails to obtain
an alarm user's permit shall be charged one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each alarm
that the police or fire respond to.
3. Any alarm user having an alarm system on his/her premises/location and any user of
alarm services or equipment designed and installed with the intent of eliciting a police
or fire response shall pay to the Town of Rutland a charge for each and every false
alarm to which the police or fire respond in each calendar year as follows:
A. After two (2) false alarms in a calendar year, where such false alarms result in a
response by the police or fire department, the alarm user shall be assessed a
service charge of one hundred-fifty dollars ($150.00) for the first excessive
false alarm, two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second excessive false alarm
and an additional one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each excessive false alarm
thereafter.
B. Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to pay false-alarm service charges
within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of receipt shall be subject to a
civil penalty of not less than fifty dollars ($50) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500) for each violation in addition to the service charge assessed.
Each day of such violation of this provision shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 106. Limitation on liability of Town of Rutland
1. The Town of Rutland shall take every reasonable precaution to assure that the alarm
signals and prerecorded alarm messages received by the Town of Rutland are given
appropriate attention and are acted upon with dispatch. Nevertheless, the Town of
Rutland shall not be liable for any defects in operation of alarm devices, for any failure
or neglect to respond appropriately upon receipt of an alarm from such a defective
system nor for failure or neglect of any person in connection with the installation and
operation of alarm systems or their components or the transmission of alarm signals
and messages. In the event that the city finds it necessary to require users to cease
transmitting signals from alarm systems not conforming to this chapter or act to prevent
the sounding of false alarms, the Town of Rutland shall not be held liable for such
action.
2. The provisions of section 101 part 1 will be prominently displayed on all permits.
Town of Rutland
Ordinance Regulating Open Burning and Incineration of Solid Waste
WHEREAS, the Town of Rutland has, by virtue of the authority granted in 24 V.S.A. §
1971 (Title 24, Chapter 59, Section 1971), and 24 V.S.A. § 2202a(a) Title 24, Chapter
61, Subchapter 8, Section 2201a), the power to adopt, amend, repeal, and enforce
ordinances, and to manage and regulate the solid waste disposal within its boundaries;
and
WHEREAS, the Town of Rutland has determined that open burning and incineration
practices prohibited by this Ordinance constitute public nuisances, and the Town of
Rutland has the authority to regulate and prohibit such practices by virtue of the
authority granted in 24 V.S.A. § 2291 (14) (Title 24, Part 2, Chapter 61, Subchapter 11,
Section 2291);
NOW, THEREFORE, to protect public health and safety and to promote the reasonable
use of resources and protection of the environment, the Select Board of the Town of
Rutland hereby adopts this ordinance to regulate open burning and incineration in the
Town of Rutland, Vermont.
Article I: Purpose and Title
Purpose. This ordinance is enacted to promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Rutland and to regulate open
burning and incineration practices that pose a danger to the public health
and welfare and the environment or constitute a public nuisance. Although
this ordinance provides for restricted open burning, residents are
encouraged to utilize facilities provided by the Solid Waste Alliance
Communities (SWAC) whenever possible.
Title. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Ordinance
Regulating Open Burning and Incineration of Solid Waste”.
Article II: Definitions
A. “Air contaminants” shall mean dust, fumes, mist, smoke, and other particulate
matter, vapor, gas, odorous substances, or any combination thereof.
B. “Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ)” means the Town Forest Fire Warden or his
designee and Chief of the Rutland Town Fire Department or his designee.
C. “Emission” shall mean a release of air contaminants.
D. “Fuel” shall mean any form of combustible matter, solid, liquid or gas used to
produce heat, light, or power by burning, but excluding refuse. Fuel includes, but
is not limited to, coal, coke, charcoal, natural gas, propane, gas, fuel oil and wood.
E. “Incineration” means the burning of refuse in an enclosed container, such as a
furnace, stove, incinerator, or similar devise.
F. “Natural wood” means branches or brush less than four (4) inches in diameter that
has not been chemically treated with preservatives, paint, oil, stain, adhesive or
other chemical.
G. “Non-woody vegetation” means leaves, grass, yard trimmings, and other organic
materials.
H. “Open Burning” shall mean any burning in the open or in an open container,
specifically excluding burning that takes place in dwelling heating systems,
cooking systems, candles or lamps and welding equipment.
I. “Refuse” shall mean all solid or liquid wastes, including but not limited to: animal
and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food; street cleaning; dead animals; abandoned automobiles;
solid market and industrial wastes; paper; cardboard; tin cans; plastics; glass;
bedding; crockery; plywood composite materials; dimensional lumber; pressuretreated
materials; and other building materials.
J. “Structure” means any assembly of materials for display, use or occupancy,
including, but not limited to, buildings mobile homes, shipping and storage
containers, carports, sheds, garages, and porches.
Article III: Open Burning and Incineration
§ 1. Burning Prohibited
A. No refuse, or downed trees shall be burned through open burning or
incineration, nor shall any structure be intentionally burned.
B. No burning may occur within 200 feet of a woodland or timberland or
field that contains dry grass.
§ 2. Burning Permit Requirements
A. Residents wishing to burn natural wood and non-woody vegetation in
accordance with this section shall obtain a permit from the Town of
Rutland Fire Warden before burning. Permits may contain any
condition and shall be for specific days, specified location, and for
specific material. The hours within which said burning may take place
may be specified in the permit. The Town of Rutland Fire Warden may
inspect material to be burned prior to issuance of a permit or ignition
and as a result of that inspection deny the burn request.
B. Individuals possessing burn permits shall attend the fire until
extinguished and shall have sufficient means readily available in order
to keep the burn under control and to extinguish the burn immediately.
Burns shall not smolder for any extended period of time.
C. The Town of Rutland Fire Warden can enter the property of a permit
holder to investigate a fire and order the fire to be extinguished. If the
permit holder refuses an order to extinguish, the Town of Rutland Fire
Warden may call the Rutland Town Fire Department to extinguish the
fire. Any cost associated with the fire department extinguishing the fire
is the responsibility of the permit holder.
D. Individuals wishing to burn construction or demolition materials and
commercial wastes shall first receive an approved Vermont
Department of Environmental Conservation burn permit prior to
application to the Town of Rutland Fire Warden for a Town burn
permit.
§ 3. Permissible Open Burning
A. Nothing herein shall prevent the use of: campfires or bonfires less than thirty
(30) inches in diameter; barbeque pits less than thirty (30) inches in diameter;
the burning of fuels for cooking purposes; the recreational burning of natural
wood in chimneys or similar open containers; or the open burning of natural
wood or non-woody vegetation, including bonfires greater than thirty (30)
inches in diameter, when the ground surrounding the area where the burning
is to take place is covered with snow.
B. Nothing herein shall prevent the burning of solid or liquid fuels, or structures
for bona fide fire training provided that the materials other than natural wood
are removed to the greatest extent possible prior to burning, and that notice
has been provided to the Vermont Department of Environmental
Conservation and Town of Rutland Select Board approval has been granted.
C. Nothing herein shall prevent the Town of Rutland Select Board, with prior
approval from the department of Environmental Conservation, from
authorizing burning for the protection of public health or to thwart a hazard.
D. Nothing herein shall prevent the burning of natural wood or any virgin fuel in a
woodstove, fireplace, or a furnace to produce heat or for the purpose of
preparing food.
Article IV: Penalties and Civil Enforcement
A. This ordinance is a civil ordinance and enforcement shall be brought in the
judicial bureau in accordance with 24 V.S.A. § 1974a et seq.
B. Any person(s) igniting an open burn with or without a permit may be liable for
the cost to extinguish the fire and for any damages caused by the fire subject
to the burn permit.
C. The penalties for violating this ordinance are as follows:
1st offense - Delivery of written Notice of Violation by Enforcement Personnel
as noted in this ordinance (demand to cease burning immediately)
Civil Penalty Waiver Fee
2nd Offense: $100.00 $50.00
3rd Offense: $250.00 $125.00
4th Offense: $500.00 $300.00
The waiver fee is paid by a violator who admits or does not contest the
violation.
Offenses shall be counted on a calendar year basis.
D. The Town of Rutland may make application to the Vermont Judicial Bureau
for an order to cease a violation of this ordinance. The Town Administrator or
his designee is authorized to commence a civil action to obtain injunctive and
other appropriate relief, or to pursue any other remedy authorized by law. Any
additional injunctive relief shall be brought in Superior Court.
Article V: Designation of Enforcement Personnel
A. For the purposes of this ordinance, the Town of Rutland Select Board may
designate any combination of the following persons as enforcement
personnel: Select Board members, Town Health Officer, Town Fire Warden
and any official with law enforcement authority under Vermont Law.
Article VI: Repeal of Inconsistent Provisions
A. All ordinances or parts of ordinances, resolutions, regulations, or other
documents inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
Article VII: Severability
A. This ordinance and its various parts, sentences, sections, and clauses are
hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, section or clause is
adjudged invalid, it is hereby provided that the remainder of this ordinance
shall not be affected thereby.
Article VIII: Effective Date
This ordinance shall become effective 60 days after the adoption date shown
below.
Adopted this___________ day of ___________ 2015 by the legislative body of
the Town of Rutland, VT.
________________________
Joseph Dicton, Chairman
_______________________
Don Chioffi, Clerk
______________________
John Paul Faignant
_____________________
Mary Ashcroft
____________________
Joshua Terenzini
Town Of Rutland Ordinance
Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient Merchants
01 Authority
02 License required
03 Definitions
04 Exceptions
05 License Application
06 Display of License
07. No Assignment or transfer of license
08 Loud noises and amplifying devices
09 Use of public highway prohibited
10 Municipal Records
11 Enforcement, Violations, and Penalties
12 Severability
13 Effective date
Authority
Pursuant to 24 V.S.A. § 2291(9) the following ordinance is promulgated in order to regulate
the licensing of peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants conduction business in the Town
of Rutland. This Ordinance is designated as a civil ordinance pursuant to 24 V.S.A.
§ 1971(b).
License Required
Unless exempted from this Ordinance by section 04, it shall be unlawful for any person to
engage in the business of peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant as defined in section 03 of
this Ordinance within the corporate limits of the Town of Rutland without first obtaining a
license therefore as provided herein.
Definitions
Peddler - defined as any person, whether a resident of the Town of Rutland or not, traveling
by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place,
from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods,
wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions
or popcorn, ice cream, sodas, or other refreshments of like character, offering and exposing
the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchases or who without
traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive
vehicle, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance, and further provided that one who
solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchases as part of a scheme
or design to evade the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a peddler subject to
provisions of this chapter.
Person - as used herein shall include the singular and the plural and shall also mean and
include any person, firm, or corporation, association, club, co-partnership or society, or any
other organization.
Solicitor - is defined as any person, whether a resident of the Town of Rutland or not,
traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance,
from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take
orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever
for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future whether or not
such individual has, ‘carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or
whether he/she is collecting advance payments on such sales or not, provided that such
definition shall include any person who, for him/herself, or for another person, firm or
corporation, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad box car,
hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop or any other place within the Town for the sole
purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery.
Transient merchant - is defined as any person, whether as owner, agent, consignee or
employee, whether a resident of the Town or not, who engages in a temporary business of
selling (and delivering) goods, wares, and merchandise within the Town, and who, in
furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, garage, structure,
motor vehicle, tent, railroad box car, public room in hotels, lodging houses, motel,
apartments, shops, or any street, driveway, alley, or other place within the Town, for the
exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public
auction provided that such definition shall not be construed to include any person who, while
occupying such temporary locations, does not sell stock, but exhibits samples only for the
purpose of securing orders for future delivery only. The person so engaged shall not be
relived from complying with the provisions of this chapter merely by reason of association
temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant, auctioneer or by conducting such
transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader,
merchant, or auctioneer.
Exceptions
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to one who sells or offers for sale in person or
by his/her employees or agents, newspaper, ice, bread, pastry, wood, milk, fruits, vegetables,
or other farm produce.
The provision of this chapter shall not apply to sales made to manufacturers, merchants, and
dealers for resale only.
License Application
An application for licenses under this Ordinance, shall set forth the name, permanent and
local address, business address and physical description of all persons to be covered by the
license; description of any vehicles to be used in the licensed activity, including registration
number, the nature of the business to be conducted; the last place of such business, and the
period of time requested to be covered by the license.
The applicant shall identify every federal, state, or local administrative or regulatory
enforcement action or license violation asserted against the applicant or the applicant’s
employer concerning commerce, the conducting of business, or the sale of services, goods,
wares, merchandise, personal property or any other thing regulated by this Ordinance and, if
no longer pending, the outcome or resolution thereof.
The applicant shall identify any and all misdemeanor and felony criminal convictions
concerning the applicant. For each such conviction, the applicant shall identify the offense
for which the applicant was convicted, the date of conviction, and the court and state that
issued the conviction.
The applicant shall state whether they seek a permit to conduct business door to door or from
a particular location. An applicant that proposes to conduct business from a particular
location must provide with the application written permission from the owner of the property
for the location proposed. Any such permit shall be limited to the particular location
identified.
The Select Board or its designee shall issue or deny a license application.
No license shall be issued where the applicant or the business that the applicant seeks to
conduct would endanger the health, safety or welfare of the public. Evidence of danger to
the public health, safety or welfare may include, but shall not be limited to, misdemeanor or
felony conviction(s); evidence of fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation; consumer complaints;
or evidence of violations or enforcement concerning other licensing or consumer protection
authorities.
In the exercise of its discretion, the Select Board of the Town of Rutland may establish the
duration of permits and a schedule of fees for permits issued pursuant to this Ordinance.
Display of license
Each solicitor, peddler and transient merchant shall at all times while doing business in the
Town of Rutland keep in his/her possession the license provided for in this Ordinance and
shall, upon the request of prospective customers, Town Constable or other Town official,
exhibit the license as evidence that he/she has complied with all requirements thereof. Each
transient merchant shall publicly display his/her license in his/her place of business.
No assignment or transfer of license
A license issued pursuant to this Ordinance shall not be used at any time by any person other
than the person identified on the license. A license issued pursuant to this Ordinance shall
not be transferred or assigned.
Loud noises and amplifying devices
No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant, nor any person in his/her behalf, shall shout,
make any cry out, blow a horn, ring a bell, or use any sound device, including any loud
speaking radio or sound amplifying system upon any street, alleys, parks or other public
places of the Town or upon any private premises in the Town for the purpose of attracting
attention to any foods, wares or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell.
Use of Town highway to sell or conduct business prohibited
A peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall not sell or conduct business from any
location in town highway, including a town highway right of way. A peddler, solicitor, or
transient merchant shall not conduct business from a metered parking space. A peddler,
solicitor or transient merchant shall not conduct business operate in any congested area
where his/her operations might impede or inconvenience the public without the approval of
the Select Board of the Town of Rutland.
No solicitation list
Any resident, tenant, or property owner located that desires not to receive solicitation or other
contact at their property from persons subject to this Ordinance may so inform the Town
Administrator.
The Town Administrator shall keep a list of the properties and/or addresses of the properties
in the Town for which the Town has received such notice (the no-solicitation list”).
The Town Administrator shall provide a copy of the no solicitation list to the holder of
permit that authorizes door-to-door solicitation.
It shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance for a permit holder to solicit or conduct
business covered by this Ordinance, otherwise attempt to conduct business covered by this
Ordinance at a property identified on the no-solicitation list.
Municipal records
The Constable(s) of the Town of Rutland shall inform the Town Administrator of every
municipal ticket issued for a violation of this Ordinance. The Town Administrator shall
maintain a record for each license and a record of all the reports of violation of this
Ordinance.
Enforcement, violations, and penalties
A civil penalty of not more than $500 may be imposed for a violation of this Ordinance.
Each week that the violation continues shall constitute a separate violation of this Ordinance.
An issuing municipal official is authorized to recover by the issuance of a municipal
complaint, civil penalties in the following amounts for each violation of this Ordinance:
First Violation $50
Second Violation $100
Third Violation $300
Fourth and Subsequent Violations $500
In lieu of the civil penalties provided in subsection b of this section, an issuing municipal
official is authorized to recover a waiver fee in the following amount, from any person to
whom a municipal complaint is issued, who declines to contest the municipal traffic
complaint and pays the waiver fee:
First Violation $25
Second Violation $50
Third Violation $150
Fourth and Subsequent Violations $250
Other Relief - In addition to the enforcement procedures available before the Traffic and
Municipal Ordinance Bureau, the Town of Rutland may pursue any remedy authorized by
law, including without limitation, the maintenance of a civil action in superior court pursuant
to 24 V.S.A. § 1974a(b) to obtain injunctive and other appropriate relief.
Severability
The provisions of this Ordinance are severable. If any provision of this Ordinance, or its
application to any person or circumstances or within any part of the Town of Rutland is held
invalid, illegal, or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity shall not
apply to any other portion of this Ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application thereof.
Effective date
This Ordinance shall become effective sixty (60) days after its adoption by the Select Board.
If a petition is timely filed under 24 V.S.A. § 1973, the taking effect of this Ordinance shall
be governed by 24 V.S.A. § 1973(e).
TOWN OF RUTLAND PERMIT TRACKING ORDINANCE
I. PURPOSE
The Town of Rutland (Town) administers a wide variety of regulatory programs for which the
issuance of permits or other administrative action is required of the Town, including without
limitation, 911 registration, subdivision of land, access to public highways, construction within
flood hazard areas, excavation or installations within the public highway right of way, sewer
allocation and connection, public water connection, and the construction of telecommunication
facilities. Experience has shown that, in the absence of zoning, development often occurs without
the landowner’s realization that various permits or administrative action might be necessary for
the activity undertaken. It is disadvantageous to the public health, safety and welfare, inefficient,
, and frequently more expensive to address compliance issues after the fact that could have been
avoided if the development project had come to the Town’s attention before work commenced.
The establishment of a permit program for development within the Town that is designed to
ensure at the outset that the project receives all the requisite permits and administrative approvals
would benefit the person undertaking development, as well as, the public health, safety and
welfare. Therefore, the purpose of this Ordinance is to create an informational permit program
for development within the Town of Rutland that serves to channel the construction project to
the appropriate municipal authorities from whom a permit or other administrative action is
required.
II. AUTHORITY
This Ordinance is promulgated pursuant to 19 V.S.A. § 1111; 24 V.S.A. §§ 2291(3), (6), (15),
(19), (22); 24 V.S.A. § 3315, 30 V.S.A. § 7056; 10 V.S.A., Chapter 32, and 24 V.S.A. § 4410 of
the Vermont Planning and Development Act. This Ordinance is designated as a civil ordinance
pursuant to 24 V.S.A. § 1971(b).
III. DEFINITIONS
1. “Building” means a structure having a roof (including an awning or other similar covering,
whether or not permanent in nature) and used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals,
equipment, or personal property.
2. “Informational Permit” means a written statement, issued by the Select Board of the Town of
Rutland or its designee that establishes that the proposed construction project has obtained the
necessary municipal permits and approvals.
3. “Permit officer” means the municipal officer designated by the Select Board to issue permits;
4. “Person” means an individual, corporation, government, governmental subdivision or agency,
business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, or any other legal entity.
5. “Structure” means an assembly of materials for occupancy or use, including but not limited to
a building, mobile home or trailer, or swimming pool.
IV. PERMIT REQUIRED
1. No building or structure of any kind, whether business or residential, including but not limited
to houses, outbuildings, retail and/or commercial structures, as well as an enlargement or
addition that increases the footprint of an existing structure, shall hereafter be constructed or
installed within the limits of the Town of Rutland unless an informational permit is first obtained
from the Town permit officer.
2. An informational permit is required for the alteration of an existing building or structure that
results in an increase in the number of bedrooms.
V. EXEMPTIONS FROM PERMIT REQUIREMENT
1. A building or structure with a floor area or foot print of less than 100 square feet.
2. A vertical expansion of an existing building or structure that is not accompanied by an
increase of the foot print of building or structure or an increase in the number of bedrooms.
VI. PERMIT ADMINISTRATION AND APPLICATION
1. The Town shall provide application forms approved by the Select Board to be completed by
the owners of all prospective construction projects, or their authorized agents, requesting
informational permit approval.
2. The application forms shall contain questions pertaining to the name, address and contact
information of the owner(s); type, size and location of the project; the existing regulatory permits
and/or approvals to which the property is subject; new permit(s) and/or prior permitting at the
site; and any other questions relative to the project which the Town may deem necessary.
3. The application shall include a general plot plan or sketch on one sheet of paper measuring no
less than size 8 ½” x 11” that depicts the location of existing and proposed buildings and
structures, the location of all utilities, wells, septic and replacement septic areas on the property;
adjoining public highways; and any rights of way that provide access to the property.
4. The application shall contain such other information concerning the proposed construction
project that the Select Board may determine from time to time in the exercise of its discretion to
be appropriate to achieve the purposes of this Ordinance
5. The Select Board may establish, and may revise from time to time in the exercise of its
discretion, a fee schedule for applications processed pursuant to this Ordinance.
VII. ENFORCEMENT
1. This Ordinance shall be enforced as provided by 24 V.S.A. § 1974a.
2. A civil penalty of not more than $500 may be imposed for a violation of this Ordinance.
3. The permit officer or other issuing municipal official is authorized to recover by the issuance
of a municipal complaint, civil penalties in the following amounts for each violation of this
Ordinance:
First Violation $200
Second Violation $300
Third Violation $400
Fourth and Subsequent Violations $500
4. In lieu of the civil penalties provided in subsection B of this section, an issuing municipal
official is authorized to recover a waiver fee in the following amount, from any person to whom
a municipal complaint is issued, who declines to contest the municipal traffic complaint and pays
the waiver fee:
First Violation $100
Second Violation $150
Third Violation $200
Fourth and Subsequent Violations $250
VIII. SEVERABILITY
The provisions of this Ordinance are severable. If any provision of this Ordinance, or its
application to any person or circumstances or within any part of the Town of Rutland is held
invalid, illegal, or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity shall not
apply to any other portion of this Ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application thereof.
IX. EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall become effective sixty (60) days after adoption as provided in 24 V.S.A. §
1972.
TOWN OF RUTLAND ORDINANCE
FOR PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANTS
§ 100. Authority
§ 101. Purposes
§ 102. Definitions
§ 103. General Requirements
§ 104. Inspection, Testing, Maintenance, Correction and Repair
§ 105. Identification and Notification of Impaired Hydrant
§ 106. Records
§ 107. Enforcement, Violations and Penalties
§ 108. Effective Date
§ 100. Authority
Pursuant to 20 V.S.A. § 2291(13), 24 V.S.A. § 2291(14) and 24 V.S.A. § 2291(15) the
following ordinance is promulgated in order to regulate the inspection, testing,
maintenance, correction, and repair of fire hydrants located on private property in the
Town of Rutland and those fire hydrants located in the rights of way of a public highway
of the Town of Rutland that the Town of Rutland does not own. This Ordinance is
designated as a civil ordinance pursuant to 24 V.S.A. § 1971(b).
§ 101. Purposes
The purposes of this Ordinance are to:
1. Provide standards and requirements for the inspection, testing, maintenance,
correction, and repair of fire hydrants located on private property of the Town of
Rutland, as well as fire hydrants located in the right of way of a public highway in
the Town of Rutland that are owned by a fire district or any person or entity other
than the Town of Rutland.
2. Ensure that every private fire hydrant to which the Fire Department of the Town
of Rutland or other municipal fire department connects in the event of a fire or
other emergency will function as designed to produce the water necessary to
respond appropriately to the fire or other emergency.
3. Protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the Town of Rutland.
§ 102. Definitions
1. EMERGENCY IMPAIRMENT – A condition where a private fire hydrant is out of
service due to an unexpected occurrence, such as frozen or ruptured hydrant
components or an interruption of the water supply to the system.
2. FIRE DEPARTMENT – The Fire Department of the Town of Rutland.
- 2 -
3. HYDRANT – A private fire hydrant as defined below.
4. IMPAIRED HYDRANT – A private fire hydrant which is not operational due to an
emergency impairment or a preplanned impairment.
5. IMPAIRMENT – A shutdown of a private fire hydrant which renders the hydrant nonoperational
and therefore out of service.
6. IMPAIRMENT TAG – A tag affixed to a private fire hydrant to indicate that the
hydrant is out of service. The Fire Department may determine the requirements of an
impairment tag and the means and location of its attachment to a hydrant.
7. INSPECTION – A visual examination of a private fire hydrant to verify that it appears
to be in operating condition and is free from physical damage.
8. ISSUING MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL - A constable of the Town of Rutland, the town
attorney, town grand juror, administrative assistant, officer, and any other person
designated by the Board of Selectmen to issue and pursue before the Traffic and
Municipal Ordinance Bureau a municipal complaint to enforce this Ordinance.
9. MAINTENANCE – Work performed to keep a private fire hydrant operable or to
make repairs.
10. NFPA STANDARD – Publication 25 of the National Fire Protection Association
(NFPA) entitled Standard for the Inspection, Testing and Maintenance of Water-
Based Fire Protection Systems 2002, and any subsequent amendments or revisions
thereto.
11. OWNER – The person that holds record title to the property upon which a private fire
hydrant is located. For fire hydrants located in the right of way of a public highway
in the Town of Rutland that are not owned by the Town of Rutland, the owner is the
person that owns the fire hydrant itself.
12. OWNER’S DESIGNEE - Where the owner is not the occupant of the premises upon
which a private fire hydrant is located, the occupant, management firm, or managing
individual designated by the owner through specific provisions in the lease, written
use agreement, or management contract owner to assume the responsibility to inspect,
test, and maintain, correct, and repair a private fire hydrant located on the owner’s
property.
13. PERSON - Any institution, public or private corporation, individual, partnership, fire
district, or other entity.
14. PRE-PLANNED IMPAIRMENT – A condition where a private fire hydrant is out of
service due to work that has been planned in advance.
- 3 -
15. PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANT – A valved connection to a water main for the purpose
of supplying water to a fire hose or other fire protection apparatus and that is not
located within the right of way of a public highway of the Town of Rutland. A
private fire hydrant also includes any fire hydrant located in a right of way of a public
highway in the Town of Rutland that is owned by a fire district or any person other
than the Town of Rutland.
16. QUALIFIED – Having knowledge of the installation, construction, operation,
maintenance, correction or repair of a fire hydrant and the hazards involved.
17. RECORD – Written documentation of the inspection, testing, maintenance,
correction, or repair of a private fire hydrant.
18. SHALL – Indicates a mandatory requirement.
19. TESTING – A procedure of periodic physical and operational checks used to
determine whether a private fire hydrant is capable of being operated as intended and
will perform as intended, e.g., water-flow tests. These tests follow up on the original
tests at intervals specified in this Ordinance.
§ 103. General Requirements
1. Responsibility for properly maintaining a private fire hydrant shall be that of the
owner of the property or the owner’s designee.
a. Where the owner of a private fire hydrant has designated an occupant,
management firm, or managing individual, through specific provisions in the
lease, written use agreement, or management contract, to be responsible for the
inspection, testing and maintenance of a private fire hydrant in accordance with
this Ordinance, the owner’s designee shall comply with the requirements of this
Ordinance and shall be subject to enforcement of this Ordinance in the event of a
failure to so comply.
2. By means of periodic inspections, tests, maintenance, correction, and repair, every
private fire hydrant shall be maintained in proper working condition, consistent with
this Ordinance, the NFPA Standard, and the manufacturer’s specifications or
recommendations.
3. Inspection, testing, maintenance, correction, and repair shall be implemented with the
procedures meeting or exceeding those established in this Ordinance and the NFPA
Standard and shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications or
recommendations. This Ordinance shall control in the event of a conflict among any
of the aforementioned applicable standards. Inspection, testing, maintenance,
correction, and repair shall be performed by qualified maintenance personnel or a
qualified contractor.
- 4 -
4. The owner or owner’s designee shall notify the Fire Department of the Town of Rutland
before testing or shutting down a private fire hydrant or its water supply.
a. This notification shall include the purpose for the shutdown, the private fire
hydrant involved, and the estimated time that the hydrant will be impaired.
5. The owner or owner’s designee shall notify the Fire Department when the private fire
hydrant is returned to service.
6. The owner or owner’s designee shall promptly correct or repair any deficiencies,
damaged parts, or impairments found while performing the inspection, testing, and
maintenance requirements of this Ordinance.
7. The owner or owner’s designee shall promptly correct or repair any deficiencies,
damaged parts, or impairments of any private fire hydrant of which the owner or owner’s
designee has knowledge or, in the exercise of reasonable care, ought to have knowledge.
§ 104. Inspection, Testing, Maintenance, Correction and Repair
1. This section shall provide the minimum requirements for the routine inspection, testing,
maintenance, correction, and repair of private fire hydrants. These functions shall be
permitted to be carried out simultaneously.
2. On or before October 1st of each year, the owner or the owner’s designee shall inspect, test,
maintain, and if necessary, correct, and repair each private fire hydrant to ensure proper
functioning, with the necessary repair or corrective action taken as shown in Table 1.
a. The owner or owner’s designee shall conduct an inspection of a private fire
hydrant after each time the hydrant is operated.
3. When conducting a test of a private fire hydrant, the hydrant shall be opened fully, and
water flowed until all foreign material has cleared.
a. Flow shall be maintained for not less than one (1) minute.
b. After operation, the hydrant shall be observed for proper drainage from the barrel.
c. Full drainage shall take no longer than sixty (60) minutes.
d. Where soil conditions or other factors are such that the hydrant barrel does not
drain within sixty (60) minutes, or where the ground water level if above that of
the hydrant drain, the hydrant drain shall be plugged and the water in the barrel
shall be pumped out.
e. A hydrant does not drain as required shall be identified clearly as needing
pumping after each operation.
4. Private fire hydrants shall be lubricated annually to ensure that all stems, caps, plugs, and
threads are in proper operating condition.
- 5 -
5. Private fire hydrants shall be kept free of snow, ice, or other materials and protected
against mechanical damage so that free access is ensured.
6. The owner or the owner’s designee shall repair as soon as possible a private fire hydrant
which is impaired or otherwise does not function as required by this Ordinance, the
NFPA Standard, or the manufacturer’s specifications.
a. After completing all necessary repairs to a private fire hydrant, the owner or the
owner’s designee shall inspect and test the hydrant as necessary consistent with
the standards of this Ordinance, including without limitation Table 1, to ensure
that the hydrant is operational.
§ 105. Identification and Notification of Impaired Hydrant
1. The owner or owner’s designee shall notify the Fire Department in advance of a
preplanned impairment of a private fire hydrant.
2. The owner or the owner’s designee shall notify the Fire Department immediately of an
emergency impairment of a private fire hydrant.
3. The owner or owner’s designee shall affix an impairment tag to an impaired hydrant at
the commencement of a preplanned impairment and at the time of discovery of an
emergency impairment.
4. Once the necessary inspection and testing confirm that repairs have restored a private fire
hydrant to operational status, the owner or the owner’s designee shall remove the
impairment tag and shall notify the Fire Department that the hydrant is operational.
§ 106. Records
1. Records shall indicate the procedure performed concerning the inspection, testing,
maintenance, correction, and repair of a private hydrant. Such records shall include the
organization that performed the work, the results, and the date, as well as such other
pertinent information as the Fire Department shall require.
2. Records shall be maintained by the owner or the owner’s designee.
3. The owner or owner’s designee shall submit to the Administrative Officer of the Town of
Rutland a record of the annual inspection, test, maintenance, correction and repair of each
private fire hydrant and its components.
4. The owner shall retain the original records of a private fire hydrant for the life of the
private fire hydrant.
- 6 -
5. Subsequent records shall be retained for a period of one year after the next inspection,
test, maintenance, correction or required by this Ordinance.
§ 107. Enforcement, Violations and Penalties
1. A civil penalty of not more than $500 may be imposed for a violation of this Ordinance.
Each week that the violation continues shall constitute a separate violation of this
Ordinance.
2. An issuing municipal official is authorized to recover by the issuance of a municipal
complaint, civil penalties in the following amounts for each violation of this Ordinance:
First Violation $50
Second Violation $100
Third Violation $300
Fourth and Subsequent Violations $500
3. In lieu of the civil penalties provided in subsection 2 of this section, an issuing municipal
official is authorized to recover a waiver fee in the following amount, from any person to
whom a municipal complaint is issued, who declines to contest the municipal traffic
complaint and pays the waiver fee:
First Violation $25
Second Violation $50
Third Violation $150
Fourth and Subsequent Violations $250
4. Other Relief - In addition to the enforcement procedures available before the Traffic and
Municipal Ordinance Bureau, the Town of Rutland may pursue any remedy authorized
by law, including without limitation, the maintenance of a civil action in superior court
pursuant to 24 V.S.A. § 1974a(b) to obtain injunctive and other appropriate relief.
§ 108. Effective Date
This Ordinance shall become effective sixty (60) days after its adoption by the Select Board. If a
petition is timely filed under 24 V.S.A. § 1973, the taking effect of this Ordinance shall be
governed by 24 V.S.A. § 1973(e).
- 7 -
SIGNATURES DATE
________________________________ ___________________________
________________________________ ___________________________
________________________________ ___________________________
________________________________ ___________________________
________________________________ ___________________________
TABLE 1 -FIRE HYDRANT INSPECTION, MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR
CONDITION CORRECTIVE ACTION
Inaccessible Make accessible
Barrel contains water or ice (presence of
either could indicate a faulty drain, a leaky
hydrant valve, or a high groundwater table)
Repair and drain; for high groundwater it
could be necessary to plug the drain and
pump out the barrel after each use
Improper drainage from barrel Repair drain
Leaks at outlets or at top of hydrant Repair or replace gaskets, packing, or parts as
necessary
Cracks in hydrant barrel Repair or replace
Tightness of outlets Lubricate if necessary, tighten if necessary
Worn nozzle threads Repair or replace
Worn hydrant operating nut Repair or replace
Availability of operating wrench Make sure wrench is available
Cracked or peeled paint, exposed rust
unpainted metal
Remove rust, paint hydrant as necessary
372375.v1
Page 1 of 7
Town of Rutland Ordinance
Public Assembly
§ 100. Authority and Purpose
§ 101. Definitions
§ 102. Permit Required
§ 103. Exemption from Permit Requirement
§ 104. Permit Application
§ 105. Action on Application
§ 106. Criteria for Imposing Conditions on Permit
§ 107. Judicial Review
§ 108. Enforcement, Violations and Penalties
§ 109. Revocation of Permit Approval
§ 110. Severability
§ 111. Effective Date
§ 100. Authority and Purpose
Pursuant to 24 V.S.A. § 2291(11), (14), and (15) the following ordinance is promulgated in
order to regulate commercial public assemblies in the Town of Rutland (Town) to protect the
public health, safety and welfare, including without limitation the health, safety, or welfare of
those who attend commercial public assemblies organized and promoted to take place in the
Town, the residents, businesses, and property owners of the Town that may be impacted by a
commercial public assembly, and the Town and its ability to provide municipal services as
necessary for a commercial public assembly. This Ordinance is designated as a civil
ordinance pursuant to 24 V.S.A. § 1971(b).
§ 101. Definitions
As used in this chapter:
A. Commercial public assembly or assembly - A gathering of five hundred (500) or
more individuals in an outdoor public place at which the general public is permitted
or invited to attend, conducted or promoted for profit, whether or not a profit is
actually returned, where persons are admitted on payment of cash, entry fees, advance
subscriptions, donations, or anything of value.
B. Gathering - A group of individuals in attendance at a location at a single point in
time.
C. Outdoor public place - An open area where patrons cannot be accommodated inside a
permanent building with respect to which a person permits use by the general public.
An outdoor public place shall not include a stadium used for sporting events, or a
fairground having permanent seats for patrons.
2
D. Permit - A written statement, issued by the Select Board of the Town of Rutland or its
designee, authorizing the holding of a commercial public assembly under stated
conditions as to time, place, and manner.
E. Permit officer - The municipal officer designated by the Select Board to issue
permits.
F. Person - An individual, corporation, government, governmental subdivision or
agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, or any other legal
entity.
G. Promotional activity - Purchasing paid advertisements in any media of
communication or circulation of printed material advertising the assembly.
H. Youth athletic event - An athletic event in which a majority of the participants are 18
years of age or younger.
§ 102. Permit Required
Any person who intends to hold or organizes or promotes a commercial public assembly in
an outdoor public place to be held in the Town of Rutland, shall obtain a commercial public
assembly permit (“permit”) from the Town.
§ 103. Exemption from Permit Requirement
The following assemblies are exempt from this permit requirement of this ordinance:
1. Any assembly sponsored by the Town of Rutland.
2. Any assembly that takes place on public lands of the Town of Rutland, including
without limitation, Northwood Park. Such an assembly must obtain the prior
permission of the Board of Selectmen.
3. Any assembly for a youth athletic event.
§ 104. Permit Application
A completed application for a permit to hold a commercial public assembly shall be filed
with the permit officer not less than sixty (60) days before the date of the assembly.
The Select Board may modify the time requirements of this Ordinance for good cause shown
provided the public health and safety will not be jeopardized by such action.
An application for a permit to hold a commercial public assembly shall be in writing and
shall be signed by an individual authorized to act for the person sponsoring it.
3
The application shall include:
1. The date and hours the assembly is to be held.
2. the name, residence address, and the telephone number of the applicant, the principal
officers of the applicant, the individual making the application, and any other
individual authorized to represent the applicant in applying for the permit.
3. The property where the assembly is to be held.
4. The written consent of the owner of the property or other person that has the authority
to consent to the use of the property upon which the commercial public assembly is
proposed to take place.
5. The estimated number of persons expected to participate in or attend the public
assembly.
6. A schedule and copies of all promotional activity the applicant has engaged in or
intends to engage in.
7. The general nature of the assembly and the arrangements made to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare during the conduct of the assembly, including
arrangements with respect to traffic control; police, fire and emergency services;
insurance coverage; crowd control; sanitation facilities; and clean up.
8. Such other information concerning the proposed assembly that the Board of
Selectmen may determine from time to time in the exercise of its discretion to be
appropriate to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
The Select Board shall establish an application fee schedule and may revise such schedule
from time to time in the exercise of its discretion.
§ 105. Action on Application
1. The Select Board of the Town shall consider the completed application at a public
meeting.
2. The permit officer shall provide written notice of the public meeting by mail to the
landowners whose property adjoins the property upon which the commercial public
assembly is proposed to take place.
3. The Select Board may recess the public meeting on the application as necessary to
receive additional information.
4. Within twenty (20) days of the completion of the public meeting, the Select Board shall
direct the permit officer to:
4
A. Issue the permit as requested.
B. Issue the permit subject to any conditions authorized in section VII of this Ordinance,
which the Select Board deems reasonably necessary to protect the public health,
safety, or welfare; or
C. Deny the permit application with a written decision that explains the reasons for the
denial.
5. If the Select Board fails to act on the application within twenty (20) days of the
completion of the public meeting, the permit application shall be deemed approved.
6. If the proposed commercial public assembly also triggers the permit requirement of
Chapter 201 of Title 20 of the Vermont Statutes Annotated pertaining to state public
assembly permits, the time requirements for this section for the Select Board’s action on
the application shall not apply. In such circumstance, the application shall be deemed to
comply with this Ordinance and shall be approved forthwith by the permit officer if and
when the applicant has received a public assembly permit from the Commissioner of
Public Safety or the Commissioner’s designee pursuant to 20 V.S.A. §§ 4501 et. seq. A
denial of the state public assembly permit application shall result in the denial of the
application filed pursuant to this Ordinance.
§ 106. Criteria for Imposing Conditions on Permit
1. If there is a reasonable likelihood that a commercial public assembly will substantially
harm the public health, safety, or welfare, the Select Board may grant the permit subject
to such conditions as are reasonably necessary to avoid substantial harm to the public
health, safety, or welfare.
2. The Select Board may impose conditions upon the grant of a permit, including but not
limited to, conditions to ensure:
A. The implementation of a plan to limit the number of individuals in attendance at the
assembly to the maximum number authorized by the permit;
B. The provision of adequate food, potable water, and emergency medical facilities;
C. The provision of adequate toilet and lavatory facilities, including the source, number,
location, type and means of disposing of septic waste;
D. The collection, storage and disposal of solid waste in compliance with applicable
state and federal laws and regulations and that litter and other waste incidental to the
assembly will be removed and properly disposed of by the permit holder;
5
E. The time, place, and duration of the assembly is suitable in view of the number of
persons expected to attend;
F. Measures for controlling the crowd and managing the assembly are adequate,
including without limitation, a security plan detailing the number of guards; their
deployment; their names, addresses, and credentials; and their hours of availability;
G. The provision of adequate fire protection;
H. That sound, noise and light are adequately controlled;
Measures for controlling traffic and parking are adequate and will provide for suitable
road access at all times for area residents and the unobstructed passage of police, fire,
ambulance and other emergency vehicles and personnel;
I. That the assembly will not substantially impair the provision of fire and police
protection, medical and other essential public services of the Town;
J. The assembly will not unreasonably interfere with the quiet enjoyment of residences
in the vicinity of the assembly;
K. The person sponsoring or holding the assembly has adequate liability insurance to
cover the event subject to the application;
L. The person sponsoring or holding the assembly furnishes an adequate bond or deposit
of money with the Town of Rutland, or arranges other financial security in a
reasonable amount to insure reimbursement of the Town for the cost of additional law
enforcement, fire, or emergency services, or the performance of other conditions
attached to the permit;
M. Any other condition that the Select Board determines to be reasonably necessary to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 107. Judicial Review
1. If the Select Board determines that there is a reasonable likelihood that an assembly will
substantially harm the public health, safety, or welfare and this cannot be avoided by
imposition of conditions, the permit officer may apply to the Rutland Superior Court for
an order enjoining the applicant, the person that proposes to sponsor or hold the
commercial public assembly, or other interested person from holding the assembly.
2. The Select Board may apply to the Rutland Superior Court for an order enjoining a
commercial public assembly from taking place if the assembly would reasonably likely
require a permit under this Ordinance.
3. Within thirty (30) days of the issuance of a permit or the denial of a permit application,
an applicant may appeal the permit decision of the Select Board to the Rutland Superior
Court.
6
4. A person who desires to organize or promote any outdoor public gathering may also
petition the Rutland Superior Court for an order declaring that the gathering is not subject
to this Ordinance. The petition shall contain a copy of the application. a copy of the
permit, if any, and state the grounds for the decision requested.
§ 108. Enforcement, Violations and Penalties.
A civil penalty of not more than $500 may be imposed for a violation of this Ordinance,
including without limitation a violation of any requirement(s) and/or condition(s) of a permit.
Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate violation of this Ordinance.
The permit officer or other issuing municipal official is authorized to recover by the issuance
of a municipal complaint, civil penalties in the following amounts for each violation of this
Ordinance:
First Violation $200
Second Violation $300
Third Violation $400
Fourth and Subsequent Violations $500
In lieu of the civil penalties provided in subsection 2 of this section, an issuing municipal
official is authorized to recover a waiver fee in the following amount, from any person to
whom a municipal complaint is issued, who declines to contest the municipal complaint and
pays the waiver fee:
First Violation $100
Second Violation $150
Third Violation $200
Fourth and Subsequent Violations $250
Other Relief - In addition to the enforcement procedures available before the Traffic and
Municipal Ordinance Bureau, the Town of Rutland may pursue any remedy authorized by
law, including without limitation, the maintenance of a civil action in superior court pursuant
to 24 V.S.A. § 1974a(b) to obtain injunctive and other appropriate relief; or the revocation of
a permit.
§ 109. Revocation of Permit Approval.
The Select Board acting through the permit officer may revoke any permit issued pursuant to
this Ordinance for the any of the following reasons:
1. The provision of false, fraudulent, misleading, or inaccurate information in
connection with the permit application;
2. The failure to comply with any requirement(s) and/or condition(s ) of any permit; or
3. The violation of or failure to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance
7
§ 110. Severability
The provisions of this Ordinance are severable. If any provision of this Ordinance, or its
application to any person or circumstances or within any part of the Town of Rutland is held
invalid, illegal, or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity shall not
apply to any other portion of this Ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application thereof.
§ 111. Effective Date
This Ordinance shall become effective sixty (60) days after adoption as provided in 24
V.S.A. § 1972.
427974.1
Page 1 of 7
TOWN OF RUTLAND ORDINANCE
PUBLIC NUISANCE
I. Findings, Purpose and Authority
II. Definitions.
III. Prohibitions
IV. Property Inspection and Inspection Report
V. Hearing on Inspection Report and Order of Abatement
VI. Appeal of Decision and Order of Abatement
VII. Enforcement of Order of Abatement
VIII. Severability
I. FINDINGS, PURPOSE, and AUTHORITY
A. Any premises and/or property within the Town of Rutland which is in a state of
disrepair and deterioration, including vacant buildings, unsafe structures and
potentially dangerous land conditions, are deemed to be public nuisances because
their existence contributes to the decrease in value of surrounding properties,
precipitates disinvestment by neighboring owners, provides a location for criminal
activity, undermines the aesthetic character of the Town and its neighborhoods and
environs, and has other undesirable effects.
B. When the owner of a vacant building fails to actively maintain and manage a building
the building can become a major cause of blight in both residential and nonresidential
neighborhoods. Vacant buildings that are boarded, substandard or on unkempt
properties, and long-term vacancies discourage economic development and retard
appreciation of property values. One vacant property that is not actively and well
maintained and managed can become the core and cause of the spread of blight.
C. It is a responsibility of a property owner to prevent their property from becoming a
burden to the neighborhood and community and/or a threat to the public health,
safety, or welfare.
D. Allowing public nuisances to remain indefinitely, even in the absence of code
violations, structural boarding and other security measures, is detrimental to the
public health, safety and welfare, unreasonably interferes with the reasonable and
lawful use and enjoyment of other neighboring or adjacent property, may pose a
danger to first responders in an emergency, and detracts from the appearance and
good order of the neighborhood.
E. A public nuisance constitutes a danger or threat to the health, safety, and/or welfare of
the public.
Page 2 of 7
F. The purpose of this ordinance is to abate public nuisances and to mitigate their
impacts.
G. The Select Board of the Town of Rutland hereby adopts and promulgates the
following Ordinance pursuant to 24 V.S.A. § 2121 and §2291(13), (14), and (15) in
order to regulate public nuisances and compel the cleaning, maintenance, and/or
repair of any buildings, structures, or premises which in the judgment of the Select
Board qualify as a public nuisance.
H. This is a civil ordinance.
II. DEFINITIONS.
Actual notice - written notice hand-delivered or mailed to the last known address.
Dangerous building - a building or structure, or any portion thereof, that:
1. Presents a fire hazard; or
2. Presents a significant risk of partial or complete collapse due to one or more of the
following:
a. Dilapidation, deterioration, or decay.
b. Damage due to fire, flooding, or other casualty.
c. Faulty construction.
d. The removal, movement, or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for
the purpose of supporting such building or structure.
e. The deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of the foundation of a building or
structure; or
f. Any other cause that creates a significant risk of partial or complete collapse.
Fire hazard - A building or structure that is determined by the Fire Chief to presents a
significant risk of fire because of dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, or other cause.
Hazardous waste - carries the meaning set forth in 10 V.S.A. §6602(4).
Inspection Official -The Town Public Nuisance Inspector, Town Health Officer, Town
Constable, Chief of the Town Fire Department, or such other person so designated and
appointed by the Select Board.
Page 3 of 7
Public health hazard - The potential to harm the public health by virtue of any condition or
any biological, chemical, or physical agent. See 18 V.S.A. §2(8) G.
Public nuisance:
1. A dangerous building.
2. A building, structure, or property that constitutes an attractive nuisance to children,
including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, and
unsafe fences and structures.
3. A vacant or unoccupied building, structure, or property that serves as the site of or
attracts criminal activity.
4. A vacant or unoccupied building or structure that was used or is intended to be used
for dwelling purposes and that because of decay; deterioration; damage; faulty
construction; inoperable or unsanitary sewage or plumbing systems, inoperable or
ineffective heating systems or other condition(s), is determined by an Inspection
Official to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation, or in such condition that it is
likely to cause sickness or disease; or
5. A vacant or unoccupied building or structure that because of decay; deterioration;
damage; faulty construction; inoperable or unsanitary sewage or plumbing systems,
inoperable or ineffective heating systems or other condition(s), is determined by an
Inspection Official to be unsanitary, unfit for human occupation, or to be in such
condition that it is likely to cause sickness or disease;
6. A building, structure, or property upon which there exists garbage, rubbish, debris,
solid waste, and/or hazardous waste such that the Town Health Officer determines the
condition to constitute a public health hazard; or
7. A property that detracts from the value, use and enjoyment of neighboring or adjacent
property(ies) due to the dilapidated, deteriorated, decayed, or damaged condition a
vacant building or structure and/or the existence of garbage, rubbish, debris, solid
waste, and/or hazardous waste,
Owner - The person holding record title to premises or property, as well as any person
occupying, using, controlling or operating such premises or property as tenant, lessee or any
other capacity recognized at law.
Property and premises - used interchangeably in this Ordinance and shall include buildings,
structures, land, land conditions, land improvements, and personal property deposited,
discarded, or stored thereon.
Solid waste - carries the meaning set forth in 10 V.S.A. §6602(2).
Page 4 of 7
Vacant - containing no contents pertaining to operations customary to the occupancy of a
building or structure for at least ninety (90) days. This definition does not include warehouse
structures, garages, vacation or resort facilities or those buildings or structures only used on a
seasonal basis.
Unoccupied building or structure - containing contents pertaining to the occupancy of a
building while operations or other customary operations are suspended for at least ninety (90)
days. A building or structure occupied by a person without permission or authority of the
owner qualifies as unoccupied. This definition does not include warehouse or storage
structures, garages, vacation or resort facilities or those buildings or structures only used on a
seasonal basis.
III. PROHIBITIONS.
A. No owner of property located within the Town of Rutland person shall create, operate,
maintain, or allow the existence of a public nuisance on their property.
B. No person shall fail to comply with the terms of an Order of Abatement issued under this
Ordinance by the Select Board or its designee.
IV. PROPERTY INSPECTION and INSPECTION REPORT.
A. Upon the acquisition or receipt of information that a violation of this Ordinance has or
may have occurred, an Inspection Official shall undertake a physical inspection of the
premises and/or property. The Inspection Official may enter any building, structure or
property within the Town for the purpose of making inspections or investigations at all
reasonable hours.
B. Except in case of emergency, the owner of the property shall be provided with actual
notice in advance of the inspection.
1. The notice of inspection shall identify the date and time that an inspection of the
premises and/or property will be made and shall contain a statement of the purpose(s)
of such inspection.
C. The Inspection Official shall prepare a written inspection report regarding the condition
of the premises and/or property inspected.
1. If the Inspection Official determines that no public nuisance exists, the Inspection
Report shall explain the reason(s) therefore.
2. The Inspection Official determines that a public nuisance exists the Inspection Report
shall explain the reason(s) therefore and shall recommend any corrective action or
abatement deemed to be necessary.
Page 5 of 7
D. The Inspection Official shall deliver a copy of the Inspection Report to the Select Board
and Town Administrator.
V. HEARING ON INSPECTION REPORT and ORDER OF ABATEMENT.
A. If the Inspection Report concludes that a public nuisance exists, the Town Administrator
shall prepare written Notice of Hearing which shall identify the date, time, place, and
purpose of the hearing to be conducted by the Select Board regarding the Inspection Report.
1. The owner of the subject property shall be provided with actual notice of the
Inspection Report and the Notice of Hearing no less than ten (10) days prior to the date
of the hearing,
2. The Notice of Public Nuisance Hearing shall be posted in three or more public places
within the Town in conformance with the location requirements of 1 V.S.A.
§312(c)(2).
B. At the Public Nuisance Hearing, the Select Board shall allow testimony and evidence
from the property owner, owner, occupant(s) of the property, Town officials, agents, and
employees, adjacent property owners, and members of the public regarding the condition of
the property addressed in the Inspection Report.
C. Following such hearing, the Select Board shall deliberate and determine whether or not a
public nuisance exists. The Select Board shall issue a written decision which sets forth its
findings and conclusions.
D. If the Select Board determines that a public nuisance exists, then the Select Board shall
issue as part of its written decision, an Order of Abatement to address the remediation,
elimination, and/or abatement of the public nuisance.
E. In the Decision and Order of Abatement, the remedial responses that the Select Board
may order include, but shall not be limited to:
1. Requiring building openings (doors, windows, areaways, and other openings) to be
made weather-tight and secured against entry by birds, vermin and trespass.
2. Posting or affixing a notice of dangerousness in a conspicuous place upon the building
or structure's exterior walls, or on the grounds of the property which shall not be
removed or defaced without the Villages authority.
3. Requiring specified remedial or abatement actions to be taken and completed within a
specified time frame.
4. Requiring the property owner to develop and submit within a specified time frame a
remediation/abatement plan for the Select Board's consideration and approval; or
Page 6 of 7
5. Authorizing the Town to take remedial action forthwith in appropriate circumstances
where the risks and exigencies of the situation call for prompt action and/or the owner
appears to be unable or unwilling to respond to the Select Board's directives. The
Select Board may order that the owner reimburse the Town for its response costs and
expenses within a specified period of time.
6. Imposing a fine of up to $500 per day for a failure to comply with the terms of a
Decision and Order of Abatement.
VI. APPEAL OF DECISION AND ORDER OF ABATEMENT
A. Within thirty (30) days of the date of the Decision and Order of Abatement, an aggrieved
person may undertake an appeal pursuant to V.R.C.P. 75 to the Rutland Civil Division,
Vermont Superior Court.
B. An appeal of the Select Board's Decision and Order of Abatement shall be on the record
and in the nature of certiorari.
VII. ENFORCEMENT OF ORDER OF ABATEMENT.
A. If a person subject to an Order of Abatement fails to comply with the terms of the Order
of Abatement the Town may bring a civil action in the Rutland Civil Division, Vermont
Superior Court for enforcement of the Order of Abatement and/or the remediation,
mitigation, and/or abatement of the public nuisance.
B. In an enforcement actions, the Town may seek such injunctive relief, enforcement
remedies, collection remedies, fines, and penalties as permitted by law, including, without
limitation, the demolition, cleanup, mitigation, and/or removal of buildings, structures,
garbage, rubbish, debris, solid waste, and/or hazardous waste.
1. The Town may also seek as part of the court's injunctive relief an order that:
a. authorizes the Town to perform the work necessary to remediate, mitigate, and/or
abate the public nuisance as set forth in Order of Abatement in the event that the
person subject to the injunction does not comply with its terms within a specified
period of time; and
b. imposes a lien on the property for the recovery of the Town's costs and expenses
costs in the same manner and to the same extent as taxes assessed on the grand list
on the property, which includes and applies all procedures and remedies for
collection of taxes to the collection of the Town's costs and expenses incurred in
performing the work necessary to remediate, mitigate, and/or abate the public
nuisance.
Page 7 of 7
VIII. SEVERABILITY.
If any portion of this ordinance is found to be unconstitutional or invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected and shall remain
in full force and effect. If any statute referred to in this ordinance is amended, this ordinance
shall be deemed to refer to such amended statute.
707601.1
Page 1 of 6
TOWN OF RUTLAND
ROAD NAME AND ROAD LOCATION ADDRESSING ORDINANCE
SECTION I - PURPOSE
In accordance with 24 V.S.A. Chapter 59, Chapter 61, Subchapter 11, and Chapter 117,
and 23 V.S.A. Chapter 24, the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Rutland hereby
establishes the following ordinance in order to develop a more uniform road naming and
road location addressing system throughout the Town of Rutland to enable people to
locate roads and addresses and to effectively provide emergency services and deliveries
to town citizens.
This ordinance is hereby designated a CIVIL ordinance and shall be enforced according
to 24 V.S.A. Chapter 59 and 23 V.S.A. Chapter 24.
SECTION II - DEFINITIONS
Road: For purposes of this Ordinance, a "road" is (i) a public road, a state or town
highway identified on the latest A.O.T. General Highway Map for the Town of Rutland,
or (ii) any non-public road, street, right of way, shared driveway, or other way which
provides access to three or more dwellings.
Public Road: A state or town highway identified on the latest A.O.T. General Highway
Map for the Town of Rutland.
Structure: For purposes of this Ordinance, a "structure" shall include (i) any dwelling, (ii)
any public building, (iii) any place of business, and (iv) any building which the Board of
Selectmen or its designee determines should have a separate location number in order to
effectively provide emergency services.
SECTION III - ROAD NAMING
A. Each "road," as defined herein, shall be assigned a name by the Board of Selectmen or its
designee. The Board of Selectmen or its designee may determine that other roads, streets,
rights of way, or other ways providing access to a structure, may require a name if
necessary, to effectively provide emergency services.
B. Attached to this Ordinance is a list and map of all current roads and road names in the
Town of Rutland and the names of such roads are hereby adopted. See Attachment A.
Each road not named in Attachment A shall receive a proposed name by resolution of the
Board of Selectmen at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Board. The proposed road
names must be separate and distinct from other designated road names in the Town of
Rutland and surrounding communities.
Page 2 of 6
C. The Board of Selectmen shall add names to Attachment A by following the procedures for
adoption and amendment of ordinances as set forth in 24 V.S.A., Chapter 59.
In addition to the statutory provisions, the adoption procedure for new road names under
this Ordinance shall include providing notice of the proposed amendment with the
proposed road name to all landowners on that road via individual or bulk mailing or by a
notice in a newspaper circulating in the municipality. Within thirty (30) days of the
passage of the resolution to amend Attachment A for purposes of naming a road, affected
individuals in the Town of Rutland may request the Board of Selectmen to hold a hearing
on the proposed Amendment, or may offer written comments to the Board of Selectmen
on the proposed Amendment. Unless the resolution is withdrawn, revoked, or amended
by the Board of Selectmen, the resolution amending Attachment A shall become effective
sixty (60) days after the date of the resolution in accordance with 24 V.S.A. Section 1972.
D. The Board of Selectmen may change the names of any road, after a duly warned public
hearing when necessary to promote public welfare and safety.
SECTION IV - FUTURE DEVELOPMENT
A. Prior to the approval of a subdivision by the Planning Commission, the subdivider shall
furnish a plan for road naming and road numbering in accordance with this Ordinance to
the Planning Commission and Board of Selectmen. The subdivider shall be responsible
for installation of road signs and location numbers prior to the issuance of any permits for
construction on any of the subdivided lots.
B. Following the adoption of this Ordinance, the written approval of the Board of Selectmen
or its designee is required for any proposed road name and location numbers of any new
structure for which an Act 250 or highway access permit is required.
C. Where a new or reconstructed structure is not otherwise subject to Section IV B and when
the Board of Selectmen or its designee determines that, in order to promote the purposes
of this Ordinance, the new or reconstructed structure should be assigned a location number
or should have its existing location number changed, the Board of Selectmen or its
designee shall provide the owner of structure with a written order of the assignment or
amendment of the structure’s location number. This owner shall comply with Section V
of the Ordinance within 60 days of the date of the order unless the order specifically
provides a different date by which compliance is due.
SECTION V - GENERAL ADDRESSING AND NUMBERING SYSTEM GUIDELINES
A. Roads officially named by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Rutland shall be
measured in segments of 5.28 feet (1/1000 of a mile). Even numbers shall be assigned to
the right side of the road and odd numbers to the left as they proceed from the starting
point.
B. The Board of Selectmen or its designee shall assign each structure, as defined herein, a
"location number" based upon its distance (i.e., the number of 5.28 feet segments) from
the starting point of the road to the center of the driveway or entrance from the road to the
structure, if possible. The Board of Selectmen or its designee shall have the authority to
Page 3 of 6
assign a location number utilizing other physical information regarding the structure, if
appropriate and necessary in order to effectively provide emergency services.
C. Each of the location numbers for structures must be at least four (4) inches high and at
least two (2) inches wide. Location numbers must be dark in color on a light-colored
background with no other markings or symbols.
Numbers must be clearly visible from the road if the location number signs are affixed to
the structure. If the location number affixed to the structure is not clearly visible from the
road, the location number shall be affixed on a board or plaque no smaller than 8 inches
wide by 4 inches high and such board or plaque affixed to a post, pole, fence, or other
structure near the driveway entrance so as to be clearly visible from the road during all
seasons.
Numbers may only be affixed to a mailbox if there is a single mailbox located at the
entrance to the structure from the road and, in such event, the location number shall be on
both sides of the mailbox. If there are multiple mailboxes at a single location or the
mailbox is on the opposite side of the road to the entrance to the structure, no location
numbers may be placed on the sides of the mailbox and any identifying information shall
only be marked on the front of the mailbox facing the road.
The property owner is responsible for the purchase and installation of location numbers to
be installed.
D. A multiple dwelling or use structure shall bear one number for each dwelling or use where
possible. If each dwelling or use does not have a separate number, then the Board of
Designee or its designee shall determine the appropriate numbering of each dwelling or
use so as to provide emergency services effectively.
E. All location numbers shall be maintained so as to maintain clear visibility of the location
number.
SECTION VI - ROAD NAME SIGNS [Amended 7-15-2003]
A. The Board of Selectmen, upon adoption of this Ordinance, shall institute a program for
the installation and maintenance of municipal and private road name signs in accordance with
this Ordinance. All non-public roads shall also be properly signed. The cost of initial
installation (purchase and installing post and sign) shall be paid by the Town for public roads
listed on Attachment A and by the owners/users of existing non-public roads listed on
Attachment A. The owners/users of non-public roads shall be responsible for the maintenance,
repair, and replacement of such road signs for the non-public roads. The Town shall be
responsible for the maintenance, repair, and replacement of roads signs on public roads. The
Town shall be responsible for the maintenance repair and replacement of road signs on public
and non-public roads.
Page 4 of 6
B. All road signs shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devises for Roads
and Highways.
C. All road signs shall be maintained so as to maintain clear visibility of the name of the
road.
SECTION VII - IMPLEMENTATION
A. The Town shall ensure, through cooperative efforts with the Post Office, that each
property owner is notified of the implementation of this Ordinance.
B. All structure owners shall install their location numbers within sixty (60) days after the
adoption of the road name upon which the structure is located.
SECTION VIII - SEVERABILITY
If any portion of this Ordinance and any Amendments made hereto is held
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this
Ordinance and any Amendments made hereto shall not be affected and shall remain in
full force and effect. If any statute referred to in this Ordinance shall be amended, this
Ordinance shall be deemed to refer to such statute as amended.
SECTION IX - ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES
A. The designated Enforcement Officer is the Administrative Assistant.
B. This Ordinance is designated as a civil ordinance pursuant to 24 V.S.A. Section 1971(b).
This Ordinance shall be enforced through the Traffic and Municipal Ordinance Bureau
pursuant to 23 V.S.A. Chapter 24 and 24 V.S.A. Chapter 59, as may be amended from
time to time.
C. The following civil penalties are hereby imposed for violation of this Ordinance.
First violation of the Ordinance $ 50.00
Second violation of the Ordinance $100.00
Third violation of the Ordinance $200.00
Fourth and subsequent violation of the Ordinance $400.00
Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
In cases where violations of the Ordinance are brought in the Traffic and Municipal
Ordinance Bureau, and where the violation is admitted or not contested, in lieu of the
above, the following waiver penalties are imposed.
First violation of the Ordinance $ 25.00
Page 5 of 6
Second violation of the Ordinance $ 50.00
Third violation of the Ordinance $100.00
Fourth and subsequent violation of the Ordinance $200.00
Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
D. In addition to any other remedy provided in this Ordinance or available at law or in equity,
the Town of Rutland may institute a suit for an injunction to prevent, restrain or abate
violations of this Ordinance.
Adopted –
Amended – 7/2003, 11/2003, 7/2005, 9/2006, 7/2008, 10/2011, 1/2012
Page 6 of 6
Page 1 of 28
Chapter 175
SEWERS
Part 3
Use of City Sewage Disposal System
[Adopted 6-22-1987]
Article XI
General Provisions
§ 175-67. Definitions and word usage.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE — The person appointed by the Board of Sewage Disposal
Commissioners to administer this ordinance.
BOARD — The Town of Rutland Board of Sewage Systems Commissioners.
BOD (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand)— The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five days at
20° C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the
building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the
inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other
place of disposal. COD (denoting "chemical oxygen demand") — The total quantity of
oxygen utilized by the wastewater, including the organic (BOD) as shown by standard
laboratory testing procedures, expressed in milligrams per liter.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the Town of Rutland or his duly authorized
deputy, agent, or representative.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES— The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes,
commercial trade or business establishments other than sanitary sewage. Combined industrial
waste and sanitary sewage is considered "industrial waste."
Page 2 of 28
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of
surface or ground water.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams per liter of
solution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from
the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch [one point twenty-seven (1.27)
centimeters] in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer of the Town of Rutland.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The liquid wastes from normal residential households, including
toilet, sink and shower wastes. Included are wastes from industrial, commercial, or business
uses which contain waste only from toilets and sinks and showers used for human washing
and which contain no wastes from the industrial, commercial, or business use.
SANITARY SEWER— A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm- surface and
ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Agency of Environmental Conservation, State of
Vermont, or his representative.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings,
institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground- surface and storm
waters as may be present.
SEWAGE WORKS— All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of
sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which, in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any period of duration longer than
fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or
flows during normal operation.
STORM DRAIN - (sometimes termed "storm sewer") — A sewer which carries storm- and
surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than
unpolluted cooling water.
Page 3 of 28
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in
water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering.
§ 175-70. Building sewer permit classes. [Amended 3-17-1989]
There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits, for residential and commercial
service and for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the
owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the town. The
permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the administrative officer. A permit and inspection
fee for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and for an industrial building sewer
permit shall be paid to the town at the time the application is filed. The Board shall from time
to time establish such fees. The administrative officer shall not issue a building sewer permit
unless there is also in effect a sewer allocation permit under the Town of Rutland
Regulations Relating to Allocation of Sewer Capacity, and the term of such building sewer
permit shall expire upon expiration of any such sewer allocation permit.
§ 175-70.1. Payment for technical review.
All costs for the review of industrial pretreatment facilities or other specialized factors which
need to be evaluated to ensure the proposed industrial waste discharge meets the
requirements of this chapter shall be borne by the owner.
§ 175-71. Costs and expenses; indemnification of town.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection and repair of the building
sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the town from any loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building
sewer.
§ 175-72. Separate building sewer for each building.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except
where one (1) building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is
available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or
driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one (1) building sewer.
§ 175-73. Use of old building sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with commencing new buildings only when
they are found, on examination and test by the administrative officer, to meet all
requirements of this ordinance.
Page 4 of 28
§ 175-74. Specifications.
The building sewer shall be PVC sewer pipe, ASTM specification ASTMD3034; cast-iron
soil pipe, ASTM specification C13A74-42 or equal; vitrified clay sewer pipe, ASTM
specification C1344T or equal; or other suitable material approved by the Administrative
Officer. Joints shall be tight and waterproof Any part of the building sewer that is located
within ten (10) feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of mechanical joint ductile
iron pipe, ANSI A21.511 AWWA C151 Class 52. Mechanical joint ductile iron pipe may be
required by the Administrative Officer where the building sewer is exposed to damage by
tree roots. I f installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast-iron
soil pipe, except that nonmetallic material may be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed
or cradle as approved by the Administrative Officer.
§ 175-75. Elevation.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below
the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity
flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an
approved means and discharged to the building sewer. The size and slope of the building
sewer shall be subject to the approval of the administrative officer, but in no event shall the
diameter be less than four (4) inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall be not less than
one-eighth (Vs) inch per foot.
§ 175-76. Storm water runoff.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway
drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain
which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
§ 175-77. Manner of connection.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the Y-branch if
such branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is twelve (12) inches in
diameter or less, and no properly located Y-branch is available, the owner shall, at his
expense, install a Y-branch in the public sewer at the location specified by the Administrative
Officer. Where the public sewer is greater than twelve (12) inches in diameter and no
properly located Y-branch is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to
receive the building sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about fortyfive
degrees (45°). A forty-five-degree ell may be used to make such connection with the
spigot end, cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the
building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the
invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connections made
Page 5 of 28
secure and watertight by encasement in concrete with suitable pipe saddle approved by the
Administrative Officer.
§ 175-78. Inspection.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Administrative Officer when the
building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection
shall be made under the supervision of the Administrative Officer or his representative.
§ 175-79. Protection of excavations; restoration of public property.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades
and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other
public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory
to the town.
§ 175-80. Grading of building sewer.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below
the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three (3) feet of any
bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford
protection from frost. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight
alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved
pipe fittings.
§ 175-81. Back water valves and traps.
An approved backwater valve or trap shah be installed, when necessary, as required by the
Administrative Officer, at the expense of the owner.
§ 175-82. Standards.
The following pipe joint standards are hereby set forth:
A. All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight.
B. Sewer pipe joints shall be push-on type, complying to ASTM D3212, using
elastomeric gasket designed to prevent slippage during jointing. Gasket lubricant shall
be supplied by the pipe manufacturer. Petroleum-based lubricants shall not be used.
C. Mechanical join t ductile iron pipe joints shall meet ANSI A21.il/AWWAC111
standards using plain rubber gaskets.
Page 6 of 28
D. Other jointing materials and methods may be used only by approval of the
Administrative Officer.
Article XIII
Use of Public Sewers
§ 175-83. Restricted actions.
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any Storm water, surface water,
groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted
industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
§ 175-84. Storm sewers.
Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are
specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved
by the administrative officer. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged, on approval of the administrative officer, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or
natural outlet.
§ 175-85. Certain wastes not to be discharged.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or
wastes to any public sewers;
A. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid
or gas.
B. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or
interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals,
create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the city sewage
treatment plant.
C. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five point zero (5.0) or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and
personnel of the city or town sewage works.
D. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size which is capable of causing
obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the
city or town sewage works, such as but not limited to ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole
blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entails and paper dishes, cups, milk
containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
Page 7 of 28
E. Any waters or waste which would cause the town to be in violation of any valid
agreement in effect between the Town of Rutland and the City of Rutland pertaining to
usage of the City of Rutland wastewater treatment facility.
F. Any industrial waste which has a five-day biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5) in
excess of two hundred twenty (220) milligrams per liter, a chemical oxygen demand
(COD) in excess of four hundred fifty (450) milligrams per liter or a suspended solids
concentration in excess of three hundred (300) milligrams per liter [Added 3-17-1989;
amended 1990]
§ 175-86. Discharge of certain wastes restricted.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances,
materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the administrative officer,
that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment; have an
adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property
or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
administrative officer will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject
wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the
sewers, the nature of the sewage treatment process, the capacity of the city sewage treatment
plant, the degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent
factors. The substances prohibited are:
A. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees
Fahrenheit (150° F.) [sixty-five degrees Celsius (65° C.)].
B. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in
excess of one hundred (100) milligrams per liter or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two and one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (32° and 150° F.) [zero and sixty-five degrees Celsius (0° and 65°
C.)].
C. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of
any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower zeropoint
seventy-six (0.76) horsepower metric] or greater shall be subject to the review
and approval of the administrative officer.
D. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or concentrated
plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
E. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar
objectionable or toxic substances or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine
Page 8 of 28
requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at
the city sewage treatment works exceeds the treatment works permit limits established
for such materials.
F. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances,
in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established, after treatment of
the composite sewage to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public
agencies or jurisdiction for such discharge to the city treatment works receiving
waters.
G. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed
limits established by applicable state and federal regulations.
H. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of nine point five (9.5).
I. Materials which exert or cause:
1) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as but not limited to Fullers
earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or of dissolved solids, such as but not limited
to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate.
2) Excessive discoloration, such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions.
3) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities
as to constitute a significant load on the city sewage treatment works or which may
cause the effluent limitations of the city discharge permit to be exceeded.
4) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs, as defined
herein.
J. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or
reduction by the city sewage treatment processes employed or are amenable to
treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the
requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the treatment
plant receiving waters. If any water or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in §§ 175-85 or 175-86, the administrative officer may:
1) Reject the wastes;
2) Require pretreatment so that such waters or wastes comply with the provisions of
those sections;
Page 9 of 28
3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not
covered by existing sewage disposal charges and of analyzing the waste and
reviewing pretreatment plans and construction. If the administrative officer permits
the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the
plant and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the
administrative officer, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances, and laws.
§ 175-88. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided and maintained by the owner when, in the
opinion of the administrative officer, they are necessary for the proper handling" of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other
harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living
quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
administrative officer and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning
and inspection.
§ 175-89. Maintenance of pretreatment facilities.
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at his expense.
§ 175-90. Monitoring and control manholes.
A. When required by the administrative officer, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together
with such necessary meters and other appurtenances, in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required,
shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans
approved by the administrative officer. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his
expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
B. All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform such monitoring of their
discharges as the administrative officer may reasonably require, including installation,
use and maintenance of monitoring equipment; keeping records; and reporting the results
of such monitoring to the administrative officer. Where industrial pretreatment permits
are issued by the State of Vermont, monitoring records must also be submitted to the
Secretary in accord with such permit. Records of any other monitoring will be supplied
by the administrative officer to the Secretary on request.
Page 10 of 28
§ 175-91. Determining characteristics of wastewaters.
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which
reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by The
American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole
provided or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special
manhole has been^ required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the
effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to
life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a twentyfour-
hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or
samples should be taken.) Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are
obtained from twenty-four-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH values are determined
from periodic grab samples.
§ 175-92. Terminating disposal authorization of industries in violation.
Any industry held in violation of the provisions of this Part 3 may have its disposal
authorization terminated.
§ 175-93. Effect on special agreements and arrangements.
No statement contained in this Part 3 shall be construed as preventing any special agreement
or arrangement between the town, the city, and any industrial concern whereby an industrial
waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to
payment therefore by the industrial concern.
Article IX
Administration
§ 175-94. Tampering with sewage works.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of
the sewage works.
§ 175-95. Authority to enter private property and easements.
A. The administrative officer and other duly authorized employees of the town bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the
purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance
with the provisions of this Part 3. The administrative officer or his representatives shall
Page 11 of 28
have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil,
refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on
the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for wastes
treatment.
B. The administrative officer and other duly authorized employees of the town bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties
through which the town holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not
limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of
any portion of the sewerage works lying within said easement.
§ 175-96. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person found to be violating any provision of this Part 3, except § 175-94, shall be
served by the town with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing
a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within
the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
B. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in
Subsection A above or shall violate § 175- 94 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on
conviction thereof, shall be fined in the amount not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.) for each violation. Each week in which any such violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Part 3 shall become liable to the town
for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by reason of such offense.
Part 4
Allocation of Sewer Capacity
Adopted 3-27-1989
Article XV
Definitions
§ 175-97. Definitions.
As used in this Part 4, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The person appointed by the Board of Sewage
Disposal Commissioners to administer this Part 4.
BOARD — The Board of Sewage Disposal Commissioners of the Town of Rutland
pursuant to 24 V.S.A. § 3614.
Page 12 of 28
CITY FACILITY — The City of Rutland sewer system and the city wastewater treatment
facility.
CITY/TOWN AGREEMENT— The agreement dated January 18, 1984, between the
City of Rutland and the Town of Rutland, providing for the disposal of sewage by the
town and its property owners utilizing the city facility, and any amendments, extensions,
or replacement of or to that agreement.
DEVELOPMENT — Any change or expansion in use of property or any building or
structure thereon, any construction, reconstruction, conversion, alteration or enlargement
of any building or structure and any other activity on property resulting in an increased
demand for sewage disposal services.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer line of the Town of Rutland which conveys sewage, directly
or via other lilies, to the city facility.
SEWER ALLOCATION — The amount of sewage which a property owner may
discharge to the public sewer or to any other sewer line within the Town of Rutland for
ultimate disposal in the city facility under the terms of the city/town agreement. A "sewer
allocation" shall be expressed in terms of gallons per day averaged over a calendar
month.
STRUCTURE— Any assembly of materials for occupancy or use.
TOWN SEWAGE DISPOSAL ORDINANCE— An ordinance of the Town of Rutland
pertaining to the use of the public sewers and the city sewage disposal system, adopted
June 27, 1987, and any amendments thereto or replacements thereof Any term defined in
that ordinance shall have the same meaning when used in this Part 4, and the definitional
section of the “Town Sewage Disposal Ordinance" is incorporated herein by reference.
Article XVI
Determination of Sewer Allocation
§ 175-98. Determination of sewer allocation.
Except as hereafter provided, after a building or structure has been connected to the public
sewer for at least twelve (12) months, its sewer allocation shall be based upon its average
water usage over the twelve (12) months just prior to the date of determination thereof by the
town. Average water usage shall be calculated by dividing the total gallonage utilized over
such twelve-month period by three hundred sixty (360) days.
The quotient rounded up to the nearest one hundred (100) gallons per day shall be the
property's sewer allocation, notwithstanding any greater amount specified in any prior
approval or permit for connection to or use of the public sewer or any greater sewer capacity
Page 13 of 28
approval. For purposes of the foregoing determination, portions of any twelve-month period,
which have elapsed prior to the effective date of this Part 4, shall be counted. However,
notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event that the flows allowed in any previously issued
town or state permit or approval are less than those determined by such twelve-month
averaging procedure, the flows in such permit or approval shall control and establish the
sewer allocation.
§ 175-99. Notice of determination.
The owner of a building or structure shall be given written notice of the determination of the
sewer allocation for such owner's building or structure determined by the Board in
accordance with § 175-98 above. Thereafter, an owner desiring to utilize for such building or
structure more than the sewer allocation specified in the notice shall apply for a permit for
such additional sewer allocation pursuant to Article XVII of this Part 4.
§ 175-100. Waiver of provisions.
The Board may waive or modify in whole or in part the provisions of this Article in
circumstances where it determines that a particular twelve-month history is not representative
of a building or structure's sewer utilization, because of interruption of usage, leaks,
infiltration, seasonal fluctuations or otherwise or in circumstances where strict application of
this Article would result in an inequitable situation.
§ 175-101. Subsequent determination of allocation.
The Board may at any time after a building or structure has been connected to the public
sewer for twelve (12) months determine or re-determine the sewer allocation of such building
or structure, based upon average water usage for the twelve-month period just prior to the
date of determination or redetermination. I n such event, the owner shall be given notice
pursuant to § 175-99 above.
§ 175-102. Review of determination.
A property owner who receives a notice determining such owner's sewer allocation under this
Part 4, may have such determination reviewed by the Board by filing a written request for
review with the Rutland Town Clerk within t h i r t y (30) days of the date the town gives the
notice of determination of sewer allocation. The Board shall, upon the filing of such a request
for review, proceed promptly, upon notice to the property owner and hearing, to determine
the sewer allocation to which such owner is entitled. The sewer allocation shall be
established as of the date of determination under this Part 4. If a request for review is not
filed as prescribed in this section, the determination specified in the Board's notice of sewer
allocation shall be binding on such property owner.
Page 14 of 28
§ 175-103. Increased usage prohibited.
Upon determination of an owner's sewer allocation, whether by a written notice of
determination with no review request having been filed as provided above or upon
determination by the Board in a review proceeding, such determination shall be deemed to
amend any permit or approval of an owner to use or discharge sewage to the public sewer
from a building or structure for a greater amount, and such property owner shall not, without
a permit issued pursuant to Article XVII of this Part 4, discharge more sewage from such
building or structure than the amount specified in such determination.
After a determination of sewer allocation has been made, an increase in sewage flow without
a permit, caused by any development, shall be deemed a violation of this Part 4. Whether
there has been such an increase in flows shall be established by comparing gallons per day
averaged over a calendar month with the number of gallons per day in such determination of
allocation. However, an increase in flows where no development has taken place, caused by
normal, temporary or seasonal fluctuations or leakage, shall not be deemed a violation.
§ 175-104. Usage prior to determination of allocation.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed as permitting the discharge of sewage in excess
of the amount permitted in any approval or permit during any period of time before a
determination has been made under this Article.
Article XVII
Sewer Allocation Permit
§ 175-105. Permit required, application procedure.
An owner desiring to utilize the public sewer for a new use or to service a new building or
structure or to meet demand for sewage disposal services caused by any development shall
first apply to the Board for a sewer allocation permit to do so. A separate application shall be
filed for each use, building or structure involved. Such permit application shall be made on a
form approved by the Board, or if no form has been approved, then application shall be made
by letter.
No application shall be accepted unless signed by all owners of the property involved.
Such application shall be accompanied by the prescribed fee and shall include the
following information:
A. A brief description of the building or structure for which sewer services are requested, its
location, its proposed use and, if the application is for increased flows, a description of
the proposed development.
Page 15 of 28
B. The amount of new or increased sewer flows requested, stated in gallons per day as
averaged over a calendar month.
C. The method by which such sewer flows were calculated.
D. The biochemical oxygen demand and other constituents of such flows and their
concentrations if anything other than bathroom waste is involved.
E. Such other information as the Board may require in order to properly evaluate the
application.
§ 175-106. Issuance of permit.
When the application is complete, the Board shall, after notice to the property owner and an
opportunity to be heard, issue with conditions or deny the permit application. A separate
permit shall be issued for each use, building or structure and shall state the maximum sewer
allocation for such use, building or structure, expressed in gallons per day as averaged over a
calendar month. In the event of a denial, the reasons shall be stated in writing.
§ 175-107. Standards to be applied.
The Board shall apply the following standards in determining whether a permit should issue:
A. Whether the application is complete and properly executed by the property owner(s).
B. The sewer allocation for which application is made shall not exceed the amount
reasonably necessary to provide adequate sewer service for the use, building or structure
or development proposed.
C. The amount of sewer allocation for which application is made shall not, in combination
with other users, the amounts in other approvals and permits previously issued and the
amounts involved in then-pending permit applications filed prior to the property owner's
application, cause the town's capacity in the city facility to be exceeded.
D. The proposed sewer allocations or any construction related to it shall not cause the town
to violate any of the terms or conditions of the city/town agreement.
§ 175-108. Permit conditions.
The Board may grant a permit for a lesser sewer allocation than that applied for and attach
such reasonable conditions to any permit as may be necessary, so that the proposed sewer
allocation will be in compliance with the standards, terms and conditions of this Part 4 and
will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare.
Page 16 of 28
§ 175-109. Conditions for allocation.
Whether or not stated on a permit, a sewer allocation shall be subject to the terms and
conditions of the city/town agreement, and actual connection to the use of the public sewer
shall be in compliance with the Town Sewage Disposal Ordinance and all other town policies
and ordinances, rates and rules now or hereafter in effect and redetermination of the amount
which may be used pursuant to Article XVI of this Part 4. A separate building sewer permit
is required under the Town Sewage Disposal Ordinance.
§ 175-110. Permit expiration; extension.
A. A sewer allocation permit shall expire and become null and void at the expiration of
twelve (12) months from the date of issuance by the Board, unless within that time the
property owner commences utilization of the public sewer for the use. building or
structure involved in such permit. I f a permit expires because of failure to commence
such usage, then the property owner shall, before using the public sewer for such use,
building or structure, submit a new permit application, with the supporting
documentation and information required by § 175-105, and any required fees, the
granting or denial of which shall be subject to all the terms of this Part 4.
B. A permit may be extended by the Board for an additional twelve-month period from
expiration of the original twelvemonth period if:
1) Written application for an extension is made to the Board before expiration of the
first twelve-month period; and
2) The Board determines that the property owner continues to have a bona fide
intention to complete the project, that the owner during the first twelve-month
period has diligently pursued the development of the project and that there is a
reasonable expectation that the owner begin utilization of sewer services pursuant to
the permit by the end of the extension period.
C. If by the end of the second twelve-month period, utilization of the public sewer has not
commenced for the use, building or structure involved in such permit, then the permit
shall expire and become null and void, unless again extended as provided hereafter, and
the owner shall, before using the public sewer for such use, building or structure, submit
a new permit application, in the same manner as required by Subsection A above.
D. A sewer permit may be extended upon written application made before expiration of the
second twelve-month period or any further extension period if:
1) The Board determines that the owner is still diligently pursuing the project; and
Page 17 of 28
2) The owner has not been able to commence utilization because the owner is in
litigation before administrative bodies or courts relating to the obtaining of
necessary permits for the project. Any extension granted under this subsection shall
not be for more than one (1) year, and further extensions may be granted for oneyear
periods if Subsection D(l) and (2) are met.
E. A permit may be extended upon written application made to the Board before expiration
of the second twelve-month period or any further extension period, if the Board
determines that there has been a substantial start on construction. Such extension shall be
for such additional time and on such conditions as may be equitable.
F. The Board, after notice to the property owner and hearing, may, at any time during the
initial twelve-month period or any extension thereof, revoke a permit if it determines that
utilization of sewer services for the use, building or structure involved in the permit has
not commenced and that the property owner has abandoned development of such use,
building or structure. The Board shall not revoke any permit without first giving the
property owner at least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place at which the Board
shall hold its hearing.
G. "Commencement of utilization" of the public sewer, as used in Subsections A through F
above, means active commencement of use of the public sewer for a use, building or
structure which is substantially complete and able to be used or occupied for its designed
purpose.
§ 175-111. Filing priority.
Each permit application shall be considered in the order of its filing priority.
Article XVIII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 175-112. Notices.
A. Any notice required to be given under this Part 4, shall be deemed to have been given
when deposited in the United States Mail, registered, or certified mail, return receipt
requested, addressed:
1) To the property owner at such owner's address as carried on the books of the town for
sewer and water billing purposes or, if at the time of notice such owner is not a user
of town sewer and water, then
2) To the address shown on the property owner's permit application or such other
address as the property owner may, in writing, designate in connection with such
application.
Page 18 of 28
B. In the event that a property owner who has applied for a sewer allocation transfers title;
notice shall be deemed given if given to such successor in title.
§ 175-113. Fees.
The Board may prescribe reasonable fees for the filing of any request for review or permit
application.
§ 175-114. Effect on other town ordinances.
Nothing contained in this Part 4 shall be deemed to relieve a property owner of the obligation
to comply with the Town Sewage Disposal Ordinance^ or any other ordinance or regulation
of the town or the Board. The permit requirements in this Part 4 are supplemental to the
permit requirements in the Town Sewage Disposal Ordinance.
§175-115. Connections to nonpublic sewer lines and within Fire District No. 1.
A. This Part 4 of the Code of the Town of Rutland shall not apply to property owners within
the Town of Rutland Fire District No. 1 connected to fire district sewer lines.
B. This Part 4 of the Code of the Town of Rutland shall be applicable to any property owner
within the town discharging to any sewer line which is not a public sewer, or which does
not discharge into the public sewer, where such discharge is destined for ultimate
disposal in the city facility under the terms of the city/town agreement, in the same
manner as this Part 4 applies to a person connected to or desiring to connect to and
discharge to the public sewer. Any such person shall be subject to the redetermination
provisions of Article XVI of this chapter and must apply for a sewer allocation permit
under Article XVII of this chapter, and all provisions pertaining thereto shall apply. This
subsection, however, is subject to the next succeeding section as it pertains to Alpine
Pipeline customers.
§ 175-116. Alpine Pipeline customers
The Route 4 east corridor of the town, containing those properties which are proximate to
and best serviced by the Alpine Pipeline (the "Alpine Pipeline area"), is hereby allocated
seventy-six thousand (76,000) gallons per day of the town's capacity in the Rutland City
Treatment Plant, inclusive of capacity presently committed by the Alpine Pipeline Company.
Such allocation is subject to the following:
A. Property owners who presently own units of capacity acquired by them or their
predecessors in title from the Alpine Pipeline Company ("Alpine") representing the
right to discharge wastewater to the pipeline shall not, as to the number of gallons per
Page 19 of 28
day of wastewater represented by such units of capacity, be subject to the provisions of
Article XVI of this chapter, pertaining to reductions of allocation.
B. Property owners in the Alpine Pipeline area who may hereafter acquire from Alpine
units of capacity or other rights to discharge wastewater to the Alpine Pipeline or
whose wastewater flows exceed the flows represented by the units of Alpine capacity
they presently own, shall, with regard to such future units of capacity or rights and
such additional wastewater flows, be subject to all sections of these regulations in the
same manner as any other property owners of the town as if connecting to a public
sewer; provided, however, that until the time when such seventy-six-thousand-gallon
per day allocation to Alpine is exhausted, permit applications from property owners in
the Alpine Pipeline area shall be considered in the order of their filing priority with
regard to the difference between such seventy-six thousand (76,000) gallons and the
capacity presently committed by Alpine, and until such time a separate priority list
shall be maintained as to applications from such property owners.
C. Property owners who connect to the Alpine Pipeline shall be subject to the Town
Sewage Disposal Ordinance to the same extent as other property owners of the town,
and the town shall have the same rights of enforcement and other remedies as if such
property owners were connected to the public sewer; provided, however, that the
requirement for a building sewer permit under the Sewage Disposal Ordinance shall
not be required. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit Alpine from
imposing stricter standards than are contained in the Town Sewage Disposal
Ordinance.
D. The term "property owner," as used in this section, shall include the heirs, legal
representatives, successors and assigns of a property owner.
E. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the town shall not be required to issue a permit for an
application filed under Subsection B above to the extent the discharge applied for
would exceed the difference between the town's available capacity in the Rutland City
Treatment Plant and amounts involved in Alpine units of capacity previously
committed and in allocations or approvals previously issued by and/or presently
pending before the Board.
F. The terms "presently," "previously," "hereafter" and "future," as used above, shall
mean, and refer to the time of, before and after the effective date of the above
amendments, as applicable.
§ 175-117. Effect on successors in title.
A. Any rights of a property owner under this Part 4 or any permit issued under this Part 4
shall inure to the benefit of such owner's successors in title. Any obligations imposed on
Page 20 of 28
a property owner by this Part 4 or by a permit issued under this Part 4 shall bind such
owner's successors in title.
B. The Board shall keep a file on each owner pertaining to determinations and permits
issued under this Part 4, which shall be available for inspection by the public at
reasonable times during business hours.
§ 175-117.1. Private lines to city facility.
A building or structure connected to a private line which conveys sewage, directly or
indirectly via other lines, whether public or private, to the city facility shall be deemed to be
connected to and utilizing the public sewer, and such building or structure and the owner
thereof shall be subject to this chapter as if discharging to a town line.
§ 175-118. Violations and penalties; other remedies.
A. A person who, without a permit issued under this Part 4, utilizes the public sewer for a
new use, building or structure or to meet demand for sewage disposal services caused by
any development; or increases sewer flows over the maximum amount specified in a
sewer allocation permit or any notice of determination issued or referred to under Article
XV by reason of any development; or violates any provision of this Part 4 or the terms of
any permit, approval or order of the Board or the Selectmen, shall be fined not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.) Each week a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
B. The town may resort to any legal remedy to enforce this Part 4 or the terms of any permit,
approval, or order, including actions for injunctive relief.
§ 175-119. Severability.
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this Part 4 or
any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Part 4 or any part thereof.
§ 175-120. When effective.
This Part 4 shall become effective sixty (60) days after the date of its adoption.
Page 21 of 28
Part 5
Sewer Rates
Adopted 11-20-1989
Article XIX
Sewer Disposal Charges
§175-121. Definitions.
As used hereafter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
BASIC RATE — The rate per one hundred (100) cubic feet of sewage disposed of into
the facility, which from time to time is charged by the City of Rutland to the Town of
Rutland pursuant to the Municipal Sewage Disposal Agreement. The basic rate is
currently one dollar and five cents ($1.05) per one hundred (100) cubic feet, but the rate
shall increase or decrease with changes in the rate charged by the city to the town,
without further amendment of these sewage disposal charges.
FACILITY— The City of Rutland Sewage Disposal System as defined in Paragraph 2 of
the Municipal Sewage Disposal Agreement.
MUNICIPAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL AGREEMENT — The agreement between the City
of Rutland and the Town of Rutland dated January 18, 1984, relating to disposal of
sewage from within the town into the facility.
TOWN SEWER USE ORDINANCE — An ordinance of the town entitled "Town of
Rutland Ordinance Relating to Use of the City of Rutland Sewage Disposal System,"
together with all amendments, now or hereafter adopted. USERS — There shall be three
(3) categories of users, coinciding (subject to § 175-131 herein) with the classifications in
the agreement between the city and the town, as follows:
A. Regular. This category shall include all town residential property for not more than
four (4) families and all town nonbusiness uses, which shall mean and include a
public or quasi-public use, including but not limited to a school, library, church,
hospital or medical center but only to the extent such is not a permanent office for
medical practitioners, museum or gallery not offering items for sale, government
use for local, county, state or federal government, any use which qualifies for
exemption from real estate taxes under Vermont law and any other use not
Page 22 of 28
primarily for the production of income or profit through commercial, industrial or
other business activities.
B. Town business. This category shall mean all businesses, including retail,
commercial, industrial, service, professional or otherwise, located and existing
within the town as of the date of the Municipal Sewage Disposal Agreement, and
which as of that date were served by Rutland City Sewer.
C. New town businesses. This category shall mean all businesses as defined in
Subsection B above, not served by Rutland City Sewer on the date of the Municipal
Sewage Disposal Agreement. New businesses shall include new construction,
conversion of residential or other use described in Subsection A above to business,
expansion of business existing on the date of the Municipal Sewage Disposal
Agreement through capital improvements which increase sewage disposal facilities
or requirements or other activity involving the initiation or expanded operation of
any business utilizing the facility as of the date of the Municipal Sewage Disposal
Agreement.
§ 175-122. Town costs.
The town incurs costs of its own in administering the furnishing of sewer services pursuant to
the Municipal Sewage Disposal Agreement, which the Board finds are covered by a charge
of ten percent (10%) of the rates charged herein, [but excluding the ad valorem charge of
twenty percent (20%) required by § 175-124C hereafter].
§ 175-123. Meters.
Except as set forth hereafter, the sum to be paid to the town for sewage disposal services
utilized by a town property owner shall be based upon the quantity of water used on such
property owner's premises, determined by a meter attached to the property owner's water
supply prior to commencement of service. Metering shall be subject to the following
provisions;
A. The town will provide and install on each premises proposing to discharge sewage to
the facility a water meter and such other items that are necessary for its operation, to
such specifications as the town shall decide, including, if the town deems necessary,
outside meter readers.
B. If such meter is greater than five-eighths (5/8) inch by three-fourths (3/4) inch, the
property owner shall pay the town an amount equal to the town's costs of purchasing
and installing such water meter and equipment within thirty (30) days following
rendition of a bill by the town. I f such meter is five-eighths (5/8) inch by three-fourths
(3/4) inch or less, the town will bear the cost of purchase and installation.
Page 23 of 28
C. Where abnormal structural or plumbing conditions exist, if the town deems it
necessary, the town may require the owner to provide at the owner's expense the
necessary structural or plumbing alterations so that the town may make a normal meter
connection.
D. Title to the water meter, outside meter reader and all accessory parts shall remain in
the town and shall not pass to the owner of any premises in which the same shall be
installed.
E. Except as provided in Subsection F below, the town will maintain and repair the
town's water meter and all accessory parts at its expense; however, the town shall not
be liable for damage to the meter or accessory parts caused by the owner or by persons
on the owners premises or by fire, theft or other casualty, and the costs incurred by the
town for replacement or repair caused or made necessary by such damage shall be paid
by the owner within thirty (30) days of rendition of a bill by the town.
F. Notwithstanding Subsection E above, if any town water meter on the premises of a
business or other structure is greater than five-eighths (5/8s) inch by three-fourths
(3/4) inch, then the town will do the work, maintain and repair such meter and its
accessory parts, but the property owner shall reimburse the town for all its costs of
maintenance and repair, as well as for costs incurred by the town for repair or
replacement of a meter or equipment damaged by the owner or by persons on the
owner's premises or by fire, theft or other casualty. Such reimbursement shall be made
within thirty (30) days of rendition of a bill by the town.
G. The town shall have the right, for its agents and employees, upon reasonable notice to
the owner, or at regular quarterly intervals, of access at reasonable times to the
premises for the purpose of meter installation, inspection, meter reading, maintenance,
and repair.
H. Any charges billed pursuant to this section shall be a lien on the owner's property and
may be enforced against the property to the same extent as other sewage disposal
charges under 24 V.S.A. 3612.
I. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as imposing any obligations on the town to
pay for replacement, repair, or maintenance with regard to existing meters which are
not the property of the town.
§ 175-124 ESTABLISHMENT OF RATES
Each property owner shall pay for sewage disposal services based upon the quantity of water
used, at the following rates:
A. Each regular user: the basic rate plus ten percent (10%) Thereof.
Page 24 of 28
B. Each town business: five (5) Times the basic rate, plus ten percent (10%) thereof on
the first one million (1,000,000) cubic feet per quarter, and the basic rate plus ten
percent (10%) thereof on any amount over one million (1,000,000) cubic feet per
quarter.
C. Each new town business: five (5) times the basic rate plus ten percent (10%) thereof
on the first one million (1,000,000) cubic feet per quarter, and the basic rate plus ten
percent (10%) thereof on any amount over one million (1,000,000) cubic feet per
quarter.
1) In addition, the owner of each new town business shall pay an ad valorem sum
equal to twenty percent (20%) of the real estate taxes for such new town business,
annually, on the same dates that Town of Rutland real estate taxes are due,
commencing with the real estate tax bill due in September 1989. This additional
charge is imposed to comply with Paragraph 17(c)(1) of the Municipal Sewage
Disposal Agreement. Pursuant to Paragraph 17(c)(6) of that agreement relating to
the effect of tax stabilization, if for any reason the real estate taxes assessed against
a new town business are stabilized by the town, such amount shall be computed
based upon the taxes which would have been assessed had such real estate been
taxed without regard to such stabilization.
2) The ad valorem sum equal to twenty percent (20%) of the real estate taxes for a new
town business shall be applied in a manner consistent with the requirement that
such amount be collected under Paragraph 17 of the Municipal Sewer Disposal
Agreement.
D. Surcharge.
1) Any person who shall discharge or cause to be discharged any wastewater to the
facility in violation of § 175-85F of the Town Sewer Use Ordinance shall pay a
surcharge, in addition to the rates set forth in Subsection A, B and C herein,
calculated as follows:
(a) If such wastewater has a five-day biochemical oxygen demand in excess of two
hundred twenty (220) milligrams per liter (mg/1), then for each mg/1 of in excess
of two hundred twenty (220) mg/1, eighteen and eight-tenths cent ($0,188) per
one hundred (100) cubic feet of water consumed in the quarter such violation
occurs.
(b) If such wastewater has a chemical oxygen demand (COD) in excess of four
hundred fifty (450) mg/1, then for each mg/1 in excess of four hundred fifty
(450) mg/1, four and five-tenths cent ($0,045) per one hundred (100) cubic feet
of water consumed in the quarter such violation occurs.
Page 25 of 28
(c) If such wastewater has a suspended solids concentration in excess of three
hundred (300) mg/1, then for each mg/1 in excess of three hundred (300) mg/1,
fifteen and three-tenths cent ($0,153) per one hundred (100) cubic feet of water
consumed in the quarter such violation occurs.
1) Such surcharges shall be calculated based upon a minimum of one (1) random
twenty-four-hour composite sample taken during the quarter. I f the town, in its sole
discretion, elects to take or require more than one (1) such sample, then such
surcharges shall be based upon the average of the random twenty-four-hour
composite samples taken or required by the town during such quarter.
2) The foregoing surcharges shall apply to each quarter during which one (1) or more
of the foregoing exceedances occurs, may be billed separately from the other rates
established hereunder as soon as reasonably practicable following the necessary
computations and calculations by the town and shall be payable thirty (30) days
from the date of rendition. A separate surcharge shall be due for each exceedance
under each of the three classifications COD, suspended solids). Payment of a
surcharge shall not relieve the user of his or her obligations to comply with the
provisions of the Town Sewer Use Ordinance (Part 3 of this chapter), as amended
from time to time, and payment and acceptance of the surcharge shall not be
deemed a waiver by the town of any of its enforcement rights either under the
ordinance or under applicable law.
3) The Board of Sewage Disposal Commissioners may amend the surcharge rates
herein from time to time as the costs of treatment at the facility per unit of COD and
suspended solids may change.
4) Any amounts payable to the town on account of the surcharge shall be paid over by
the town to the city to defray its additional treatment costs occasioned by such
violations of the Town Sewer Use Ordinance, to the end that such violations will
not cause increases in the basic rate, town business rate and new town business rate
charged by the city to the town.
5) All costs of testing incurred by the town to determine the COD and suspended
solids concentrations in a user's wastewater shall be additional sewage disposal
charges payable to the town by such user. The town shall bill such user for such
costs of testing, as soon as practicable after the end of each quarter, and such
additional sewage disposal charges shall be due within thirty (30) days of billing.
6) The surcharges provided in Subsection D herein shall be calculated based upon all
water consumed in the quarter that Subsection D becomes effective.
Page 26 of 28
§ 175-125. ALPINE PIPELINE CUSTOMERS
Alpine Pipeline customers located within the Town of Rutland and utilizing a portion of the
town's waste load allocation in Otter Creek as set forth in the Municipal Sewage Disposal
Agreement are obligated to pay the basic rate, town business rate and new town business
rate, including the charge equal to twenty percent (20%) of real estate taxes, to the same
extent as other property owners in the town utilizing the Rutland facility pursuant to the
Municipal Sewage Disposal Agreement.
To the extent Alpine Pipeline customers pay such amounts to the Alpine Pipeline Company
and such amounts are disbursed to the City of Rutland, Alpine Pipeline customers are not
required to make such payments to the town. However, Alpine Pipeline customers shall pay
to the town all such sewage disposal charges, including the amount equal to twenty percent
(20%) of real estate taxes, to the extent that the same are not collected by the Alpine Pipeline
Company and disbursed to the city, within thirty (30) days of receipt of billings therefor by
the town.
The town shall have no responsibility to provide for or require Alpine Pipeline Company's
collection of such amounts, and payment over to the city.
§ 175-126. Due dates.
Sewage disposal charges shall be billed quarterly for the quarters ending with the 20th days
of December, March, June and September, and bills shall be due and payable thirty (30) days
from the date of rendition.
§ 175-127. Defective meter.
If for any cause any meter fails to register the amount of water passing through it, the
property owner shall pay to the town for sewage disposal charges based on the average daily
water consumption rate based upon the previous quarter, as recorded by the meter when in
operating order. However, if the meter was not operating for the entirety of such previous
quarter, or if during such previous quarter a less water intensive use was being made of the
premises or if part of the time water was not used, such that water consumption would not be
fairly representative, then water consumption while the meter is defective shall be deemed
that amount which the city may lawfully use in calculating amounts due from the town to the
city for such sewer service.
§ 175-128. No meter.
Except as set forth hereafter, no property owner may utilize sewage disposal services via the
facility during any period of time when a meter is not installed in compliance with § 175-123
above. If any property owner utilizes such services during a period of time when a meter is
Page 27 of 28
not installed, the amount of water consumed during such period of time shall be deemed to
be that amount which the city may lawfully use in calculating amounts due from the town to
the city for such sewer service.
§ 175-129. Automatic reduction in town business rate and new town business rate.
The town business rate and new town business rate shall change to, the basic rate plus ten
percent (10%) thereof after expiration of the ten-year periods set forth in Paragraph 17(B)
and (C) of the Municipal Sewage Disposal Agreement.
§ 175-130. Interim arrangements as to unmetered service.
Notwithstanding anything contained herein, until the Rutland Superior Court's temporary
order dated October 27, 1988, in the case of City of Rutland v. Town of Rutland and Town of
Rutland Fire District No. 1 is modified or superseded by a final order, the basic rate for
unmetered users of sewer service flowing into the sewage disposal system of Town of
Rutland Fire District No. 1 shall be calculated in accordance with Paragraph 2 of that order.
A copy of the City of Rutland's schedule relating to unmetered city residents is attached
hereto and incorporated by reference.
Until such time as the provisions in that paragraph are modified, amended or repealed by the
Sewage Disposal Commissioners, pending a determination by the Court or arbitration, the
property owners referred to in Paragraph 2 of the Court's Order shall not be required to install
meters as a precondition for the utilization of sewer service, although they may do so at their
option.
§ 175-131. Interpretation.
Subject to § 175-130 above, the application of the definitions and charges herein shall be
consistent with the provisions of the Municipal Sewage Disposal Agreement and any
amendments and any interpretations of said agreement by any arbitrator or court having
jurisdiction.
§ 175-132. Sewage disposal charge to retire bonded Indebtedness incurred for construction
of town sewer lines.
A. Each person making a connection to any town sewer line or to any sewer line discharging
to a town sewer line shall first pay to the town a sewage disposal charge, calculated as
follows, based upon the number of gallons which are estimated to be discharged from such
person's property as a result of the connection:
1) Five dollars ($5.) per gallon for each gallon up to fifty thousand (50,000) gallons.
Page 28 of 28
2) Two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) per gallon for each gallon in excess of fifty
thousand (50,000) gallons.
B. If such person making the connection has a sewer allocation permit issued pursuant to the
Town of Rutland regulations relating to allocation of sewer capacity (Part 4 of this
chapter) for the use to be serviced by such connection, then the number of gallons shall
be based upon the amount approved for a sewer allocation to service such use prior to the
effective date of such ordinance then the number of gallons shall be based upon such
prior approval. Upon application, the Sewage Disposal Commissioners may base such
sewage disposal charge upon a lesser number of gallons than the amount specified in
such permit or approval, if such person can demonstrate that the proposed use will
generate less flows than are set forth in such permit or approval, and such person waives
any rights under such permit or approval to discharge sewage in excess of such lesser
demonstrated flows.
C. All sewage disposal charges paid under this section shall be used solely to pay for
construction of town sewer lines, existing or proposed and to pay principal and interest
on sewage disposal bonds of the town.
§ 175-133. Severability.
If any provision or part of this Part 5 is deemed to be invalid or unenforceable by any court
of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall not affect the validity or enforceability
of any other provision or part of such sewage disposal charges.
Chapter 179
SOLID WASTE
Article I
Recycling
§ 179-1. Purpose; declaration of policy.
§ 179-2. Definitions.
§ 179-3. Designation and treatment of residential recyclables.
§ 179-4. Designation and treatment of commercial recyclables.
§ 179-5. Authorized commercial haulers.
§ 179-6. Scavenging and unauthorized collection.
§ 179-7. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
§ 179-8. Effective date.
§ 179-9. Educational Plan.
§ 179-10. Enforcement Plan.
ARTICLE I Recycling
[Adopted 4-18-1994]
§ 179-1. Purpose; declaration of policy.
This Article has been created due to public interest in preserving the environment by
reducing the amount it of refuse sent to landfills and incinerators. Because of solid waste
disposal concerns and potential solutions to some of these problems provided by recycling, it
shall be the policy of the Town of Rutland to require recycling of recyclable materials to the
fullest extent possible.
§ 179-2. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AUTHORIZATION BY THE TOWN OF RUTLAND — Authorization pursuant to
legal contract or other written authorization entered into by the Town of Rutland Board
of Selectmen and a private third person, as defined herein.
COLLECTION BOX — A plastic bin or garbage can used for the purpose of collecting
recyclables.
COLLECTION FACILITY — A center, generally located on Rutland Town property
and managed by the Town of Rutland or its agents, for the acceptance by donation,
redemption, or purchase of recyclable -materials from the public.
COMMERCIAL HAULER— Any person who collects and/or hauls solid waste that is
generated within the Town of Rutland, except those defined as residential haulers.
COMMERCIAL RECYCLABLES — Cardboard,
including corrugated and boxboard, glass containers. including clear glass, green glass
and brown glass, newsprint, office paper, including white, colored, and mixed office
paper, metal food and beverage containers, including tin-plated steel, bimetal and
aluminum cans and plastic containers, made from high-density polyethylene (HOPE),
polyethylene terephthalate (PET), and polyvinyl chloride (PVC).
COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded solid materials
generated by normal business and institutional activities, and having no value to the
owner at the time it is discarded.
CURBSIDE — An area adjacent to the street, curb, or roadside ditch, but in no case
greater than ten (10) feet from the curb or roadside ditch, nor directly on the traveled
portion of any town highway or sidewalk.
DESIGNATED AREA — An area designated for storage of solid waste and recyclables,
readily accessible at all times by a conventional solid waste collection truck, or Mutually
agreed upon by the waste generator and their hauler.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or
organization of any kind.
RECYCLABLES — Recyclable materials as specifically identified in regulations
promulgated by the Board of Selectmen.
RESIDENT — Any person whose principal or secondary place of residence is within,
the Town of Rutland, including but not limited to homeowners, tenants, businesses, and
corporations.
RESIDENTIAL HAULER — Any individual who hauls residential solid waste from his
own individual residence that is located within the Town of Rutland.
RESIDENTIAL RECYCLABLES — Cardboard, including corrugated and boxboard,
glass containers, including clear glass, green glass, and brown glass. newsprint, office
paper, including white, colored, and mixed office paper, metal food and beverage
containers, including tin-plated steel bimetal and aluminum cans and plastic containers,
made from high density polyethylene (HDPE), polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and
polyvinyl chloride (PVC).
RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded solid materials
generated by normal household activities, and having no value to the owner at the time it
is discarded. "Residential solid waste" shall include waste generated in single- and
multifamily housing, apartments, and condominiums.
SOLID WASTE— Any discarded garbage, refuse, septage, sludge from a waste
treatment plant, water supply plant or pollution control facility and other discarded
material including solid, liquid, semi-solid or contaminated gaseous materials resulting
from industrial, commercial, mining or agricultural operations and from community
activities, but does not include animal manure and absorbent bedding used for solid
enrichment or solid or dissolved materials in industrial discharges which are not point
sources subject to permits under the Water Pollution Control Act.
WASTE CONTAINER — A metal or plastic garbage can or dumpster with a lid that
securely fastens, or a securely tied plastic bag.
§ 179-3. Designation and treatment of residential recyclables.
A. The designated residential recyclables listed in Subsection C below must be separated
from residential solid waste and disposed in a manner approved by the Town of Rutland
Board of Selectmen.
B. Approved disposal.
(1) The approved disposal of designated residential recyclables shall be:
(a) To deliver said material to the Rutland Town Recycling Facility or a private
recycling facility at the time designated for such delivery.
(b) To deliver said material to a commercial hauler registered with the Town of
Rutland for the purpose of collecting residential recyclables. Recyclables shall be
prepared in accordance with applicable specifications. Those recyclables taken to the
Rutland Town Facility must be prepared in accordance with specifications provided
by the Rutland Town Board of Selectmen.
(2) Nothing in this section is intended to prevent any 2 occupiers of land from donating
or selling recyclable materials from its own refuse.
C. Designated residential recyclables shall be as follows:
(1) Glass containers: clear glass containers, green glass containers, brown glass
containers.
(2) Newsprint.
(3) Metal food and beverage containers including tin - plated steel, bimetal, and
aluminum cans.
(4) Plastic containers made from high-density polyethylene (HDPE) and polyethylene
terephthalate (PET) and polyvinyl chloride (PVC).
(5) Office paper, including white, colored, and mixed office paper.
(6) Cardboard, including corrugated and boxboard.
§ 179-4. Designation and treatment of commercial recyclables.
A. The designated commercial recyclables listed in Subsection C below must be separated
from commercial solid waste and disposed in a manner approved by the Town of Rutland
Board of Selectmen.
B. The approved disposal of designated commercial recyclables shall be:
(1) To deliver said material to the Rutland Town Recycling Facility or a private recycling
facility at the time designated for such delivery. Those recyclables taken to the
Rutland Town Recycling Facility must be prepared in accordance with specifications
provided by the Rutland Town Board of Selectmen.
(2) To deliver said material to a commercial hauler registered with the Town of Rutland
for the purpose of collecting commercial recyclables. Recyclables shall be prepared in
accordance with applicable specifications. Those recyclables taken to the Rutland
Town Recycling Facility must be prepared in accordance with specifications provided
by the Rutland Town Board of Selectmen.
C. Designated commercial recyclables shall be as follows:
(1) Glass containers: clear glass containers, green glass containers, brown glass
containers.
(2) Newsprint.
(3) Metal food and beverage containers including tinplated steel, bimetal and aluminum
cans.
(4) Plastic containers made from high-density polyethylene (HDPE) and polyethylene
terephthalate (PET) and polyvinyl chloride (PVC).
(5) Office paper, including white, colored and mixed office paper.
(6) Cardboard, including corrugated and boxboard.
§ 179-5. Authorized commercial haulers.
A. All haulers collecting residential or commercial solid waste in the Town of Rutland must
also offer curbside recycling services.
B. No hauler shall knowingly collect residential or commercial solid waste which does not
have the designated recyclables separated from it.
C. No person shall collect residential or commercial solid waste or recyclables placed at the
curbside or other designated area unless they are authorized by the Town of Rutland
Board of Selectmen. Licenses shall be obtained through the Town of Rutland
Administrator’s office. Authorization and licenses to collect recyclables may be suspended
or revoked by the Town of Rutland Selectmen for failure to abide by these regulations.
D. Haulers shall report to the Rutland Town Administrator’s office any obvious violation of
these regulations by a resident, hauler, or other person.
E. The hauler has the right to reject residential solid waste from which recyclables have not
been separated. Separation shall be the sole responsibility of the resident.
F. The hauler has the right to reject recyclables that are not prepared in accordance with
applicable specifications.
G. The hauler will be responsible for recyclables delivered to the Rutland Town Recycling
Facility. The Town of Rutland has the right to reject the loads and to charge fees for
further preparation and/or handling of recyclables.
H. Failure to abide by these regulations may cause suspension or revocation of any
authorization or license or enforcement of any other penalties provided by law.
§ 179-6. Scavenging and unauthorized collection.
A. Recyclables placed at the curbside for collection or in any recycling receptacle placed by
the Town of Rutland are the property of the Town of Rutland or its authorized collection
agent. I t is a violation of this Article for any person unauthorized by the Town of Rutland
to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any recyclable material or
receptacle.
B. Nothing in this section is intended to prevent any occupier of land from donating or selling
recyclable materials from its own refuse.
§ 179-7. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
A. Any person violating any provision of this Article or the regulations enacted hereunder
shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.) for each offense and/or denied
authorization to pick up any solid waste or disposal of solid waste within the Town of
Rutland.
B. The Town of Rutland or its designated agent reserves the right to refuse to collect solid
waste or to refuse to allow disposal at any facility operated by the Town of Rutland or for
the benefit of the town where this Article or the regulations promulgated hereunder are
ignored or violated. The Town of Rutland further reserves the right to terminate the
authorization of any commercial hauler who violates this Article, or the regulations
promulgated herein. Termination of authorization may include but is not limited to
revocation of license to collect, haul and dispose of solid waste.
C. Unless otherwise provided for herein, each day that a violation shall continue to exist
shall constitute a separate offense.
D. The Town of Rutland may, upon the violation of any provision of this Article, maintain
an action to enjoin the violations of this Article or any regulations adopted to implement
the same, but the election of the town to proceed with an application or petition for an
injunction shall not prevent a criminal prosecution for the violation of this Article.
Expenses incurred by such action shall be recovered by the person whose legal duty it
was to comply with this Article.
E. Enforcement of all provisions of this Article shall provide all persons a reasonable period
of time and opportunity to correct violations prior to pursuing penalties and/or fines. This
includes providing information and education programs and utilizing verbal warnings and
written warnings prior to instituting enforcement fines and/or penalties.
F. Spot checks shall be made by employees of the Town of Rutland at facilities operated by
the Town of Rutland to determine if recyclables are properly separated from solid waste
and to determine i f recyclables are properly prepared for receiving at the Rutland Town
Recycling Facility. Adequate separation and preparation shall also be policed by licensed
commercial haulers to determines that their customers are complying with the provisions
of this Article. When an employee of the Town of Rutland or a licensed commercial
hauler determines that a violation of this Article has occurred, written notice on forms
prescribed by the town shall be provided to the violator, said notice to state the nature of
the violation and the means by which compliance with this Article can be attained.
Copies of all such written notices shall be submitted to the Rutland Town Administrator
within five (5) days of service. Upon occurrence of the third violation of the same offense
by any party, the Administrator shall levy penalty by fine and/or denial of rights to use
the Town of Rutland Recycling Facility or exercise such other enforcement action as is
provided for under this Article or other applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
G. The Administrator or his/her designee shall be responsible for enforcement. The Board of
Selectmen shall act as appeal board for all appeals that are not resolved after appeal to the
Administrator.
§ 179-8. Effective date.
This Article shall become effective at 12:00 midnight on June 17, 1994.
§ 179-9. Educational Plan.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Educational Plan is to inform all residents and businesses in
Rutland Town of the methods and means of recycling, especially in regards to mandated
recycling.
B. Implementation. The Educational Plan will include both written materials, i.e., brochures
and flyers, and personal contact. Sectors of the community which will receive this
approach are single-family residential units, multifamily residential units and commercial
and industrial businesses. Information dissemination and personal visits will be conducted
by the Town Administrator. Listed below is the approach to be used for each sector.
(1) Single-family residential units. Information on the recycling program methods and
means will be disseminated via newspaper, radio, flyers, brochures, billing inserts
and displays in store windows. A block leader program will be instituted for the
residential sector.
(2) Multi-family residential units. Information on the recycling program methods and
means will be disseminated via newspaper, radio, flyers, brochures, billing inserts and
displays in store windows. A block leader program will be instituted for the
residential sector. The Town Administrator will also visit each multifamily unit prior
to the program start date in order to assist the owner with placement of collection
containers and other needs. When necessary, collection methods and information will
be custom designed per site.
(3) Commercial and industrial businesses. Information on the recycling program methods
and means will be disseminated via newspaper, radio, flyers, brochures, billing inserts
and displays in store windows. The Town Administrative Assistant will assist each
business individually with placement of collection containers and education of
employees.
C. Anyone interested in recycling will be able to obtain information by calling the Rutland
Town Clerk's office. The Town Clerk's office is open weekdays from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30
p.m., except on Fridays. The Clerk’s office closes at noon on Fridays.
D. An educational program will be conducted at the Rutland Town Elementary School. The
program will include a logo and slogan contest. The Town Administrator will meet with
school officials to ensure coordination and implementation of the elementary education
program.
E. Conclusion. The Educational Plan for Rutland Town's Mandatory Recycling Ordinance is
an essential component of the town's recycling program. The program is designed to
include all segments of the general public in a cooperative effort to reduce the amount of
solid waste generated within the Town of Rutland. In implementing the plan, the Town of
Rutland will ensure a successful, effective, and manageable recycling program.
§ 179-10. Enforcement Plan.
A. On April 18, 1994, the Town of Rutland Board of Selectmen enacted an ordinance* for
the collection and recycling of solid waste in the Town of Rutland which requires
households and businesses to recycle the following materials beginning June 17, 1994:
glass containers; metal food and beverage containers; newspapers; plastic containers made
from high-density polyethylene (HDPE), polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and polyvinyl
chloride (PVC). The ordinance was received well by the public no challenges were raised
to its adoption. In the event that households and businesses do not comply with the
ordinance, the Town of Rutland will institute the following enforcement process:
(1) The Rutland Town Administrator will be responsible for enforcement of the Waste
Management Ordinance and the regulations for the collection and recycling of solid
waste generated within the Town of Rutland. The Rutland Town Planning
Commission will act as an appeal board for all enforcement proceedings that are not
resolved after a hearing before the Board of Selectmen.
(a) First offense. After the first violation of any part of the ordinance or regulations,
an individual will receive a written notification form specifically describing the
offense. Haulers will have the option of leaving educational materials instead of
a notification form if an individual occasionally places an unacceptable item in
with his or her recyclables or small amounts of recyclable materials are
infrequently mixed in with solid waste.
(b) Second offense. On the occurrence of the second violation, the Administrator
will send a written warning and an offer to personally assist the violator in
correcting the deficiency.
(c) Third offense. On the occurrence of the third offense, the Administrator will
send a second written warning and contact the individual by phone or personal
visit. The written warning will include a description of the alleged offense,
potential enforcement actions, a statement that the respondent has a 2 right to a
hearing and a description of the procedures for requesting a hearing.
(d) Fourth offense. Any individual who engages in four (4) or more offenses may
be fined not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.) for each offense beginning
with the fourth offense or may be assigned to community service assisting at the
Town Recycling Center. A citation will be sent via certified mail. Failure to pay
the fine or via complete community service may result in additional judicial
action.
(2) It is expected that the majority of instances of noncompliance will result from
improper preparation and/or selection of recyclables. It is unlikely that these instances
will recur after receipt of written notification from the individual’s hauler or the
Town of Rutland. Cases of noncompliance which may require more stringent
enforcement are those in which households refuse to separate recyclables from solid
waste. At any step in the enforcement process, the hauler may refuse to collect an
individual’s solid waste or recyclables that are not properly prepared. The
Administrative Assistant will conduct periodic spot checks of garbage to determine
participation.
B. Due process appeal flow chart.
(1) First offense: Contact Administrator
(2) Second offense: Contact Administrator
(3) Third offense: Review by Administrator
(4) Fourth offense: Hearing with Board of Selectmen; Appeal to Planning Commission
Page 1 of 16
Chapter 181
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
ARTICLE I
Driveway Installations
§ 181-1. Permit required.
§ 181-2. Authority; effect on other regulations.
§ 181-3. Compliance required; change of use.
§ 181-4. Restrictions; applicability.
§ 181-5. Safeguarding traffic.
§ 181-6. Compacting backfill.
§ 181-7. Replacement of disturbed courses.
§ 181-8. Inspections and approvals.
§ 181-9. Installations and parking in right-of-way.
§ 181-10. Costs of work.
§ 181-11. Other regulations to be met.
§ 181-12. Culvert.
§ 181-13. Construction per details and standards.
§ 181-14. Responsibility within highway limits.
§ 181-15. Drainage.
§ 181-16. Manner of grading slopes.
§ 181-17. Manner of entry to right-of-way.
§ 181-18. Marking underground services.
§ 181-19. Time of completion.
ARTICLE II
Acceptance of Roads and Town Highways
§ 181-20. Documentation accompanying request for acceptance.
§ 181-21. General requirements.
§ 181-22. Draft instruments; review fee; review by Town.
§ 181-23. Acceptance.
§ 181-24. No Town actions other than Select Board vote constitutes acceptance.
ARTICLE III
Naming of Roads and Numbering of Buildings
§ 181-25. Purpose.
§ 181-26. Definitions.
§ 181-27. Road naming.
§ 181-28. Future development.
§ 181-29. General addressing and numbering system guidelines.
Page 2 of 16
§ 181-30. Road name signs.
§ 181-31. Implementation.
§ 181-32. Severability.
§ 181-33. Enforcement and remedies.
ARTICLE IV
Policy for Transportation
Construction and Improvements
§ 181-34. Adherence to sound engineering practices.
§ 181-35 Minimum standards.
§ 181-36. Culverts.
§ 181-37. Roadside ditches.
§ 181-38. Bridges.
§ 181-39. Agency of Transportation guidelines.
§ 181-40. Deviations from policies.
§ 181-41. Applicability.
§ 181-42. Authority for final decisions.
§ 181-43. Verification of compliance; inspection report.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen as indicated in part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
ARTICLE I
Driveway Installations
[Adopted 7-7-1980]
§ 181-1. Permit required.
Any person desiring access to a Town highway for any use shall obtain a permit therefor,
pursuit to this chapter, prior to commencing any work on constructing such access or, if a
driveway preexists such use, prior to commencing use of such driveway in support of
such use.
§ 181-2. Authority; effect on other regulations.
The permit required by this chapter is issued in accordance with 19 V.SA. § 43 relative to
all highways within the control and jurisdiction of the Town of Rutland. The issuance of
this permit does not release the applicant from any requirement of statutes, ordinances,
rules and regulations administered by other governmental agencies.
Page 3 of 16
§ 181-3. Compliance required; change of use.
The permit will be effective upon compliance with such of these requirements as are
applicable and shall continue in effect for as long as the present land use continues. Any
change from the present land use will require a new permit.
§ 181-4. Restrictions; applicability.
The permit required by this chapter is issued subject to the directions, restrictions and
conditions contained therein and on the reverse of the permit form, and any attachments
thereto, and covers only the work described in this application, and then only when the
work is performed as directed. Violations are subject to the penalties set forth in 19
V.S.A. § 43, with fines of not less than $100 nor more than $10,000 for each violation.
§ 181-5. Safeguarding traffic.
The permit holder shall take all necessary precautions to safeguard the traveling public
until the work is completed.
§ 181-6. Compacting backfill.
Backfill shall be thoroughly compacted to prevent future settlement of the highway.
§ 181-7. Replacement of disturbed courses.
Gravel, base, and surface courses shall be replaced, if disturbed, by the permit holder.
§ 181-8. Inspections and approvals.
A. All new drainage pipes within the highway right-of-way shall be approved by the
Selectmen or Road Commissioner before backfilling trenches.
B. An additional inspection and approval shall be obtained prior to paving drives.
§ 181-9. Installations and parking in right-of-way.
No installation or parking will be allowed within the highway right-of-way.
§ 181-10. Costs of work.
All construction costs and costs of material shall be at the permit holder's expense.
Page 4 of 16
§ 181-11. Other regulations to be met.
All applicable town regulations and State Environmental Control Commission regulations
must be met.
§ 181-12. Culvert.
A galvanized culvert with a minimum diameter of 12 inches (or size as requested by the
Selectmen or Road Commissioner) minimum diameter galvanized culvert will be
installed under the drive.
§ 181-13. Construction per details and standards.
Drives are to be constructed as per Detail A, B, or C, Standard for Residential and
Commercial Drives. Also see Vermont Standards B71.
§ 181-14. Responsibility within highway limits.
The applicant or the applicants agent shall be responsible for any damage, repair or
maintenance of the facility within the highway limits.
§ 181-15. Drainage.
No effluent from septic tanks or drainage fields will be allowed to drain onto the highway
right-of-way.
§ 181-16. Manner of grading slopes.
The slopes within the highway right-of-way shall be graded in a workmanlike manner,
seeded, and mulched.
§ 181-17. Manner of entry to right-of-way.
The driveway to be constructed will enter the town right-of-way at an elevation not
higher than that of the shoulder of the highway. The driveway to be constructed shall not
exceed 5% grade per 20 feet from the edge of the traveled portion of the road. The angle
that the driveway enters the road shall be determined by the Selectmen, who, in their
determination, will be guided by safe and practical ingress to and egress from the town
highway.
§ 181-18. Marking underground services.
Underground services will require sleeves and markers to locate them and will be
referenced on a map submitted with the permit or before use of the driveway.
Page 5 of 16
§ 181-19. Time of completion.
All construction shall be completed within one year of the approved application.
ARTICLE II
Acceptance of Roads and Town Highways
[Adopted 6-23-1997]
§ 181-20. Documentation accompanying request for acceptance.
All requests for acceptance of roads as town highways by a landowner shall be
accompanied by following:
A. Survey.
1. A survey certified by a Vermont-licensed surveyor, showing outer limits of the land
proposed for conveyance, with bearings and distances for straight fines and radii, arcs
and chord lengths for all curves and turnaround areas. The survey shall show as built
the roadway, any turnarounds, any sidewalks culverts and all slope and ditch areas. All
roadways, turnarounds and sidewalks as built shall be within the land proposed for
conveyance. If culverts, slopes or ditches extend outside the lands proposed for
conveyance, the outer necessary easement areas shall be shown by bearings and
distances, radii and chords, as appropriate.
2. The survey shall also show as built, any underground utility lines which are within or
cross the land proposed for conveyance or associated easements, including water,
sewer, electric, telephone and television and all drainage areas on the landowner's
remaining land, and on parcels or lots previously conveyed by the landowner which are
part of landowner's subdivision, over which surface water from the roadway will pass.
The names of the owners of any such parcels or lots shall be shown on the survey, with
the deed references to their deeds. The survey shall also show all information required
to be shown on the survey elsewhere in these policies. The survey shall conform to the
requirements of 27 V.S.A. § 1403.
B. Certified as built design specifications. Design specifications by a licensed Vermont
engineer, to which all improvements and facilities for conveyance were built (including
but not limited to roads, sidewalks, water and sewer lines and associated culverts, slopes,
ditches, water drainage facilities, traffic signals, road striping, turning lanes, sewer
waterline connection 'T''s and other associated improvements and facilities).
Specifications shall include cross sections every 100 feet. A licensed Vermont engineer
shall certify that the design specifications are at a minimum consistent with the
requirements of all applicable state and local regulations and the permits issued
Page 6 of 16
authorizing the improvements, and all of the improvements as built have been installed in
accordance with the design specifications and all applicable state and local permits and
plans approved by such permits.
C. Warranty deed. An executed Warranty Deed conveying fee-simple title to the land
proposed for conveyance, and all necessary easements for culverts, slopes and ditches
outside the land to be conveyed, all described by bearings, distances, radii, arcs and
chords consistent with the survey. Necessary easements for roadway surface water
drainage shall also be described.
1. If the landowner has previously conveyed parcels or lots which are part of the
landowner's subdivision over which surface water from the road passes, the deed to the
town shall include easements for passage of road surface water across parcels or lots. I t
is the landowner's responsibility to either reserve these surface water easements in
making parcel or lot conveyances or obtain them from owners thereof before requesting
town roadway acceptance, in either case so that these easements may be transferred to
the town by the landowner along with roadway area.
2. If the landowner is also requesting that the town accept a water or sewer line, the deed
shall transfer ownership of the line. I f all or any part of the line is outside or within 10
feet of the edge of the land proposed to be conveyed, that part of the line shall be shown
as built on the survey, by appropriate bearings, distances, radii, arcs, and chords, and
the deed shall include an easement 15 feet on either side of that part of the line (not
including the area lying within the land proposed conveyance), plus an additional 10
feet by way of temporary easement during construction for location of machinery and
placement of fill and other materials. I f any water or sewer line or associated facilities
crossing the land proposed for conveyance is not to be conveyed to the town, the
landowner shall set forth that fact clearly in the deed, provide in the deed that the town
will have no responsibilities for maintenance and repair .and file with the deed a permit
application under 19 V.S.A. § 1111(c) to maintain the line in the town property if and
when the road is accepted.
3. All easements required to be included in the deed shall include rights of installation,
restoration, replacement, enlargement, maintenance and repair of facility or
improvement for which the easement is granted.
4. The deed shall convey all improvements and facilities constructed or installed within or
under the land and improvements proposed for conveyance (whether constructed or
installed as of the date of the deed or thereafter), excepting only any water or sewer
lines and associated facilities specifically excluded and electric, telephone, cable
television and similar facilities owned by utility companies. The deed shall include the
Waiver of Development Rights covenant required by the Environmental Protection
Rules of the Vermont Agency of Conservation (Subdivision Regulations), Section 3.06,
as amended.
Page 7 of 16
D. Subdivision deferral permit application. A deferral permit application for the land
proposed to be conveyed, as required by Section 3.06 of the Subdivision Regulations,
signed by the landowner. The town may sign the application so that the landowner may
process it with the Agency of Conservation. Signing of the application by the town shall
not constitute commitment or agreement to accept the land proposed for conveyance.
E. Subdivision permit required for remaining land. A permit or deferral permit under the
Subdivision Regulations for any remaining land of the landowner which would be left
subject to the Subdivision Regulations after the conveyance of the town.
F. Property transfer return. A Vermont property transfer tax return, signed by the landowner
with all parts filled in (except for the section pertaining to the Subdivision Regulations,
which must await issuance of the deferral permit).
G. Act 250. I f the roadway is subject to an Act 250 permit, the appropriate permit number
shall be filled in on the Vermont property transfer tax return, and the following shall be
supplied along with the return: a copy of the Act 250 permit, and all amendments and a
certification by a licensed surveyor or engineer that the land and easements proposed for
conveyance are so located on the property and of a sufficient width as to comply with the
Act 250 permit as amended. I f the landowner claims the road is not subject to Act 250,
then an opinion by a Vermont attorney shall accompany the property transfer tax return
explaining the reason for the exemption, and the appropriate exemption spaces in the
return shall be completed.
H. Title certificate. A title certificate prepared and signed by a Vermont attorney certifying
to the marketability of the land and easements proposed for conveyance, stating the
names of all record owners of the land and easements proposed for conveyance and
noting any mortgages, easements, restrictions, other encumbrances which might affect
the town's title to or use of both the land and the easements.
I. Partial discharges and releases. Executed partial discharges of mortgages and executed
releases of other restrictions and encumbrances noted on the attorney's title certificate.
J. Security for maintenance and any continuing permit obligations. An indemnification
agreement signed by the landowner backed by letter of credit issued by a Vermont bank
under which the landowner agrees to indemnify and hold the town harmless for its costs
in performing any work necessary to repair and/or replace any of the improvements
proposed for conveyance which fail within one year of acceptance by the town (including
but not limited to breakup of pavement, erosion of slopes or drainage areas or leaking or
breaking pipes).The letter of credit shall provide that the town may draw upon it at any
time within 18 months of acceptance of the improvements by signed draft accompanied
by the town's certification to the bank that the town has incurred costs to perform work to
replace or repair improvements proposed for acceptance by the landowner and accepted
by the town, and specifying the amount of the costs. If any permit issued to the
landowner contains a reopener under which the town as successor in title to the
Page 8 of 16
landowner could be required to install any additional improvements or facilities of any
kind (including but not limited to additional turning lanes, signage, traffic signals, other
traffic improvements) as a result of development or subdivision to the permit ("reopener
improvements"), the indemnification/letter of credit shall also cover the town's costs of
the reopener improvements, if required to be made by the District Commission or
Environmental Board. The amount of the letter of credit and any extended period of time
for the town to draw on account of reopener improvements shall be as agreed by the
landowner and the selectmen prior to the town's accepting the improvements.
K. A review fee deposit in the amount of $750, to be used pursuant to § 181-22 below.
§ 181-21. General requirements.
All roadways, turnarounds and sidewalks as built shall be located within the land
proposed for conveyance.
A. All strips of land within which roads are located shall be at least 50 feet wide, and the
radii of all turnaround areas shall be at least 60 feet, unless greater widths and/or radii are
required by permits. The width of the strip of land shall be increased to a minimum of
120 feet, and the radii of the turnaround areas to a minimum of 75 feet where sidewalks
are installed.
B. Legal or recording requirements: All deeds, transfer returns, indemnifications and other
instruments of transfer shall be signed by all record owners of title.
C. Paving requirements: Roadways 20 feet wide centered on a roadway cul-de-sac shall
have a minimum-paved radii of 45 feet from center of cul-de-sac. Also required shall be
two inches of blacktop base and a one-inch finish coat of blacktop.
§ 181-22. Draft instruments; review fee; review by town.
A. Before submitting executed and signed instruments, the landowner shall submit drafts.
The town will review the landowner's documentation as it deems necessary with the
town's Attorney, engineer and/or surveyor and will then request that the landowner revise
the documentation and supply any further documentation to meet any of their comments.
B. The landowners required review fee deposit will be used to defray the town's review
costs, and any excess will be refunded to the landowner. If the town's review costs exceed
the deposit, the landowner will reimburse the town for the excess prior to acceptance.
§ 181-23. Acceptance.
The land and easements and improvements proposed for acceptance shall only be
accepted by vote of the Selectmen. If the Selectmen decide to accept the road, their
Page 9 of 16
acceptance shall be conditional and shall not effect until the town receives a Vermont
attorney's supplemental title certificate to the date of recording, indicating that objections
to marketability noted in the original title certificate have been cleared and that there is
nothing new between the original title certificate and the date of recording affecting
marketability.
§ 181-24. No town actions other than Select Board vote constitutes acceptance.
Nothing in these policies, and no actions of the landowner or the town pursuant to these
policies or otherwise ( including but not limited to the town's inspection during
construction or approval of the work or materials), shall be construed as imposing an
obligation on the Town to accept any land or easements proposed for conveyance to the
Town or any associated roadway or other improvements or as an acceptance thereof
Whether to accept or not to accept any such land, roadway, or improvements shall be in
the sole discretion of the Selectmen.
ARTICLE III
Naming of Roads and Numbering of Buildings
[Adopted 5-28-1996]
§ 181-25. Purpose.
A. In accordance with 24 V.S.A. Chapter 59, Chapter 61,
Subchapter 11, and Chapter 117, and 23 V.S.A. Chapter 24, the Board of Selectmen of the
Town of Rutland hereby establishes the following article in order to develop a more
uniform road naming and road location addressing system throughout the Town of
Rutland to enable people to locate roads and addresses and to effectively provide
emergency services and deliveries to Town citizens.
B. This article is hereby designated a CIVIL ordinance and shall be enforced according to 24
V.S.A. Chapter 59 and 23 V.S.A. Chapter 24.
§ 181-26. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PUBLIC ROAD — A state or Town highway identified on the latest A.O.T. General
Highway Map for the Town of Rutland.
ROAD — A public road, a state or Town highway identified on the latest A.O.T. General
Highway Map for the Town of Rutland; or any nonpublic road, street, right-of-way,
shared driveway, or other way which provides access to three or more dwellings.
Page 10 of 16
STRUCTURE — Includes any dwelling, any public building, any place of business, and
any building which the Board of Selectmen or its designee determines should have a
separate location number in order to effectively provide emergency services.
§ 181-27. Road naming.
A. Each road, as defined herein, shall be assigned a name by the Board of Selectmen or its
designee. The Board of Selectmen or its designee may determine that other roads, streets,
rights of way, or other ways providing access to a structure, may require a name if
necessary, to effectively provide emergency services.
B. Attached to this article is a list and map of all current roads and road names in the Town
of Rutland and the names of such roads are hereby adopted. See Attachment A. Each
road not named in Attachment A shall receive a proposed name by resolution of the
Board of Selectmen at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Board. The proposed road
names must be separate and distinct fi-om other designated road names in the Town of
Rutland and surrounding communities.
C. The Board of Selectmen shall add names to Attachment A by following the procedures
for adoption and amendment of ordinances as set forth in 24 V.S.A., Chapter 59. I n
addition to the statutory provisions, the adoption procedure for new road names under
this article shall include providing notice of the proposed amendment with the proposed
road name to all landowners on that road via individual or bulk mailing or by a notice in a
newspaper circulating in the municipality. Within 30 days of the passage of the resolution
to amend Attachment A for purposes of naming a road, affected individuals in the Town
of Rutland may request the Board of Selectmen to hold a hearing on the proposed
amendment, or may offer written comments to the Board of Selectmen on the proposed
amendment. Unless the resolution is withdrawn, revoked or amended by the Board of
Selectmen, the resolution amending Attachment A shall become effective 60 days after
the date of the resolution in accordance with 24 V.S.A. Section 1972.
D. The Board of Selectmen may change the names of any road, after a duly warned public
hearing, when necessary to promote public welfare and safety.
§ 181-28. Future development.
A. Prior to the approval of a subdivision by the Planning Commission, the subdivider shall
furnish a plan for road naming and road numbering in accordance with this article to the
Planning Commission and Board of Selectmen. The subdivider shall be responsible for
installation of road signs and location numbers prior to the issuance of any permits for
construction on any of the subdivided lots.
Page 11 of 16
B. Following the adoption of this article, the written approval of the Board of Selectmen or
its designee is required for any proposed road name and location numbers of any new
structure for which an Act 250 or highway access permit is required.
C. Where a new or reconstructed structure is not otherwise subject to § 181-28B, and when
the Board of Selectmen or its designee determines that, in order to promote the purposes
of this article, the new or reconstructed structure should be assigned a location number or
should have its existing location number changed, the Board of Selectmen or its designee
shall provide the owner of the structure with a written order of the assignment or
amendment of the structure's location number. This owner shall comply with § 181-29 of
this article within 60 days of the date of the order unless the order specifically provides a
different date by which compliance is due.
§ 181-29. General addressing and numbering system guidelines.
A. Roads officially named by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Rutland shall be
measured in segments of 5.28 feet (1/1,000 mile). Even numbers shall be assigned to the
right side of the road and odd numbers to the left as they proceed from the starting point.
B. The Board of Selectmen or its designee shall assign each structure, as defined herein, a
location number based upon its distance (i.e., the number of 5.28-foot segments) fi-om
the starting point of the road to the center of the driveway or entrance from the road to the
structure, if possible. The Board of Selectmen or its designee shall have the authority to
assign a location number utilizing other physical information regarding the structure, if
appropriate and necessary in order to effectively provide emergency services.
C. Each of the location numbers for structures must be at least four inches high and at least
two inches wide. Location numbers must be dark in color on a light-colored background
with no other markings or symbols.
D. Numbers must be clearly visible from the road if the location number signs are affixed to
the structure. I f the location number affixed to the structure is not clearly visible from the
road, the location number shall be affixed on a board or plaque no smaller than eight
inches wide by four inches high and such board or plaque affixed to a post, pole, fence or
other structure near the driveway entrance so as to be clearly visible from the road during
all seasons.
E. Numbers may only be affixed to a mailbox if there is a single mailbox located at the
entrance to the structure from the road, and, in such event, the location number shall be
on both sides of the mailbox. If there are multiple mailboxes at a single location or the
mailbox is on the opposite side of the road to the entrance to the structure, no location
numbers may be placed on the sides of the mailbox and any identifying information shall
only be marked on the front of the mailbox facing the road.
Page 12 of 16
F. The property owner is responsible for the purchase and installation of location numbers
to be installed.
G. A multiple dwelling or use structure shall bear one number for each dwelling or use
where possible. If each dwelling or use does not have a separate number, then the Board
of Selectmen or its designee shall determine the appropriate numbering of each dwelling
or use so as to provide emergency services effectively.
H. All location numbers shall be maintained so as to maintain clear visibility of the location
number.
§ 181-30. Road name signs.
A. The Board of Selectmen, upon adoption of this article, shall institute a program for the
installation and maintenance of municipal and private road name signs in accordance
with this article. All nonpublic roads shall also be properly signed. The cost of initial
installation (purchase and installing post and sign) shall be paid by the Town for public
roads listed on Attachment A and by the owners/users of existing nonpublic roads listed
on Attachment A. The owners/users of nonpublic roads shall be responsible for the
maintenance, repair, and replacement of such road signs for the nonpublic roads. The
Town shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair, and replacement of roads signs on
public roads.
B. All road signs shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devises for
Roads and Highways.
C. All road signs shall be maintained so as to maintain clear visibility of the name of the
road.
§ 181-31. Implementation.
A. The Town shall ensure, through cooperative efforts with the Post Office, that each
property owner is notified of the implementation of this article.
B. All structure owners shall install their location numbers within 60 days after the adoption
of the road name upon which the structure is located.
§ 181-32. Severability.
If any portion of this article and any amendments made hereto are held unconstitutional
or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this article and any
amendments made hereto shall not be affected and shall remain in full force and effect. If
any statute referred to in this article shall be amended, this article shall be deemed to refer
to such statute as amended.
Page 13 of 16
§ 181-33. Enforcement and remedies.
A. The designated Enforcement Officer is the Town Administrator.
B. This article is designated as a civil ordinance pursuant to 24 V.S.A. Section 1971 (b).
This article shall be enforced through the Traffic and municipal Ordinance Bureau
pursuant to 23 V.S.A. and 24 V.S.A. Chapter 59, as may be amended from time to time.
C. Civil penalties.
1. The following civil penalties are hereby imposed for violation of this article:
Violation Penalty
First $50
Second $100
Third $200
Fourth and subsequent $400
2. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
D. Waiver fees.
1. In cases where violations of this article are brought in the Traffic and Municipal
Ordinance Bureau, and where the violation is admitted or not contested, in lieu of the
above, the following waiver penalties are imposed:
Violation Waiver Fee
First $25
Second $50
Third $100
Fourth and subsequent $200
2. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
E. In addition to any other remedy provided in this article or available at law or equity, the
Town of Rutland may institute a suit for an injunction to prevent, restrain or abate
violations of this article.
Page 14 of 16
ARTICLE IV
Policy for Transportation
Construction and Improvements
[Amended 11-__-2001]
§ 181-34. Adherence to sound engineering practices
Road and road related improvements shall be constructed or installed in accordance with
sound engineering practice and this policy.
§ 181-35 Minimum standards
The construction guidelines and standards contained as part of this policy are considered
minimum and may be exceeded to meet traffic or other conditions.
§ 181-36. Culverts
All new culverts shall be a minimum of eighteen inches (18”) in diameter with the
exception of drive culverts, which will be a minimum of fifteen inches (15”). New and
replacement bridges and culverts will meet the 25-year event or “Q-25” standard.
§ 181-37. Roadside ditches
Roadside ditches shall be treated to minimum erosion and to remove sediments and other
pollutants from runoff water by:
A. seeding and mulching ditches having a slope of less than 0-5 %;
B. placing biodegradable matting and seed in ditches with slopes between 5-10 %;
C. stone lining ditches having a slope of 10 % or greater.
§ 181-38. Bridges
All bridges shall have a minimum two-lane width.
§ 181-39. Agency of Transportation guidelines
The Select Board hereby adopts and will enforce the following construction guidelines
and/or standards from the Vermont Agency of Transportation which are considered
integral to this policy (ADT = Average Daily Total):
Page 15 of 16
A. A-21 Class 3 Town Highway guidelines for ADT 0 – 250 and designated scenic
roads
B. A-76 Design Standard for Town and Development Roads
C. B-11 Design Standards for Under drain
D. B-71 Design Standard for Residential and Commercial Drives
E. D-2 Design Standard for Headwalls and other reinforcement
F. D-3 Design Standard for Treated Gutters
Where these guidelines exceed the Vermont State Standards, the geometric requirements
in the Vermont State Standards will govern.
§ 181-40. Deviations from policies
Plans for construction showing deviations from these policies may be approved by the
Select Board or its designee if it can be shown that strict adherence will cause undue
hardship because of unusual site conditions. However, every effort shall be made to meet
the general objectives of these policies.
§ 181-41. Applicability
Any new road, whether or not that road is proposed to be conveyed to the town, shall be
constructed according to the minimums of this policy.
§ 181-42. Authority for final decisions
The Select Board or its designee shall make final decisions over all questions arising
during construction of new roads.
§ 181-43. Verification of compliance; inspection report
The Select Board or its designee shall be provided with verification of compliance with
these policies for all road construction and road related improvement installations. A final
inspection report certifying whether the construction has been installed as approved shall
be submitted by the project engineer.
Page 16 of 16
Page 1 of 14
TOWN OF RUTLAND ORDINANCE
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
SECTION I: AUTHORITY
Under authority granted in 24 V.S.A. § 2291(19) and 24 V.S.A. Chapter 59, the Select Board of
the Town of Rutland (Select Board) hereby adopts the following civil ordinance concerning
telecommunications facilities. Under this Ordinance, the Select Board shall have the power:
A. To regulate the construction, alteration, development, decommissioning or dismantling of
wireless telecommunications facilities and ancillary improvements.
B. To hire, at the expense of the applicant, qualified person(s) to conduct an independent
technical review and evaluation of the application, including without limitation, to
evaluate compliance with Federal Communication Commission (FCC) rules, regulations,
and standards; and
C. To require the posting of a bond or other acceptable security in order to finance the future
decommissioning or dismantling of a permitted telecommunication facility.
SECTION II: PURPOSES
The purposes of this Ordinance are to:
A. Allow the development of adequate telecommunications services, while preserving the
character and appearance of the Town of Rutland (Town) while;
B. Protect the scenic, historic, environmental and natural resources of the Town;
C. Provide standards and requirements for the operation, siting, design, appearance,
construction, monitoring and removal of telecommunications facilities and towers;
D. Minimize tower and antenna proliferation by requiring the sharing of existing
telecommunications facilities, towers and sites where possible and appropriate;
E. Facilitate the provision of telecommunications services to the community;
F. Minimize the adverse visual effects of telecommunications facilities and towers through
careful design and siting standards;
G. Encourage the location of towers and antennas in non-residential areas and away from
other sensitive areas such as those that have schools and child care facilities;
H. Advance the objectives of the Rutland Town Plan; and
Page 2 of 14
I. Protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the Town of Rutland.
SECTION III: DEFINITIONS
Adequate Capacity: Capacity is considered to be “adequate” if the grade of service is
p.05 or better for a least 50% of the days in a preceding month, prior to the date of application,
as measured using direct traffic measurement of the telecommunications facility in question,
where the call blocking is due to frequency contention at the antenna(s).
Adequate Coverage: Coverage is “adequate” within that area surrounding a base station where
the predicted or measured median field strength of the transmitted signal is such that the
majority of the time, transceivers properly installed and operated will be able to communicate
with the base station without objectionable noise (or excessive bit-error-rate for digital) and
without calls being dropped. In the case of cellular communications in a rural environment, this
would be a signal strength of at least -90dBm. It is acceptable for there to be holes within the
area of adequate coverage as long as the signal regains its strength further away from the base
station. The outer boundary of the area of adequate coverage, however, is that location past
which the signal does not regain.
Alternative Design Tower Structure: Artificial trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles,
silos and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence
of antennas or towers.
Antenna: A device which is attached to a tower or other structure for transmitting and receiving
electromagnetic waves.
Antenna Height: The vertical distance measured from the base of the antenna support structure
at grade to the highest point of the antenna. If the support structure is on a sloped grade, then
the average between the highest and lowest grades shall be used in calculating the antenna
height.
Applicant: The telecommunication services provider and the owner of the property upon which
the telecommunications facility is proposed to be located that submit an application for a permit
pursuant to this Ordinance.
Base Station: The primary sending and receiving site in a telecommunications facility network.
More than one base station and/or more than one variety of telecommunications provider can be
located on a single tower or structure.
Cellular Service: A telecommunications service that permits customers to use wireless, mobile
telephones to connect, via low-power radio transmission sites called cell sites, either to the
public switched network or to other mobile cellular phones.
Channel: The segment of the radiation spectrum to or from an antenna, which carries one
signal. An antenna may radiate on many channels simultaneously.
Page 3 of 14
Collocation: Locating wireless communications equipment from more than one provider on a
single site.
Engineer: An engineer who is licensed to practice in the State of Vermont and who is qualified
in the relevant field of knowledge or engineering specialty (e.g., a structural engineer in
questions of load bearing, shear forces, etc.; an electrical engineer in questions of radiation
effects, interference, etc.).
Facility Site: A property, or any part thereof, which is owned or leased by one or more
telecommunications facility(s) and where required landscaping is located.
FCC: Federal Communications Commission. The government agency responsible for
regulating telecommunications in the United States.
Frequency: The number of cycles completed each second by an electromagnetic wave
measured in Hertz (Hz).
GIS: Geographic Information Services.
Location: References to site location shall be the exact longitude and latitude, to the nearest
tenth of a second. Bearing or orientation should be referenced to true North.
Monopole: A single self-supporting vertical pole with no guy wire anchors, usually consisting
of a galvanized or other unpainted metal, or a wooden pole with below grade foundations.
Permit: Embodies the rights and obligations extended by the Town of Rutland to an operator to
own, construct, maintain, and operate a telecommunications facility within the boundaries of the
Town.
Personal Wireless Services: Commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless exchange access
services. These services include cellular services, personal communications services,
specialized mobile radio services, and paging services.
Repeater: A small receiver/relay transmitter and antenna of relatively low power output
designed to provide service to areas which are not able to receive adequate coverage directly
from a base or primary station.
Scenic Character: May include consideration of a field of sight or view corridor that may
include natural and/or manmade structures and activities. The objects considered may be far
away or nearby. The scenic character of an area may include consideration of the view from a
stationary point or the view seen as one travels along a roadway, waterway, or path.
Telecommunications Facility: A land facility supporting antennas and microwave dishes that
send and/or receive radio frequency signals, and all equipment (including repeaters) with which
Page 4 of 14
a telecommunications provider transmits and receives the waves which carry their services.
Communications facilities includes structures, towers or accessory buildings associated with the
provision of telecommunication services.
Telecommunications Services Provider: An entity licensed by the FCC to provide
telecommunications services to individuals or institutions.
Telecommunications Tower: A guyed, monopole, or self-supporting vertical structure,
constructed as a free-standing structure or in association with a building, other permanent
structure or equipment, containing one or more antennas intended for transmitting and/or
receiving television, AM/FM radio, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, or similar forms of
electronic communication.
USGS: United States Geological Survey.
VCGI: Vermont Center for Geographic Information.
View Corridor: A three-dimensional area extending out from a viewpoint. The width of the
view corridor depends on the focus of the view. The focus of the view may be a single object,
such as a mountain, which would result in a narrow corridor, or a group of objects, such as a
downtown skyline, which would result in a wide corridor. Panoramic views have very wide
corridors and may include a 360-degree perspective. Although the view corridor extends from
the viewpoint to the focus of the view, the mapped portion of the corridor extends from the
viewpoint and is based on the area where base zone heights must be limited in order to protect
the view.
SECTION III: CONSISTENCY WITH FEDERAL LAW
In addition to other findings required by this Ordinance, the Board shall find that its decision
regarding an application is intended to be consistent with federal law, particularly the
Telecommunications Act of 1996. This Ordinance:
A. Does not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless
services;
B. Does not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services;
and
C. Does not regulate personal wireless services on the basis of the environmental effects of
radio frequency emissions to the extent that the regulated serves and facilities comply with
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations concerning such emissions.
Page 5 of 14
SECTION IV: TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY PERMITS
A. No construction, alteration, addition, modification, installation or use of any
telecommunications tower or facility shall commence until a telecommunications
tower/facility permit (permit) has been issued by the Select Board. This includes
installation of antennas for new uses, change in the number of buildings or facilities,
material change in technology used, or addition or change of any equipment resulting in
greater visibility or structural wind-loading, or additional height of the tower or profile
change of the facility due to additional antennas not included in the original application.
B. A pre-existing telecommunications facility may remain in place and in operation. No
alteration, modification, repair, or upgrade of a pre-existing telecommunication tower
and/or facility shall be commenced until the Select Board has issued a permit required by
this Ordinance.
C. A telecommunications facility may be permitted upon compliance with this Ordinance and
upon proof of compliance with all other local, state or federal laws applicable to land use
and development and to such towers or facilities.
D. The Select Board may in the exercise of its discretion impose conditions upon the issuance
of a permit. All permit conditions shall be written on or attached to the permit;
E. The telecommunication services provider or FCC licensee must be an applicant for a
permit. Where the telecommunication services provider or FCC licensee does not own the
land upon which the telecommunication facility is located, the landowner(s) must also be
an applicant on the permit application.
F. If any other applicable regulation, bylaw, ordinance or statute which differs from this
Ordinance, the most strict shall apply.
G. In the event that the Town has incurred expenses for the review and evaluation of an
application, no permit shall be issued until the applicant has paid the Town for the
expenses incurred.
SECTION V: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
A. Application for a permit for a telecommunications facility shall be made to the municipal
official designated by the Select Board by the telecommunication services provider and the
owner of the property upon which the telecommunications is proposed to be located.
B. An application for a telecommunications facility in the Town shall include at least the
following information:
Page 6 of 14
1. The name(s) and address(es) of each applicant and of their agents. If any applicant is not
a natural person, the name and address of the business and the state in which it is
incorporated and has its principle office;
2. The name(s) and address(es) of the record landowners and their agent(s);
3. The name(s) and address(es) of the record landowners of each abutting property;
4. The name(s), address(es), fax/telephone numbers and e-mail address(es) of the persons
to be contacted who are authorized to act in event of an emergency regarding the
structure or safety of the tower or facility;
5. A vicinity map showing the entire vicinity within a 2500-foot radius of the tower or
facility site, including the location of the telecommunications facility or tower,
topography, public and private roads and driveways, buildings and structures, utilities,
water bodies, wetlands, landscape features, historic sites and habitats for endangered
species. It shall indicate the property lines of the proposed tower site parcel and all
easements or rights of way needed for access from a public way to the tower and/or
other structures;
6. The location of the proposed structure on a USGS Topographic Map or Survey with 20-
foot elevations or a GIS-generated map compatible with VCGI standards and
encompassing the area within at least two-mile radius of the proposed tower site;
7. Elevations and proposed site plans of the entire development showing all facades and
indicating all exterior materials and colors of towers, buildings and associated facilities,
as well as all proposed landscaping, utility wires, guy wires and screening. (All plans
shall be drawn at a minimum scale of 1 inch = 50 feet);
8. In the case of a proposed site which is forested, the approximate average height of the
existing vegetation within 200 feet of the tower base;
9. Construction sequence and time schedule for completion of each phase of the entire
project;
10. A copy of any executed contracts to provide land, tower access, or facilities to the
applicant;
11. A copy of the application or draft application for an Act 250 permit, if applicable; and
12. A report from an engineer that:
a. Describes the tower height, design and elevation;
Page 7 of 14
b. Documents the height above grade for all proposed mounting positions for antennas
to be collocated on a telecommunications tower and the minimum separation
distances between antennas;
c. Describes the tower’s proposed capacity, including the number, height and types of
antennas that the tower is proposed to accommodate;
d. Documents the steps the applicant will take to avoid interference with any
established public safety telecommunications;
e. In the case of new tower proposals, demonstrates that existing telecommunications
towers and other existing structures within 5 miles of the proposed site cannot
reasonably be modified to provide adequate coverage and adequate capacity to the
community;
f. Describes potential changes or additions to those existing structures or towers that
would enable them to provide adequate coverage and adequate capacity;
g. Describes the output frequency, number of channels and the power output per
channel for each proposed antenna;
h. Includes a written five-year plan for use of the proposed telecommunications facility,
including reasons for seeking capacity in excess of immediate needs (if applicable),
as well as plans for additional development and coverage within the Town;
i. Demonstrates the proposed tower’s, facility’s and other structure’s compliance with
the standards set forth in this Ordinance or other applicable standards;
j. Provides proof that at the proposed site the applicant will be in compliance with all
FCC regulations, standards and requirements, and includes a statement that the
applicant commits to continue to maintain compliance with all FCC regulations,
standards and requirements regarding both radio frequency interference (RFI) and
radio frequency radiation (RFR);
k. Includes such other information required by the Board or its consultants necessary
to evaluate the application; and
l. Includes each engineer’s stamp and registration number;
C. A letter of intent committing the tower or facility owner and his or her successors to
permit shared use of the tower if the additional user(s) agree to meet reasonable terms and
conditions for shared use, including compliance with all applicable FCC regulations,
standards and requirements and the provisions of this Ordinance and all other applicable
laws; and
Page 8 of 14
D. To the extent required by the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and as
administered by the FCC, a complete Environmental Assessment (EA) draft or final
report describing the probable impacts of the proposed facility.
E. Each application shall be signed by the applicant(s) and the contributing engineer(s) under
the pains and penalties of perjury.
F. The Select Board shall establish application fees for small scale facilities and all other
telecommunication facility.
SECTION VI: COLLOCATION
A. Towers shall be designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower
and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights where overall permitted height allows.
Towers shall be designed structurally, electrically and in all other respects to
accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and additional antennas where overall
permitted height allows.
B. The Select Board may deny an application for a new telecommunications tower or facility
where the Select Board finds that the antennas and other equipment planned for the
proposed tower or facility can be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or
facility.
SECTION VII: MINIMUM LOT SIZE, HEIGHT AND SETBACK
A. In order to protect public safety and to preserve the scenic character and appearance of the
area, the height limit for towers, antennas and tower-related fixtures shall be not more than
20 feet above the average height of the tree line measured within 100 feet of the highest
vertical element of the telecommunications facility. Notwithstanding the above, additional
height may be approved upon a finding by the Select Board that the additional height is
necessary in order to provide adequate coverage in the or to accomplish collocation of
facilities and that the additional height will not cause an undue visual impact on the scenic
character or appearance of the area.
B. The minimum lot size for a telecommunication facility shall be one acre.
C. The minimum distance from any freestanding telecommunications tower or facility to any
property line, dwelling or other occupied structure shall be no less than the height of the
tower, including antennas or other vertical appurtenances, plus an additional 20 feet.
D. Where a telecommunications facility 15 feet or greater in height is mounted on an existing
structure such as a silo, church steeple or utility pole, and thereby extends the overall
height of the structure as measured from ground level to the top of the telecommunication
facility, including antennas and other vertical appurtenances, the minimum distance from
the base of the existing structure to any property line, dwelling or other occupied structure
Page 9 of 14
shall be no less than the distance from ground level to the top of the telecommunication
facility, including antennas and other vertical appurtenances.
E. Where a telecommunications facility less than 15 feet in height is mounted on an existing
structure such as a silo, church steeple or utility pole, and thereby extends the overall
height of the structure as measured from ground level to the top of the telecommunication
facility, including antennas and other vertical appurtenances, minimum distance from the
base of the existing structure to any property line, dwelling or other occupied structure
shall be no less than the distance from ground level to the top of the existing structure.
F. Where a telecommunications facility is mounted on an existing structure such as a silo,
church steeple or utility pole, but the highest vertical appurtenance thereof does not extend
above the top of the existing structure, there shall be no required minimum distance to any
property line, dwelling or other occupied structure.
G. The Select Board may impose conditions to minimize the effect of noise from the
operation of telecommunication facility upon adjacent properties.
SECTION VIII: LIGHTING AND SIGNAGE
A. Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not display strobe lights
unless such lighting is specifically required by FAA or other federal or state law. If any
lighting is required solely because of the height of a tower, the Select Board may review
the plan to determine if the lighting requirement can be eliminated by a reduced height or a
change in location of the tower.
B. No commercial signs or lettering shall be placed on the tower or its appurtenances.
C. Signage shall be limited to that required by state or federal law.
SECTION IX: TOWER AND FACILITY DESIGN
A. The Select Board may require telecommunications towers, equipment, antennas, and their
support structures to be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through the
use of color camouflaging, architectural design, and other alternative design tower
structures as well as by minimal disruption of existing vegetation.
B. The Select Board may require materials used for the exterior of any telecommunications
facility or structure shall be of a type, color, and location so as to minimize glare and the
impact on any scenic or historic areas, public vantage points or abutting properties.
SECTION XI: SCREENING
The Select Board may require screening at the perimeter of the site by existing natural foliage or
by planted new foliage or other means approved by the Select Board.
Page 10 of 14
SECTION XII: ACCESS ROADS AND UTILITIES
A. Where telecommunications facilities require construction of a new access road or
improvement to existing access roads, the Select Board may, without limitation, require
such roads to follow the contour of the land, to be constructed or improved within existing
forest or forest fringe areas and not in open fields.
B. The Select Board may, without limitation, require utility or service lines to be designed
and located so as to minimize or prevent disruption of the scenic character and beauty of
the area, or that the underground installation of utility and service lines.
SECTION XIII: PROTECTION OF SCENIC RIDGES AND HILLSIDES
The Select Board, in consultation with the applicant and others, may consider the likely visual
impact of any proposed telecommunications facility or tower and may require the applicant to
provide photographs, simulations, conduct tests and supply any other necessary, helpful and
relevant information. Based on the information presented, the Select Board may designate an
alternative location for the facility or tower or may request a redesign in order to minimize the
visual impact on the scenic character and beauty of the area. In determining whether or not a
facility or tower would have an undue adverse visual impact and when setting conditions in the
permit, the Select Board may consider:
A. The period of time during which it would be viewed by persons traveling on public
highways;
B. The frequency with which persons traveling on public highways will view the facility;
C. The degree to which it will be screened by existing vegetation, the topography of the land,
and existing structures;
D. Background features that will either obscure it or make it more conspicuous;
E. Its distance from key vantage points and the proportion of it which will be visible above
the skyline or tree line;
F. The number of members of the traveling public or residents of the Town and neighboring
municipalities who will be affected by the alteration of the scenic character and beauty of
the area;
G. The sensitivity or unique value of the particular view affected by it; and
H. Significant disruption of a viewshed that provides context to a historic or scenic resource.
Page 11 of 14
SECTION XIV: SMALL SCALE TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
A. The placement of wireless telecommunications antennas, repeaters, or micro-cells on
existing buildings, structures, roofs, or walls, and not extending more than 10 feet from the
same, or the installation of ground facilities less than 20 feet in height, may be approved
by the designated municipal official, provided the antennas, repeaters, or micro-cells meet
the requirements of this Ordinance.
B. An application for a small scale telecommunication facility shall include:
1. A final site and building plan;
2. A report prepared by a qualified engineer which documents the proposed
telecommunication use's compliance with state and federal regulations, the structure's
suitability for the telecommunications antenna, repeater, or micro-cell, and the proposed
method of affixing same to the structure complies with standard engineering practices,
and provides complete details of the fixtures, couplings, and points of attachment to the
existing structure;
3. Where the applicant does not own the existing structure, a copy of the applicant's
executed contract with the owner of the existing structure authorizing the proposed use
of the structure.
SECTION XV: EXEMPTIONS
A. The following telecommunication facilities are exempt from the requirements of this
Ordinance: police, fire, ambulance and other emergency dispatch; amateur (ham) radio,
citizen's band radio, single-use local business radio dispatch, and television antennas for
home use.
B. No FCC-licensed telecommunications facility shall be considered exempt from this
Ordinance for any reason, whether or not said facility is proposed to share a tower or other
structure with such exempt uses.
SECTION XVI: CONTINUING OBLIGATIONS
A. Upon receiving a permit, the applicant shall annually demonstrate that it is in compliance
with all FCC standards and requirements regarding RFR, the basis for its representations
and the date that the most recent actual readings of RFR were performed at the site. The
applicant shall provide a list of RFR readings, their distances from the tower/transmitter,
dates of the readings and names of the person or company who took the readings.
B. The telecommunications facility or tower owner shall maintain adequate insurance on the
facility, tower, and the entire site.
Page 12 of 14
C. All facility and tower sites shall be properly fenced and identified by signage that indicates
the presence of RFR and any other appropriate warnings required by the permit conditions.
SECTION XVII: PERMIT AMENDMENTS
An alteration, modification, or addition to a previously permitted telecommunication facility
shall require a permit amendment when any of the following are proposed:
A. A change in the number of telecommunication facilities permitted on the site;
B. An addition or change of equipment resulting in greater visibility or structural wind
loading;
C. Any change, or proposed change in dimensions of an existing and permitted tower or other
structure designed to support telecommunications transmission, receiving and/or relaying
antennas and/or equipment; and
D. Any change in power input or output, an increase in the height of an antenna, an increase
in the number of antennas, change in antenna type(s) or model(s), repositioning of
antenna(s), change in number of channels per antenna above the maximum number
approved under an existing permit.
SECTION XVIII: REMOVAL OF ABANDONED, UNUSED, OBSOLETE DAMAGED OR
DANGEROUS TOWERS OF OTHER PORTIONS OF FACILTIES
Abandoned or unused towers or other portions of telecommunication facilities shall be removed
as follows:
A. The owner of a tower shall annually, on January 15, file a declaration with the Select
Board certifying the continuing safe operation of the entire tower and other portions of the
facility. Failure to file a declaration shall mean that it is no longer in use and the Select
Board shall declare it to have ceased operation and to be abandoned.
B. Abandoned or unused towers and facilities shall be removed within 180 days of cessation
of operations unless a time extension is approved by the Select Board. If the tower is not
removed within 180 days of cessation of operations at a site, the municipality shall notify
the landowner and the permit holder that the Town may remove the tower and all
associated facilities and assess the costs of removal against the permit holder and/or the
landowner.
C. Unused portions of towers shall be removed within 180 days of the time that such portion
is no longer used. Replacement of portions of a tower previously removed shall require a
new permit.
Page 13 of 14
D. An owner who has failed to file an annual declaration with the Select Board by January 15
may, by February 15, file a declaration of use or intended use and may request the ability
to continue use authorized by the permit.
SECTION XIX: PERMIT REVOCATION
A. The Select Board may revoke any permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance for the any of
the following reasons:
1. The provision of false, fraudulent, misleading or inaccurate information in connection
with the permit application approval by the applicant or the engineer, or any
representative or agent thereof;
2. The failure to install, construct, or complete work on the telecommunication facility in
accordance with the requirements and/or conditions of any applicable permit;
3. The violation or failure to comply with the terms, requirements, or conditions of any
applicable permit;
4. The alteration or modification of a telecommunication facility without obtaining a permit
as required by this Ordinance; or
5. The violation of or failure to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance or any
applicable state or federal laws or regulations.
SECTION XX: VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES
A. A civil penalty of not more than $500 may be imposed for a violation of this Ordinance.
Each week that the violation continues shall constitute a separate violation of this
Ordinance.
B. An issuing municipal official is authorized to recover by the issuance of a municipal
complaint, civil penalties in the following amounts for each violation of this Ordinance:
First Violation $100
Second Violation $200
Third Violation $400
Fourth and Subsequent Violations $500
C. In lieu of the civil penalties provided in subsection B of this section, an issuing municipal
official is authorized to recover a waiver fee in the following amount, from any person to
whom a municipal complaint is issued, who declines to contest the municipal traffic
complaint and pays the waiver fee:
Page 14 of 14
First Violation $50
Second Violation $100
Third Violation $200
Fourth and Subsequent Violations $250
D. Other Relief - In addition to the enforcement procedures available before the Traffic and
Municipal Ordinance Bureau, the Town may pursue any remedy authorized by law,
including without limitation, the maintenance of a civil action in superior court pursuant to
24 V.S.A. § 1974a(b) to obtain injunctive and other appropriate relief; or the revocation of
a permit or.
E. Costs incurred by the Town pursuant to any enforcement action, including but not limited
to attorney fees, court costs, and removal of the tower or facility or parts of the tower or
facility shall be assessed against the permit holder and/or the landowner.
SECTION XXI: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE
The provisions of this Ordinance are severable. If any provision of this Ordinance, or its
application to any person or circumstances or within any part of the Town of Rutland is held
invalid, illegal, or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity shall not
apply to any other portion of this Ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application thereof.
SECTION XXII: EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall become effective sixty (60) days after its adoption by the Select Board. If
a petition is filed under 24 V.S.A. § 1973, that statute shall govern the taking effect of this
Ordinance.
SIGNATURES
DATE
________________________________
___________________________
________________________________
___________________________
________________________________ ___________________________
________________________________ ___________________________
________________________________ ___________________________
Town of Rutland, Vermont Storm Water Ordinance Adopted April 2nd, 2019
Effective June 1st, 2019
Amended July 9th, 2019
1
Article 1. Establishment............................................................................................................ 3
Sec. 1-1. Authority, Findings, and Purpose.......................................................................... 3
Sec. 1-2. Applicability. .......................................................................................................... 4
Sec. 1-3. Responsibility for Administration. ........................................................................ 4
Sec. 1-4. Severability. ........................................................................................................... 4
Sec. 1-5. Relation to Other Ordinances of the Town of Rutland. ........................................ 4
Sec. 1-6. Ultimate Responsibility. ........................................................................................ 4
Sec. 1-7. Documents Incorporated by Reference................................................................ 4
Article 2. Definitions ................................................................................................................. 5
Article 3. Enforcement ............................................................................................................. 9
Sec. 3-1. Enforcement Remedies ......................................................................................... 9
A. Remedies not Exclusive ................................................................................................. 9
B. Judicial Bureau Municipal Civil Complaint Ticket ......................................................... 9
C. Civil Penalties and Waiver Fees .................................................................................... 9
D. Stop Work Order: .......................................................................................................... 9
E. Revocation of Permit: ................................................................................................. 10
F. Stormwater Commission Decisions: ........................................................................... 10
G. Appeal of Stormwater Commission Decision: ............................................................ 10
H. Injunctive Relief: ......................................................................................................... 11
I. Enforcement Costs, Expenses, and Attorney's Fees ................................................... 11
Article 4. Illicit Connections and Illegal Discharges ................................................................ 11
Sec. 4-1. Applicability ......................................................................................................... 11
Sec. 4-2. Prohibitions ......................................................................................................... 12
A. Solid Waste Disposal ............................................................................................... 12
B. Illicit Connections ........................................................................................................ 12
C. Illegal Discharges ......................................................................................................... 12
D. Management of Construction Waste and Debris ....................................................... 12
Sec. 4-3. Exemptions.......................................................................................................... 12
Sec. 4-4. Industrial or Construction Activity Discharges.................................................... 13
Sec. 4-5. Monitoring of Discharges .................................................................................... 13
D. The Administrative Officer has the authority to: ............................................................ 13
Sec. 4-6. Requirement to Prevent, Control, and/or Reduce Stormwater Pollutants by the
Use of Best Management Practices. ....................................................................................... 14
Town of Rutland, Vermont Storm Water Ordinance Adopted April 2nd, 2019
Effective June 1st, 2019
Amended July 9th, 2019
2
Sec. 4-7. Notification of Spills. ........................................................................................... 14
Article 5. Land Disturbance Permit ........................................................................................ 15
Sec. 5-1 Applicability ......................................................................................................... 15
Sec. 5-2 Land Disturbance Permit Application and Approval Procedure ......................... 15
A. Permit Required .......................................................................................................... 15
B. Application .................................................................................................................. 15
C. Technical Review ......................................................................................................... 15
D. Land Disturbance Permit Requirements and Standards ............................................ 15
E. Review and Approval .................................................................................................. 16
F. Denial of Application ................................................................................................... 16
Sec. 5-3 Appeal of Land Disturbance Permit Decision ..................................................... 16
Article 6. Erosion and Sediment Control ................................................................................ 17
Sec. 6-1. Applicability of Erosion and Sediment Control ................................................... 17
Sec. 6-2. Prohibitions. ........................................................................................................ 17
Sec. 6-3. Erosion and Sediment Control Requirements .................................................... 17
Sec. 6-4. Exemptions.......................................................................................................... 18
Sec. 6-5. Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. ................................................................... 18
Sec. 6-6. Access to Land Disturbance Activities. ............................................................... 18
Sec. 6-7. Inspection Requirements. ................................................................................... 19
Sec. 6-8. Inspection Certifications. .................................................................................... 19
Article 7. Post-Construction Stormwater Management ........................................................ 19
Sec. 7-1. Applicability of Post-Construction Stormwater Management Requirements. .. 19
Sec. 7-2. Prohibitions. ........................................................................................................ 19
Sec. 7-3. Stormwater Discharge Permits. .......................................................................... 20
Sec. 7-4. Exemptions.......................................................................................................... 20
Sec. 7-5. Stormwater Management Plans ......................................................................... 20
A. Content ....................................................................................................................... 20
B. Review and Approval .................................................................................................. 20
C. Design Standards ........................................................................................................ 20
D. More Restrictive Standards Apply .............................................................................. 21
Sec. 7-6. Maintenance of Stormwater Management Practices ........................................ 21
A. Landscape Plan ............................................................................................................ 21
B. Maintenance Easements............................................................................................. 21
Town of Rutland, Vermont Storm Water Ordinance Adopted April 2nd, 2019
Effective June 1st, 2019
Amended July 9th, 2019
3
C. Maintenance Agreement ............................................................................................ 21
D. Maintenance Records ................................................................................................. 21
Sec. 7-7. Access to Stormwater Treatment Practices. ...................................................... 21
Sec. 7-8. Inspection Requirements ................................................................................... 21
Sec. 7-9. Inspection Certifications ..................................................................................... 22
Sec. 7-10. Surety Requirements .......................................................................................... 22
Sec. 7-11. As-Built Drawings ................................................................................................ 22
Article 8. Effective Date .......................................................................................................... 22
Article 1. Establishment
Sec. 1-1. Authority, Findings, and Purpose.
The Town of Rutland hereby promulgates the following Ordinance pursuant to 24 V.S.A § 2291(14) and (15)
in order to provide for the management of stormwater runoff in the lands of the Town of Rutland subject
to the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) General Permit 3-9014 issued by the Vermont
Department of Environmental Conservation.
The Select Board finds that: the management of stormwater is necessary to reduce stream channel
instability, water pollution, siltation, sedimentation, local flooding; the management of stormwater is
necessary to protect groundwater; and the erosion of stream banks, water pollution, siltation,
sedimentation, local flooding, and/or groundwater contamination caused or contributed to by unmanaged
stormwater runoff constitutes a public nuisance.
The purposes of this Ordinance are to:
A. To minimize and/or control the quantity and quality of stormwater runoff;
B. To protect natural resources, particularly streams, lakes, wetlands, floodplains and other natural
aquatic systems on developed sites and elsewhere from degradation that could be caused by construction
activities and post-construction;
C. To prevent soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from construction sites and non-point source
pollution associated with development and redevelopment;
D. To prevent further degradation of and to foster the improvement of stormwater- impaired waters
in the Town of Rutland as defined by 10 V.S.A. §1264(12);
E. To control the discharge of sediment, stormwater, and non-stormwater into the Town of Rutland's
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4), and/or surface or groundwater in order to comply with the
requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES);
Town of Rutland, Vermont Storm Water Ordinance Adopted April 2nd, 2019
Effective June 1st, 2019
Amended July 9th, 2019
4
F. To address the adverse impacts caused by the public nuisance of unmanaged stormwater runoff
and to thereby promote the public safety, health, and welfare by reducing the impacts of flooding and
streambank erosion; reducing public expenditures for the removal of sediment from stormwater drainage
systems and natural resource areas; and by preventing damage to municipal infrastructure from
inadequate stormwater controls; and
G. To establish a permit process to administer MS4 General Permit No. 3-9014;
Sec. 1-2. Applicability.
This Ordinance shall apply to the designated MS4 areas within the Town of Rutland as delineated in the
map attached hereto as Appendix A. Specific provisions are applicable only to lands within the watershed
of Moon Brook or the Stream Buffer Area of Moon Brook, as depicted in the map attached hereto as
Appendix B, shall apply only to those designated areas as indicated in Articles within this Ordinance.
Sec. 1-3. Responsibility for Administration.
The Administrative Officer shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. Any
powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Administrative Officer may be delegated by the
Administrative Officer to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the
Town of Rutland.
Sec. 1-4. Severability.
The provisions of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or
paragraph of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall
be held invalid, it shall not affect the validity or application of other provisions of this Ordinance.
Sec. 1-5. Relation to Other Ordinances of the Town of Rutland.
If the provisions of these regulations conflict with the provisions of any other valid and enforceable
Ordinance(s), the stricter provisions shall prevail.
Sec. 1-6. Ultimate Responsibility.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this Ordinance are minimum standards;
therefore this Ordinance does not intend nor imply that compliance by any Person will ensure that there
will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge or discharge of pollutants.
Sec. 1-7. Documents Incorporated by Reference.
A. Town of Rutland Subdivision Regulations, as most recently amended.
B. Vermont Stormwater Management Manual, as most recently enacted.
C. The Low Risk Site Handbook for Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control (published by the
Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation, as amended).
Town of Rutland, Vermont Storm Water Ordinance Adopted April 2nd, 2019
Effective June 1st, 2019
Amended July 9th, 2019
5
Article 2. Definitions
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following shall mean:
“Administrative Officer” shall mean the designated Administrative Officer of the Town of Rutland,
Vermont.
“Agent” shall mean a person authorized to act in the place of another person.
“Applicant” shall mean a property owner or duly designated representative who files an application for a
land disturbance activity.
“Best Management Practices” or “BMPs” shall mean a schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices,
maintenance procedures, green infrastructure, and other management practices to prevent or reduce
water pollution.
“Clearing” shall mean any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
“Construction” shall mean land-disturbing activity associated with development, including land
preparation such as clearing, grading, and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for
basements, footings, piers, or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation of accessory
buildings such as garages.
“Common Plan of Development” shall mean a development that is completed in phases or stages when
such phases or stages share a common state permit or Town subdivision permit related to the regulation of
land use, the discharge of wastewater or a discharge to surface waters or groundwater, or a development
designed with shared common infrastructure. Common plans include, but are not limited to, subdivisions,
industrial and commercial parks, and university and other campuses. Construction activities or portions of
construction activities that have achieved final stabilization as of the effective date of this Ordinance shall
not be considered for purposes of determining what constitutes disturbance under a common plan of
development that requires coverage under this Ordinance. Following completion of the common plan
components on a parcel of land, any additional development of the parcel shall be considered as separate
from the original common plan for the purposes of evaluating whether one or more acres of land will be
disturbed.
“Construction Activity” shall mean activities subject to a Construction Permit issued by the State of
Vermont pursuant to its NPDES permit responsibilities. Such activities include but are not limited to
clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
“Construction Season” shall mean the period of time between May 1 and October 31, when land
disturbance activities may occur without special provision for winter conditions under this Ordinance.
“Construction and Demolition Debris” shall mean those materials resulting from the alteration,
construction, destruction, rehabilitation, or repair of any manmade physical structure including houses,
buildings, industrial or commercial facilities, and roadways.
“Designated Enforcement Officer” shall mean the Administrative Officer or other Town officer as may be
designated by the Select Board.
“Drainage Way” shall mean any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout the Site.
Town of Rutland, Vermont Storm Water Ordinance Adopted April 2nd, 2019
Effective June 1st, 2019
Amended July 9th, 2019
6
“Erosion Control” shall mean a measure that prevents or controls wind or water
erosion in agriculture, land development, coastal areas, riverbanks or construction.
“Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, Major” shall mean a set of plans prepared by or under the direction of
a licensed professional engineer or a certified professional in erosion and sediment control indicating the
specific measures and sequencing to be used to control sediment and erosion on a development site during
and after construction on a site that disturbs one acre or more of land, either individually or as part of a
common plan of development. The content of a Major Erosion and Sediment Control Plan is specified
herein.
“Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, Simplified” shall mean a plan indicating the specific measures and
sequencing to be used to control sediment and erosion on a development site during and after
construction on a site meeting the criteria in §6.3(C) or (D) of this Ordinance. The content of a Simplified
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan is specified in herein.
“Grading” shall mean any excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof.
"Green Infrastructure" means a wide range of multi-functional, natural and semi-natural landscape
elements that are located within, around, and between developed areas, that are applicable at all spatial
scales, and that are designed to control or collect stormwater runoff. See 10 V.S.A. §1264(b)(4).
“Hazardous Materials” shall mean any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof,
which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause,
or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property,
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
“Hardened Stream Channel” shall mean any water conveyance which bank or channel has been completely
fortified with armoring material consisting of stone rip rap or concrete or other impervious material.
“Illegal Discharge” shall mean any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the MS4, except as
exempted in §4.3 of this Ordinance.
“Illicit Connections” shall mean any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter the MS4, including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any
non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the MS4, and
any connections to the MS4, from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection
had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the Administrative Officer.
“Impervious Surface” shall mean those manmade surfaces, including paved and unpaved roads, parking
areas, roofs, driveways, and walkways, from which precipitation runs off rather than infiltrates.
“Industrial Activity” shall mean activities subject to Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR §122.26 (b) (14)
("storm water discharge associated with industrial activity").
“Infiltration Basin” shall mean any structure or device designed to infiltrate retained water to the
subsurface.
“Land Development” shall mean the construction or re-construction of impervious surface on a tract or
tracts of land.
Town of Rutland, Vermont Storm Water Ordinance Adopted April 2nd, 2019
Effective June 1st, 2019
Amended July 9th, 2019
7
“Land Disturbance Activities” shall mean any activity that disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the
movement of earth on land.
“Land Disturbance Permit” shall mean a permit approved by the Town of Rutland Stormwater Commission,
which authorizes land disturbance activities within the regulated area of the Town of Rutland pursuant to
this Ordinance.
“Limits of Disturbance” shall mean the boundary within which all construction, materials and equipment
storage, grading, landscaping and related activities shall occur.
“Maintenance Agreement” shall mean a legally recorded document that acts as a property deed restriction,
and which provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices.
“Municipal Authority” shall mean the Select Board of the Town of Rutland.
“Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System” (or “MS4”) shall mean a conveyance or system of conveyances
(including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater and that is: (i) located
in the Moon Brook watershed and the Town of Rutland as depicted on Appendix A; (ii) owned or operated
by Town of Rutland; (iii) and discharges to surface waters or ground water. MS4 shall not include a
combined sewer or any part of a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) as defined in 40 CFR §122.2
“National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit” shall mean a
permit issued by EPA (or by the State of Vermont under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC §1342(b))
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable
on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
“Non-Point Source Pollution” shall mean pollution from any source other than from any discernible,
confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include, but not be limited to, pollutants from mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
“Non-Stormwater Discharge” shall mean any discharge to the MS4 that is not composed entirely of
stormwater.
“Person” shall mean any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity
recognized by law and acting as either the owner, the owner's agent, or the operator of a premises.
“Pollutant” shall mean anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not
limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, and
accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coli form and pathogens; dissolved and
particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure;
and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
“Premises” shall mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved
including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
“Sediment” shall mean soil, sand, and minerals washed from land into surface waters or onto other lands.
Town of Rutland, Vermont Storm Water Ordinance Adopted April 2nd, 2019
Effective June 1st, 2019
Amended July 9th, 2019
8
“Sediment Control” shall mean measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the Site.
“Septic Permit” shall mean a Vermont Wastewater System & Potable Water Supply Permit.
“Site” shall mean a parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as
a single unified operation.
“Soil Erosion” shall mean when land or soil is diminished or worn due to wind or water.
“Stabilization” shall mean the use of accepted practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding.
“Start of Construction” shall mean the first land-disturbing activity associated with a development,
including land preparation such as clearing, grading, and filling; installation of streets and walkways;
excavation for basements, footings, piers, or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation of
accessory buildings such as garages.
“Stormwater” shall mean precipitation and snowmelt that does not infiltrate into the soil, including
material dissolved or suspended in it, but does not include discharges from undisturbed natural terrain.
"Stormwater Commission" the public body of the Town of Rutland appointed by the Town of Rutland
Select Board to administer and enforce the Ordinance. Upon the adoption of this Ordinance, the Select
Board appoints the members of the Town of Rutland Planning Commission to serve as the Stormwater
Commission.
“Stormwater Management” shall mean the use of structural or non-structural practices that are designed
to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, peak flow discharge and detrimental
changes in stream temperature that affect water quality and habitat.
“Stormwater Management Plan” shall mean a comprehensive plan consistent with the requirements of the
Vermont Stormwater Management Manual, as most recently adopted, and designed to manage the
volume, rate, and pollutant load of stormwater runoff after a site has undergone final stabilization
following completion of the construction activity.
“Stormwater Runoff” shall mean precipitation, snowmelt, and the material dissolved or suspended in
precipitation and snowmelt that runs off impervious surfaces and discharges into surface waters or into
groundwater via infiltration.
“Stormwater Treatment Practices” shall mean measures, either structural or nonstructural, that are
determined to be the most effective, practical means of preventing or reducing point source or non-point
source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and water bodies.
“Stream Buffer Area” shall mean those areas within fifty (50) feet of the top of bank of Moon Brook, or a
tributary thereto as designated on the map in Attachment B of this Ordinance.
“Surface Waters” shall mean any receiving waters existing on the surface of the ground, including but not
limited to; brooks, streams, rivers, wetlands, ponds, or lakes.
“Wastewater” shall mean any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged
from premises.
Town of Rutland, Vermont Storm Water Ordinance Adopted April 2nd, 2019
Effective June 1st, 2019
Amended July 9th, 2019
9
“Watercourse” shall mean any body of water, including, but not limited to lakes, ponds, rivers, and streams.
“Waterway” shall mean a channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to the public storm drain.
Article 3. Enforcement
Sec. 3-1. Enforcement Remedies
The Town of Rutland, by and through its authorized agents, shall have the authority to enforce the
provisions of this Ordinance, and any orders, violation notices, or enforcement orders issued hereunder,
pursuant to 24 V.S.A., Chapter 59, and may pursue all civil and criminal remedies in connection with any
violation hereunder.
A. Remedies not Exclusive: The remedies set forth herein are not exclusive of any other remedies
available, including criminal prosecution, under any applicable federal, state or local law. Election of one
remedy shall not preclude pursuing other remedies and nothing herein shall prohibit the Town of Rutland
from seeking multiple remedies.
B. Judicial Bureau Municipal Civil Complaint Ticket: The Town Administrator or other Designated
Enforcement Officer may enforce any violation of this Ordinance before the Vermont Judicial Bureau
pursuant to Chapter 59 of Title 24 and Chapter 29 of Title 4 of the Vermont Statutes Annotated.
Enforcement actions before the Judicial Bureau shall commence by the issuance of a municipal civil
complaint pursuant to pursuant to 24 V.S.A. §1977. On application of the Town of Rutland pursuant to 24
V.S.A. §1974a(c), the Judicial Bureau may order that the violation cease.
C. Civil Penalties and Waiver Fees: Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation pursuant to 24 V.S.A. §1974a(a).
(1) The first offense ticketed for a violation shall be punishable by a civil penalty of one hundred
dollars ($100.00); the waiver fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00);
(2) A second offense ticketed shall be punishable by a civil penalty of two hundred dollars ($200.00);
the waiver fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00);
(3) A third offense ticketed for shall be punishable by a civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00);
the waiver fee shall be two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00); and
(4) Upon the fourth offense, or if the civil penalty for all continuing civil ordinance violations is greater
than $800, the enforcement action shall be brought in the Criminal Division of the Superior Court, Rutland
Unit, pursuant to 24 V.S.A. §1974a(b).
D. Stop Work Order:
(1) In the event that any person holding a Land Disturbance Permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance,
or a Subdivision Approval, Flood Hazard Permit, a 19 V.S.A. §1111 dig-in-the street permit, or any other
permit issued by the Town of Rutland authorizing land development or land disturbance activities within
the areas subject to this Ordinance, violates this Ordinance, the Administrative Officer may issue a Stop
Work Order.
Town of Rutland, Vermont Storm Water Ordinance Adopted April 2nd, 2019
Effective June 1st, 2019
Amended July 9th, 2019
10
(2) The recipient of a Stop Work Order may appeal the Order of the Administrative Officer by filing a
Notice of Appeal with the Chairperson of the Town of Rutland Stormwater Commission with 15 days of the
date of the Stop Work Order. The recipient shall file a copy of the Notice of Appeal with the Administrative
Officer.
(3) After receipt of a Notice of Appeal of a Stop Work Order, the Stormwater Commission shall hold a
public hearing on the appeal at the next regularly –scheduled hearing of the Stormwater Commission. Not
less than 7 days prior to the appeal hearing, the Stormwater Commission shall post notice of the appeal
hearing in three or more public places within the Town of Rutland in conformance with the time and
location requirements of 1 V.S.A. §312(c)(2) and shall send notice of the appeal hearing to the Appellant by
First Class U.S. Mail.
E. Revocation of Permit:
(1) In the event that any person holding a Land Disturbance Permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance,
or a Subdivision Approval, Flood Hazard Permit, a 19 V.S.A. §1111 dig-in-the street permit, or any other
permit issued by the Town of Rutland authorizing land development
or land disturbance activities within the areas subject to this Ordinance, violates this Ordinance, the
Administrative Officer may file with the Chairperson of the Town of Rutland Stormwater Commission
written Petition for Permit Suspension or Revocation. The Administrative Officer shall send a copy of the
Petition for Permit Suspension or Revocation to the permit holder by First Class U.S. mail.
(2) In the Petition for Permit Suspension or Revocation, the Administrative Officer shall identify the
permit and include an explanation of the action, inaction, and/or factual circumstances that constitute
violation(s) of the permit.
(3) The Stormwater Commission shall hold a public hearing on the Petition for Permit Revocation or
Suspension within 45 days of the date of the Petition. Not less than 15 days before the public hearing, the
Stormwater Commission shall provide public notice as set forth
follow the warning and notice procedures set forth in 24 V.S.A. §4464(a)(1)(A) and (B) and shall send a copy
of the notice of hearing to the permit holder by First Class U.S. mail.
F. Stormwater Commission Decisions:
(1) The Stormwater Commission shall issue a written decision on an appeal of a Stop Work Order or a
Petition for Permit Suspension or Revocation. The written decision shall include a statement of the factual
bases upon which the Stormwater Commission has made its conclusions and a statement of the
conclusions. The Stormwater Commission may include in its decision reasonable conditions and
safeguards as it deems necessary to implement the purposes of this Ordinance. The minutes of the
meeting may suffice, provided the factual bases and conclusions are set forth therein. The written decision
shall include a statement of the permit holder's right of appeal.
(2) The Stormwater Commission shall send a copy of the written decision to the permit holder by First
Class U.S. mail.
G. Appeal of Stormwater Commission Decision:
Town of Rutland, Vermont Storm Water Ordinance Adopted April 2nd, 2019
Effective June 1st, 2019
Amended July 9th, 2019
11
(1) A permit holder may appeal a decision of the Stormwater Commission to the Criminal Division of
the Superior Court, Rutland Unit by filing a complaint and summons as set forth in V.R.C.P. 75(b).
(2) The complaint and summons must be filed with the clerk of the Criminal Division of the Superior
Court, Rutland Unit within 30 days of the date of the date of the Stormwater Commission decision.
(3) The Criminal Division of the Superior Court, Rutland Unit shall conduct an appeal on the record in
the nature of certiorari pursuant to V.R.C.P. 75.
H. Injunctive Relief:
(1) The Town of Rutland may bring an action in the Criminal Division of the Superior Court, Rutland
Unit pursuant to 24 V.S.A. §1974a(b) to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate any violation or activity causing
a violation. The Superior Court may exercise all plenary powers available to it, including without limitation,
the issuance of an injunction or order to compel the violator to:
a) Eliminate illicit connections and/or non-stormwater discharges to the MS4;
b) Discontinue practices, activities, or operations that lead to violations of this Ordinance;
c) Abatement or remediate stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of
any affected property;
d) Restore stream banks, other lands, or waterways;
e) Implement source control or treatment through the use of best management practices;
f) Perform of monitoring, analysis, and reporting;
g) Fix and order compensation for any public property destroyed, damaged, or injured;
h) Order reimbursement to the Town of Rutland of expenditures incurred as a result of, or in response
to the violation(s) of this Ordinance; and
i) Provide access to the Town of Rutland and/or its agents to the subject property as needed to abate
or correct the violation.
I. Enforcement Costs, Expenses, and Attorney's Fees: In any proceedings before the Criminal
Division of the Superior Court, Rutland Unit and/or the Vermont Supreme Court in which the Town of
Rutland is the substantially prevailing party, the Town of Rutland may recover from the adverse party the
enforcement costs, expenses, and attorney's fees reasonably incurred.
Article 4. Illicit Connections and Illegal Discharges
Sec. 4-1. Applicability
Article 4 applies to all properties within the Town of Rutland that are located within the Moon Brook
watershed as depicted in Appendix A.
Town of Rutland, Vermont Storm Water Ordinance Adopted April 2nd, 2019
Effective June 1st, 2019
Amended July 9th, 2019
12
Sec. 4-2. Prohibitions
A. Solid Waste Disposal: No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be
thrown, deposited, left, or maintained, in or upon any premise, public or private property, driveway,
parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, component of the MS4, or any surface water of the Town of Rutland
any object or material, including but not limited to: Refuse, rubbish, garbage, animal waste, litter, yard
waste, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that the same may cause
or contribute to pollution, or interfere with the operation, maintenance and access to the MS4. Wastes
deposited in streets in proper waste receptacles for the purposes of collection are exempted from this
prohibition.
B. Illicit Connections: The construction, use, maintenance, and/or continued existence of illicit
connections to the MS4 are prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices
applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
C. Illegal Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the MS4, any
materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than
stormwater, or any materials that may impede the natural flow of stormwater or the functionality of the
MS4.
D. Management of Construction Waste and Debris: Any person conducting activity involving the
outdoor generation or storage of construction waste or debris shall comply with the following:
(1) Construction wastes and/or debris stored in piles and/or open containers shall be covered during
windy conditions that would result in the mobilization of debris into the MS4 or waterways, and shall be
covered prior to significant forecasted rain (0.25 inches in a 24-hour
period); and
(2) No dumpsters shall be hosed out onto the construction site.
Sec. 4-3. Exemptions
The commencement or continuance of any illegal discharge to the MS4 is prohibited
except as follows:
A. Water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering,
approved stream flow diversions, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains,
uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater
dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing
of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pool draining (if dechlorinated - typically
less than one PPM chlorine), fire fighting activities, and any other water source not containing Pollutants;
B. Discharges specified in writing by the Administrative Officer as being necessary to protect public
health and safety;
C. Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal or emailed notification to the
Administrative Officer prior to the time of the test; and
Town of Rutland, Vermont Storm Water Ordinance Adopted April 2nd, 2019
Effective June 1st, 2019
Amended July 9th, 2019
13
D. Any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge
order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit,
waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the MS4 by the Administrative Officer.
Sec. 4-4. Industrial or Construction Activity Discharges
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge regulation, and/or
permit shall comply with all provisions of such regulation and/or permit. Proof of compliance with said
regulation and/or permit may be required in a form acceptable to the Administrative Officer prior to the
allowing of discharges to the MS4.
Sec. 4-5. Monitoring of Discharges
This section applies to all premises that have stormwater discharges associated with
industrial activity, including construction activity.
A. The Administrative Officer shall be permitted to enter and inspect any premise subject to
regulation under this Article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this Article.
B. If a person has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before
entry into its premises, the person shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to
representatives of the Administrative Officer.
C. A person shall allow the Administrative Officer ready access to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the
conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as
defined by state and federal law.
D. The Administrative Officer has the authority to:
(1) Set up on any permitted premises such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the
Administrative Officer to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the premises’ stormwater discharge.
(2) Require a person to install the installation of sampling and/or monitoring equipment as necessary.
a) The sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the owner or operator of the premise at their own expense.
b) All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy. The owner or operator of the premise shall demonstrate calibration techniques and
satisfactory operation of the devices to the Administrative Officer upon request.
E. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the premises to be inspected
and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator of the premise at the written or oral
request of the Administrative Officer and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be
borne by the owner or operator of the premise.
Town of Rutland, Vermont Storm Water Ordinance Adopted April 2nd, 2019
Effective June 1st, 2019
Amended July 9th, 2019
14
F. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Administrative Officer access to permitted premises are a
violation of this Article. A person who is the operator of a premise with a NPDES permit to discharge
stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the Administrative
Officer reasonable access to the permitted premises for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized
or required by this Article.
G. If the Administrative Officer has been refused access to any part of the premises from which
stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this Article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and
sampling program designed to verify compliance with this Article or any order issued hereunder, or to
protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the Administrative Officer
may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
Sec. 4-6. Requirement to Prevent, Control, and/or Reduce Stormwater Pollutants by the
Use of Best Management Practices.
A. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own
expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the
MS4 through the use of structural and non-structural BMPs.
B. Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illegal
discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural
BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and
conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section.
Sec. 4-7. Notification of Spills.
A. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a premises or
operation, or responsible for emergency response for a premises or operation has information of any
known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into the MS4, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment,
and cleanup of such release.
B. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify
emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services.
C. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the Administrative
Officer either in person, by phone, or via email no later than the next business day. Notifications in person
or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed or emailed to the Administrative
Officer within three business days of the phone or personal notice.
D. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment,
the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge,
steps taken to remediate said illicit discharge, and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records
shall be retained on-site by the owner or operator for no less than 5 years.
Town of Rutland, Vermont Storm Water Ordinance Adopted April 2nd, 2019
Effective June 1st, 2019
Amended July 9th, 2019
15
Article 5. Land Disturbance Permit
Sec. 5-1 Applicability
Article 5 applies to those properties within the Town of Rutland that are located, in whole or in part, in a
Stream Buffer Area of the Moon Brook watershed as depicted in Appendix B.
Sec. 5-2 Land Disturbance Permit Application and Approval Procedure
A. Permit Required: No land disturbance on a property located in whole or in part in a Stream Buffer
Area may be commenced without the issuance of a Land Disturbance Permit by the Administrative Officer.
B. Application: Application for a Land Disturbance Permit shall be on a form prescribed by the
Stormwater Commission, and shall include all information required for a Major Erosion and Sediment
Control Plan, Simplified Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, and Stormwater Management Plan, as
applicable to the proposed activity pursuant to this Ordinance.
C. Technical Review: The Stormwater Commission shall have the authority, but not the obligation, to
secure professional services to provide technical assistance with the review of a Land Disturbance Permit
application and any accompanying documents. The applicant shall bear the cost of such technical
assistance to the Town of Rutland.
D. Land Disturbance Permit Requirements and Standards: A Land Disturbance Permit shall
incorporate all applicable requirements, findings and conditions related to erosion and sediment control
pursuant to Article 6 of this Ordinance, and post-construction stormwater management pursuant to Article
7 of this Ordinance. In addition, the Stormwater Commission shall apply the following requirements and
standards:
(1) The clearing of existing trees of greater than 3 inches diameter at breast height that are not dead,
diseased, or heavily damaged by ice storms or other natural events, and the clearing of any other
vegetation other than Class A or Class B Noxious Weeds, as defined by the Vermont Agency of Natural
Resources, is permitted only upon identification of trees to be removed and the identification of
supplemental plantings and protective measures to be installed;
(2) Any project involving the clearing of existing vegetation, addition or modification of impervious
surface or structures, or disturbance of more than 5,000 square feet of land surface area located within the
Stream Buffer Area shall require a Land Disturbance Permit and submittal of a Simplified Erosion and
Sediment Control Plan, as defined in this Ordinance;
(3) Unless authorized by the Stormwater Commission in conjunction with review of a Land
Disturbance Permit and Simplified Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, no new or expanded impervious
surface or building area shall be constructed within the Stream Buffer Area and no turf grass lawn area shall
be established or expanded, within a horizontal distance of 10 feet from the top of the stream bank;
(4) For a lot where a single-family or and multi-family two-family residential use exists on the
Effective Date of this Ordinance, or is proposed, and that includes land within the Stream Buffer Area, 1
accessory structure with a floor area located at grade, or involving land disturbance for
footings and pilings totaling less than 20 square feet, may be permitted at least 20 feet horizontal distance
from the top of the stream bank;
Town of Rutland, Vermont Storm Water Ordinance Adopted April 2nd, 2019
Effective June 1st, 2019
Amended July 9th, 2019
16
a) On lots subject to subsection 4, tree houses and decks or similar structures, without at-grade floor area,
and involving land disturbance for footings or pilings totaling less than 20 square feet, may be sited at least
10 feet horizontal distance from the top of the stream bank;
(5) Any application for land disturbance or subdivision review involving a lot that includes land within
the Stream Buffer Area shall include provisions to demarcate, with sturdy plantings, fencing, or a
combination thereof, a boundary line shall be located no less than 10 feet horizontal distance from the top
of the stream bank;
a) This requirement shall not apply to the modification of an existing single-family or two-family
residential use,
(6) Any lots within the Stream Buffer Area that are subject to land disturbance on or after the
Effective Date of this Ordinance shall be seeded or stabilized. Lands lying within a horizontal distance of 10
feet from the top of stream bank shall be seeded with a combination of trees, shrubs, and plantings.
Where ground cover or grasses are planted, a naturalized mix of grasses suitable to the climate of Central
Vermont shall be utilized, rather than sod or standard turf grass, and the vegetation shall not be mowed
more than once per calendar year after establishment; and
(7) Where a lot abuts a hardened stream channel, or where impervious surfaces, structures, or
operation of use exist within 10 feet horizontal distance from the top of the stream bank on of the Effective
Date of this Ordinance, the Stormwater Commission may exempt the application from these standards
and requirements, provided other supplemental landscaping, tree planting, erosion control, are/or
stormwater treatment measures are implemented.
E. Review and Approval: The Stormwater Commission shall review each application for a Land
Disturbance Permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance, unless explicitly
exempted within this Ordinance. Within 45 days after receipt of a complete application, the reviewing
authority shall render a written decision.
(1) The Stormwater Commission may approve the application subject to such reasonable conditions
as it deems necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this Ordinance. Such conditions may include
the submission of a Simplified Erosion and Sediment Control Plan for land disturbance activity that has the
potential to cause significant erosion, result in the transport of sediment to surface waters or the MS4, or
to endanger property or public safety if not properly mitigated and controlled.
(2) The Stormwater Commission may require a permit holder to deposit a surety bond or irrevocable
letter of credit to guarantee a good faith execution of the plans approved pursuant to Article 6 and/or
Article 7 and/or any other permit condition(s).
F. Denial of Application: A denial of a Land Disturbance Permit application shall
include a statement of the reason(s) and shall inform the applicant of the procedure for submitting a
revised application to address any deficiencies.
Sec. 5-3 Appeal of Land Disturbance Permit Decision
A. A permit holder may appeal a decision of the Stormwater Commission to the Civil Division of the
Superior Court, Rutland Unit by filing a complaint and summons as set forth in V.R.C.P. 75(b).
Town of Rutland, Vermont Storm Water Ordinance Adopted April 2nd, 2019
Effective June 1st, 2019
Amended July 9th, 2019
17
B. The complaint and summons must be filed with the clerk of the Civil Division of the Superior Court,
Rutland Unit within 30 days of the date of the Stormwater Commission decision.
C. The Civil Division of the Superior Court, Rutland Unit shall conduct an appeal on the record in the
nature of certiorari pursuant to V.R.C.P. 75.
Article 6. Erosion and Sediment Control
Sec. 6-1. Applicability of Erosion and Sediment Control
A. Article 6 applies to those properties within the Town of Rutland that are located, in whole or in part,
in a Stream Buffer Area of the Moon Brook watershed as depicted in Appendix B, upon which occur any
land disturbance activity that causes or results in clearing, grading, and/or construction.
B. All projects undertaken by the Town of Rutland within a Stream Buffer Area shall be subject to the
applicable provisions of this Article.
C. Article 6 does not apply to land disturbance activity that is subject to the provisions of the Vermont
Construction General Permit 3-9020 (2006) for Stormwater Runoff from Construction Sites, as amended,
or which is otherwise exempted under this Ordinance.
D. Determination of Stream Buffer Area Boundaries: A Stream Buffer Area shall be defined as those
areas within 50 feet horizontal distance from the top of the stream bank. In any uncertainty exists as to the
boundary of the Stream Buffer Area, the Stormwater Commission shall determine the location of the
boundary.
Sec. 6-2. Prohibitions.
No person required to obtain a Land Disturbance Permit, Subdivision Approval or any other form of
approval for land disturbance activities, shall cause, allow or permit the release of any sediment created by
soil erosion resulting from these activities, to any other property, the MS4 or surface waters.
Sec. 6-3. Erosion and Sediment Control Requirements
In order to obtain a Land Disturbance Permit pursuant to Article 5, the applicant must comply with the
following erosion and sediment control provisions:
A. For any project that will disturb one acre or more of land, the applicant shall submit evidence of an
application to the Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation for coverage under the Vermont
Construction General Permit 3-9020 (2006) for Stormwater Runoff from Construction Sites, as amended,
or for an Individual Construction Stormwater Discharge Permit, whichever applies;
B. For any project that will disturb one acre or more of land under a Common Plan of Development,
but which is not subject to the requirements of Vermont Construction General Permit 3-9020 (2006), the
applicant shall submit a Major Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, as defined in this Ordinance, in
conjunction with the application for a Land Disturbance Permit;
Town of Rutland, Vermont Storm Water Ordinance Adopted April 2nd, 2019
Effective June 1st, 2019
Amended July 9th, 2019
18
C. Any project involving the clearing of existing vegetation, addition or modification of impervious
surface or structures, or disturbance of 5,000 SF or more of land surface area located within the Stream
Buffer Area of Moon Brook, as depicted on the map in Appendix B of this Ordinance, shall require a Land
Disturbance Permit and submittal of a Simplified Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, as defined in this
Ordinance; and
D. The Administrative Officer may require application for a Land Disturbance Permit and submittal of
a Simplified Erosion and Sediment Control Plan for any land disturbing activity that, in his or her sole
determination, has the potential to cause significant erosion, result in the transport of sediment to surface
waters or the MS4, or endanger property or public safety if not properly mitigated and controlled.
Sec. 6-4. Exemptions.
The discharge of any sediment from land disturbance activities approved by the Town to any other
property, the MS4 and/or surface waters is prohibited except as follows:
A. Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property or natural
resources; and
B. Any nursery and/or agricultural activity operating as a permitted principal or accessory use on a
parcel.
Sec. 6-5. Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
A. The requisite content of a Major Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, as applicable, shall be
governed by in Vermont General Permit 3-9020 for Stormwater Runoff from Construction Sites, as most
recently amended.
B. The content of a Simplified Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall be as set forth in the Vermont
Low Risk Site Handbook, as most recently amended.
C. Design Requirements. All erosion control practices, sediment control practices, waterway and
watercourse protection practices and construction site access practices shall be adequate to prevent
transportation of sediment from the site.
(1) For Major Erosion and Sediment Control Plans, all practices, at a minimum, shall meet the design
requirements set forth in the Vermont Handbook for Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control, as most
recently amended; and
(2) For Simplified Erosion and Sediment Control Plans, all practices, at a minimum, shall meet the
design requirements set forth in the Vermont Low Risk Site Handbook, as most recently amended.
D. In the event of a conflict between the aforementioned design requirements and any adopted
provisions or standards of the Town of Rutland, the stricter standards shall prevail.
Sec. 6-6. Access to Land Disturbance Activities.
The Administrative Officer shall be permitted to enter and inspect any land disturbance activities subject to
regulation under this Article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this Article.
Town of Rutland, Vermont Storm Water Ordinance Adopted April 2nd, 2019
Effective June 1st, 2019
Amended July 9th, 2019
19
Sec. 6-7. Inspection Requirements.
The Administrative Officer shall make inspections as hereinafter required and either shall approve that
portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to comply with the
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan as approved. To obtain inspections, the applicant or their agent shall
notify the Administrative Officer via email, telephone, or written communication at least 3 working days
before the following:
A. Start of construction, which shall include inspection of the limits of disturbance to ensure the limits
are correctly and fully demarcated on the site;
B. Installation of all sediment and erosion control measures;
C. Completion of site clearing;
D. Completion of rough grading;
E. Completion of final grading;
F. Close of construction season; and
G. Completion of final landscaping.
Sec. 6-8. Inspection Certifications.
In lieu of the inspection requirements outlined in Section 6-7, the Administrative Officer may allow or
require that the applicant or their agent provide a written certification from a professionally-licensed
engineer, or a certified professional in erosion and sediment control, certifying compliance with the
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan as approved upon completion of the activities enumerated in Section 6-
7 above. The applicant or their agent shall make regular inspections of all control measures in accordance
with the inspection schedule outlined in the Land Disturbance Permit, and shall provide written
certification to the Administrative Officer upon completion of each inspection, noting any remedial action
required to achieve compliance with the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
Article 7. Post-Construction Stormwater Management
Sec. 7-1. Applicability of Post-Construction Stormwater Management Requirements.
Article 7 applies to land development activities as enumerated in § 7-3, unless otherwise exempted under
§7.5. All projects undertaken by the Town of Rutland within a Stream Buffer Area shall be subject to the
applicable provisions of this Article.
Sec. 7-2. Prohibitions.
Town of Rutland, Vermont Storm Water Ordinance Adopted April 2nd, 2019
Effective June 1st, 2019
Amended July 9th, 2019
20
No person required to obtain a Land Disturbance Permit or Subdivision Approval shall improperly manage
stormwater runoff associated with these activities, and shall conform to the requirements of this Article.
Sec. 7-3. Stormwater Discharge Permits.
No person shall be granted a Land Disturbance Permit or Subdivision Approval or other approval for any
land development activities regulated under this Ordinance without compliance with the following
provisions:
A. Projects that result in one acre or more of total impervious surface shall require evidence of
application to the Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation for coverage under General Permit
3-9015 for Stormwater Discharges or an Individual Stormwater Discharge Permit, as applicable;
B. Projects resulting in one acre or more of land disturbance, whether as an individual project or
under a Common Plan of Development, but resulting in less than one acre of total impervious surface, shall
require approval by the Stormwater Commission of a Stormwater Management Plan equivalent to the
requirements of General Permit 3-9015 for Stormwater Discharges as enumerated in the Vermont
Stormwater Management Manual as most recently amended. Such approval shall be granted in
conjunction with issuance of a Land Disturbance Permit as set forth in Article 5 of this Ordinance; and
C. Any project that, in the opinion of the Administrative Officer has the potential to cause significant
erosion, result in the transport of sediment to surface waters or the MS4, or endanger property or public
safety as a result of the discharge of unmanaged stormwater runoff from impervious surfaces on the site
shall be regulated pursuant to a Stormwater Discharge Permit issued by the Stormwater Commission.
Sec. 7-4. Exemptions.
The following activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this Article:
A. Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property or natural
resources;
B. Farming or Agriculture, as defined in the Vermont Department of Agriculture Accepted
Agricultural Practice Regulations in force at the time of application; and
C. Forestry operations, as defined in 10 V.S.A. §2602(e).
Sec. 7-5. Stormwater Management Plans
A. Content. The content of a Stormwater Management Plan shall be as set forth in the Vermont
Stormwater Management Manual, as most recently amended.
B. Review and Approval. Review and approval of a Land Disturbance Permit that includes a
Stormwater Management Plan shall be as set forth in Article 5 of this Ordinance.
C. Design Standards. All stormwater management practices, sediment control practices, waterway
and watercourse protection practices and construction site access practices shall be adequate to prevent
transportation of sediment from the site. At a minimum, all stormwater management practices in a
Town of Rutland, Vermont Storm Water Ordinance Adopted April 2nd, 2019
Effective June 1st, 2019
Amended July 9th, 2019
21
Stormwater Management Plan shall meet the design requirements set forth in the Vermont Stormwater
Management Manual, as most recently adopted.
D. More Restrictive Standards Apply. In the event of a conflict between the aforementioned design
requirements and any adopted provisions or standards of the Town of Rutland, the stricter standards shall
prevail.
Sec. 7-6. Maintenance of Stormwater Management Practices
A Maintenance Plan shall be prepared and approved in conjunction with all Stormwater Management Plans.
The Maintenance Plan shall include detailed maintenance and repair procedures to ensure the continued
function of all stormwater management measures, including those landscaped or surfaced areas that are
integral to the function of the Plan. The Maintenance Plan also shall include:
A. Landscape Plan. The applicant must present a detailed plan for the management of vegetation at
the site after construction is finished, including identification of all landscaped areas or practices that are to
provide stormwater treatment and control, the responsible party for maintenance of vegetation at the site,
and practices that will be employed to ensure the healthy condition and function of landscaped areas;
B. Maintenance Easements. The applicant must ensure access to all stormwater treatment practices
at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all of the maintenance easements needed
on a permanent basis. These easements shall be recorded in the land records before the issuance of a Land
Disturbance Permit and shall run with the land;
C. Maintenance Agreement. The applicant must execute a Maintenance Agreement binding on all
subsequent owners of land served by a stormwater management measure included in the approved
Stormwater Management Plan. The Maintenance Agreement shall specify the required maintenance
measures for all stormwater treatment practices, including landscaped or surfaced areas providing
stormwater treatment and control, along with a maintenance schedule specifying when and how often
maintenance shall be performed on each stormwater treatment practice. The Maintenance Agreement is
not an agreement between the property owner and the Town, rather a standalone document that shall be
recorded in the land records of the Town of Rutland before the issuance of a Land Disturbance Permit; and
D. Maintenance Records. The holder of a Land Disturbance Permit shall maintain records that verify
that all required maintenance and inspections were performed in conformance with the approved
Stormwater Management Plan. Each of these records shall be maintained for no less than 3 years and shall
be made available to the Administrative Officer upon request.
Sec. 7-7. Access to Stormwater Treatment Practices.
Where stormwater treatment practices are being, or have been, constructed subject to regulation under
this Article, the Administrative Officer shall be permitted to enter and inspect any land disturbance
activities as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this Article. The Administrative
Officer shall be permitted to enter and inspect any premise subject to regulation under this Article as often
as may be necessary to determine compliance with this Article.
Sec. 7-8. Inspection Requirements.
Town of Rutland, Vermont Storm Water Ordinance Adopted April 2nd, 2019
Effective June 1st, 2019
Amended July 9th, 2019
22
The applicant shall notify the Administrative Officer in advance of the start of construction. The
Administrative Officer shall inspect the approved stormwater treatment practices during the construction
phase, and upon notification of completion. If any violations are found, the property owner shall be notified
in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. No additional work shall
proceed until any violations are corrected and all work previously completed has received approval from
the Administrative Officer.
Sec. 7-9. Inspection Certifications
In lieu of the requirements outlined in Section 7-9 of this Article, the Administrative Officer may, upon
request of the applicant, allow or require that the applicant or their agent provide a written certification
from a professionally licensed engineer certifying compliance with the Stormwater Management Plan as
approved.
Sec. 7-10. Surety Requirements
As a condition of approval and issuance of a Land Disturbance Permit, the Stormwater Commission require
the permit holder deposit a surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit to guarantee a good faith execution
of the approved Stormwater Management Plan and other related permit conditions. Such surety bond or
irrevocable letter of credit may be required to be in place for a period of up to three (3) years following
completion to ensure the establishment of landscaping and the proper performance of stormwater
treatment required by the permit.
Sec. 7-11. As-Built Drawings
Within thirty (30) days of substantial completion of a project, the permit holder shall submit as-built
drawings of all stormwater treatment practices to the Administrative Officer.
Article 8. Effective Date
Unless a petition is filed in accordance with 24 V.S.A. §1973, this Ordinance shall become effective 60 days
after the date of its adoption. If a petition is filed in accordance with 24 V.S.A. §1973, the Ordinance shall
take effect as provided by 24 V.S.A. §1973(e).
This Ordinance is hereby adopted this ______ day of ___________, 2019.
RUTLAND TOWN, VERMONT
SELECT BOARD
___________________________
Mary Ashcroft
Town of Rutland, Vermont Storm Water Ordinance Adopted April 2nd, 2019
Effective June 1st, 2019
Amended July 9th, 2019
23
___________________________
Joe Denardo
___________________________
John Paul Faignant
___________________________
Sharon Russell
___________________________
Josh Terenzini
Appendix A. Moon Brook Watershed
Town of Rutland, VT Map Produced: 2/8/2017
Mendon
Rutland City
Town of Rutland
Shrewsbury
Parcel Boundaries
Moon Brook Watershed
Stream Centerlines
Town Boundaries
Moon Brook
Mussey Brook
±
0 2,000 4,000 ft
Appendix B. Moon Brook River Corridor
Town of Rutland, VT Map Produced: 2/8/2017
Mendon
Rutland City
Town of Rutland
Shrewsbury
River Corridor
Parcel Boundaries
Moon Brook Watershed
Stream Centerlines
Town Boundaries
Moon Brook
Mussey Brook
±
0 2,000 4,000 ft
Town of Rutland Civil Ordinance
Variable Rate Pricing by Volume or Weight For
Municipal Solid Waste Collection
WHEREAS, the Town of Rutland has, by virtue of the authority granted in 24 V.S.A. §
1971 (Title 24, Chapter 59, Section 1971), and 24 V.S.A. § 2202a (a) (Title 24, Chapter 61,
Subchapter 8, Section 2202a), the power to adopt, amend, repeal, and enforce ordinances, and to
manage and regulate the solid waste disposal within its boundaries; and
WHEREAS, in accordance with 24 V.S.A. § 2202a (d) of Act 148, Vermont's Universal
Recycling law, which requires municipalities implement a variable rate pricing system by no
later than July 1, 2015; the Town of Rutland is implementing and requiring variable rate pricing
charges for volume or weight of the waste collected. This requirement to implement applies to all
solid waste haulers and facilities that accept and collect MSW from residential customers.
WHEREAS, variable rate pricing systems have been shown to be one of the most effective
mechanisms for decreasing the disposal of solid waste, increasing recycling and composting
rates, and increasing the diversion and reuse of valuable materials from the solid waste stream.
Further Variable rate pricing is more equitable or fair pricing for solid waste by charging based
on number of units of solid waste a residential customer produces.
NOW, THEREFORE, to encourage the responsible use of resources and the protection of the
environment, the Town of Rutland Select Board hereby adopts this ordinance requiring Variable
rate pricing charges for collection of MSW from residential customers in the Town of Rutland,
Vermont
Article I: PURPOSE; TITLE
Purpose
This ordinance is enacted to encourage the responsible use of resources and the protection of
the environment.
Title
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Ordinance requiring Variable rate
pricing."
Article II: DEFINITIONS
Collection - shall mean the gathering, pickup, acceptance, and allowance to drop off
municipal solid waste by both solid waste haulers and solid waste facilities such as transfer
Stations where drop off of municipal solid waste is permitted. b.
Facility - shall mean any site or structure used for treating, storing, processing, recycling,
transferring or disposal of municipal solid waste. A Facility may consist of a single or
several treatment, storage, recycling, or disposal locations.
Hauler - shall mean any person that collects, transports, or delivers solid waste generated
within a given area.
Municipal Solid Waste - hereafter referred to as "MSW", means combined household,
commercial, and industrial waste materials generated in a given area.
Variable rate pricing - means a fee structure that charges for MSW Collection based on its
weight or volume.
Article III: VARIABLE RATE PRICING
Haulers and facilities (hereafter "Service Providers") that provide Collection and drop-off
disposal services for MSW to residential customers shall charge these customers for this
service on the basis of the volume or weight of the MSW they produce, which is a pricing
system commonly referred to as Variable rate pricing.
Each Service Provided shall establish a unit-based price to be charged for the Collection /
drop-off disposal of each unit of MSW from residential customers; for example, a price per
pound is a price for each 30-gallon bag or 30-gallon container that is collected or disposed of
by a resident. Each larger unit of MSW, such as a 64-gallon container or a 50-gallon bag,
shall carry an independent price.
The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to prohibit any Service Provider from
establishing rules and regulations regarding the safe maximum weight of bags or container
which is overloaded, or which contains a MSW greater than the rated or specified volume or
weight of such bag or container or shall account for and bill the customer for the Collection
of such excess MSW.
Article IV: FLAT FEE
In addition to the unit-based price charged for unit of MSW, Service Providers may, but are
not required to, charge a flat fee to residential customers for the purpose of covering
operational costs for collecting, transporting, and disposing of MSW.
In the event that a Service Provider elects to establish a flat fee, all bills for services provided
to residential customers shall clearly show both the flat fee and the unit-based price to
maintain transparency.
Nothing herein shall prevent or prohibit a Service Provider from charging additional fees for
the Collection of materials such as food and yard residuals or bulky items; except however,
that no Service Provider may change a separate line-item fee on a bill to a residential
customer for the Collection of mandates recyclables after July 1, 2015, in accordance with
State statutes. A Service Provider may incorporate the cost of the Collection cost of
mandated recyclables into the Collection of solid waste and may adjust the charge for the
Collection of solid waste.
Article V: FILING OF PRICING SYSTEM
The Service Provider shall file and submit evidence of their variable rate pricing system,
including a breakdown of any and all fees including any flat fees, to the Town of Rutland or
shall file such evidence along with their license application.
Article VI: PENATIES AND CIVIL ENFORCEMENT
a. This ordinance is a civil ordinance and enforcement shall be brought in the judicial bureau
in accordance with 24 V.S.A. §§ 1974a et seq.
b.The penalties for violating this ordinance are as follows:
1st offense Notice of Violation (written warning - demanding Variable Pricing)
Civil Penalty Waiver Fee
2nd offense
$100.00 $50.00
3rd offense
$250.00 $125.00
4th offense $500.00 $300.00
The waiver fee is paid by a violator who admits or does not contest the violation.
Article VII: DESIGNATION OF ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL
For the purpose of this ordinance, the Select Board may designate any combination of the
following persons as enforcement personnel: members of the Select Board, the Town Health
Officer, The Town Administrator, The Town Attorney, the Town Constables, the Town
Police Department and any official with law enforcement authority under Vermont law.
Article VIII: REPEAL OF INCONSISTENT PROVISIONS
All ordinances or parts of ordinances, resolutions, regulations, or other documents
inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
Article IX: SEVERABILITY
This ordinance and its various parts, sentences, sections, and clauses are hereby declared to
be severable. If any part, sentence, section or clause is adjudged invalid, it is hereby provided
that the reminder of this ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
Article X: Effective Date
The ordinance shall become effective 60 days after the adoption date shown below.
Adopted this June 2, 2015.
1
Chapter 198
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Part 1
Parking Regulations
ARTICLE I
General Parking Provisions
§ 198-1. Purpose.
§ 198-2. Parking on traveled portion of road prohibited, exception.
§ 198-3. Removal; payment of charges.
§ 198-4. Charges and fees; lien against automobile.
§ 198-5. Liability and indemnification.
§ 198-6. When effective; erection of signs
§ 198-7. Effective date.
ARTICLE II
Parking Prohibitions
§ 198-8. Definitions.
§ 198-9. Stopping prohibited in specified places at all times.
§ 198-10. All-night parking; towing.
§ 198-11. Double parking.
§ 198-12. Parking of vehicles for sale.
§ 198-13. Repairing of vehicles in streets.
§ 198-14. Operation in loading zone limited.
§ 198-15. Designation of loading zones.
§ 198-16. Police, volunteer and emergency vehicles exempted.
§ 198-17. Violations and penalties.
§ 198-18. Removal of unauthorized vehicles; towing; charges; lien.
§ 198-19. Emergency declarations.
§ 198-20. Effective date.
Part 2
Yield Signs
ARTICLE III
Yield Sign Regulations
§ 198-21. Authority and purpose.
§ 198-22. Definitions.
§ 198-23. Operation at intersection controlled by yield sign.
§ 198-24. Designation of intersections controlled by yield signs.
§ 198-25. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 198-26. Operation of emergency vehicles.
§ 198-27. Severability.
§ 198-28. When effective.
2
Part 3
Stop Signs
ARTICLE IV
Stop Sign Regulations
§ 198-29. Authority and purpose.
§ 198-30. Definitions.
§ 198-31. Operation at intersection controlled by stop sign.
§ 198-32. Designation of intersections controlled by stop signs.
§ 198-33. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 198-34. Operation of emergency vehicles.
§ 198-35. Severability.
§ 198-36. When effective.
Part 4
Speed Limits
ARTICLE V
Speed Limit Regulations
§ 198-37. Definitions.
§ 198-38. Designation of speed limits.
§ 198-39. Signs.
§ 198-40. Emergency vehicles.
§ 198-41. Violations and penalties.
§ 198-42. Repeal of prior speeding regulations.
§ 198-43. Severability.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen as indicated in part histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Part 1
Parking Regulations
[Adopted 10-3-1977]
ARTICLE 1
General Parking Provisions
§ 198-1. Purpose.
After due consideration, based upon studies, surveys and investigations, as aforesaid, the
Selectmen of the Town of Rutland in session hereby declare, determine, and fix the parking
for motor vehicles on all town roads and highways within the limits of said town as follows.
3
§ 198-2. Parking on traveled portion of road prohibited, exception.
A. motor vehicle on the traveled portion of any street, town road or highway within the limits
of the Town of Rutland at any time,
B. Excepting here from, however, all motor vehicles owned, operated or controlled by persons
attending the critically ill on emergency calls and motor vehicles of persons attending
church services shall be exempted.
§ 198-3. Removal; payment of charges.
Motor vehicles parked or standing on the streets or traveled portions of highways may be
removed or cause to be removed from the street, town road or highway by an official of
said town or its agents to a place of storage. No person shall remove any vehicle from
such place of storage without first having paid all towing and storage charges hereinafter
defined.
§ 198-4. Charges and fees; lien against automobile.
The owner of any automobile removed to a place of storage in accordance with this
article shall pay to the Treasurer of the Town of Rutland prior to removing said
automobile a towage charge of $35 and storage charges at the rate of $3 per day. A
lien in favor of the Town of Rutland is hereby imposed against any such automobile for
the collection of any sums due for towage and storage.
§ 198-5. Liability and Indemnification.
Officers and town officials shall be exempt from damages incurred to motor vehicles
removed under this section, and those persons other t h a n town officers shall be insured
and are deemed to be self-insured for liability for any damages incurred to motor vehicles
which are removed under this article.
§ 198-6. When effective; erection of signs.
The aforesaid parking regulations and limits shall prevail at all times on and after the
effective date of this article and ordinance (unless otherwise changed or amended by
legal means) and when proper signs are erected giving motorists and other users of said
highways warning and notice thereof.
§ 198-7. Effective date.
This regulation and ordinance shall take effect on December 5, 1977.
4
ARTICLE II
Parking Prohibitions [Added 4-24-1989]
§ 198-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PARK or PARKING — The stopping or standing of a motor vehicle, whether occupied or
unoccupied, attended, or unattended, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers or goods, or in obedience to
police officers or traffic regulations, signs or signals, or while making emergency repairs
if disabled, while arrangements are being made to move such vehicle.
§ 198-9. Stopping prohibited in specified places at all times.
No operator or driver of any motor vehicle shall park the same in any of the following
places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
direction of a police officer or official traffic sign:
A. Within 15 feet of an intersection;
B. Five feet from a cross walk unless specifically designated for parking;
C. Within 10 feet of a hydrant, unless specifically designated for parking;
D. In front of a driveway;
E. On any sidewalk;
F. Abreast of another vehicle in any street;
G. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping,
standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
§ 198-10. All-night parking; towing.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to park a motor vehicle anywhere
else on a highway or parking lot of the Town of Rutland between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 6:00 a.m., from November 1 until April 1, except where specifically
permitted and appropriately signed. A motor vehicle parked in violation of this town
ordinance may be towed away by order of the police of said Town of Rutland.
§ 198-11. Double parking.
Double parking on any street is prohibited at all times.
§ 198-12. Parking of vehicles for sale.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon a street any vehicle displayed for sale.
5
§ 198-13. Repairing of vehicles in
It shall be unlawful for any person or garage, repair or automobile service business to park
any motor vehicle in a street or highway for the purpose of assembling, dismantling or
repairing any vehicle.
§ 198-14. Operation in loading zone
No operator of a noncommercial motor vehicle shall park in an area designed as a loading
zone. Commercial operators may use this area for loading and unloading of merchandise
only. No commercial vehicle shall be permitted to park more than 30 minutes or overnight
in said area.
§ 198-15. Designation of loading zones.
Loading zones signs shall be erected in the following areas:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 198-16. Police, volunteer, and emergency vehicles exempted.
Police, volunteer, and other emergency vehicles shall be exempt from the provisions of this
article.
§ 198-17. Violations and penalties.
A person who violates any provision of this article shall be fined not more than $100. A
separate violation shall occur for each period of parking greater than the parking time
allowed in a zone.
§ 198-18. Removal of unauthorized vehicles; towing; charges; lien.
Enforcement officers may cause any motor vehicle parking in violation of this article, or
parked on privately owned land without authorization, including by illustration and not
limitation private parking lots, drives and ways, to be removed at the expense of the owner
of the vehicle. The owner of the motor vehicle shall pay to the town the reasonable cost of
towing as determined by the Selectmen and the cost of storage charges not to exceed $2
per day. The town shall have a lien upon the motor vehicles so removed until such towing
and storage charges are paid in full, which lien shall be in addition to any criminal penalty
imposed by this article.
6
§ 198-19. Emergency declarations.
In an emergency Selectmen may impose a parking ban on designated streets or may waive
the prohibition of parking on a designated street, for a period of time not to exceed one
week.
§ 198-20. Effective date.
This article shall become effective on June 24, 1989.
Part 2
Yield Signs
[Adopted 3-20-1995]
ARTICLE III
Yield Sign Regulations
§ 198-21. Authority and purpose.
Pursuant to 23 V.S.A. § 1008, the following special regulations are adopted by the Town
of Rutland to regulate the operation and use of motor vehicles at intersections controlled
by yield right-of-way signs (hereinafter "yield" signs) within the limits of the Town of
Rutland.
§ 198-22. Definitions.
Unless context otherwise requires in statutes relating to motor vehicles and the enforcement
of law regulating vehicles, the terms used in these special regulations shall be defined as
provided by 23 V.S.A. § 4.
§ 198-23. Operation at intersection controlled by yield sign.
A. Except when directed to proceed by an enforcement officer or traffic-control signal, every
driver of a vehicle approaching a yield intersection indicated by a yield sign shall, in
obedience to such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and, if
required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, then at the point
nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway.
B. After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate
hazard during the time such driver is moving across or within the intersection; provided,
however, that if such a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the intersection,
after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision shall be deemed prima facie
evidence of his or her failure to yield right-of-way.
7
§ 198-24. Designation of intersections controlled by yield signs.
Yield signs shall be erected on the following streets for the regulation of traffic at the
following intersections:
Name of Street Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Blueberry Lane South Chittenden Road
Blueberry Lane South Prospect Hill Road
East Proctor Road [Amended 8-12-2003] South Grand Ledge Estates
Karen Drive North Connor Drive
Karen Drive South Connor Drive
Nancy Lane East Susan Lane
Sunset Lane East Victoria Drive
US Route 7 South South Middle Road
§ 198-25. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. A violation of a special regulation regarding yield signs shall constitute a "traffic violation"
as defined in 23 V.S.A.2302
B. A violation of a special regulation regarding yield signs shall constitute a violation of 23
V.S.A. 1008.
C. A violation of a special regulation regarding yield signs shall be enforced in the Vermont
Traffic and Municipal Ordinance Bureau pursuant to Chapter 24 of Title 23.
D. A person who violates a special regulation regarding yield signs shall be fined $50.
E. Upon conviction, points for the violation of 23 V.S.A. § 1008 shall be assessed against the
violator's license to operate a motor vehicle as required by 23 V.S.A. 2502, and the
violator's license to operate a motor vehicle may be suspended pursuant to 23 V.S.A. 2505
and 2506.
§ 198-26. Operation of emergency vehicles.
A. These special regulations regarding yield signs shall not apply to the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle as defined in 23 V.S.A. 4(1) where:
1. The vehicle is operated by or under the direction of an on-duty law enforcement officer
in the performance of his or her duty.
2. A Fire Department vehicle is travelling to, but not returning from, a fire alarm; or
3. A public or private ambulance is travelling on, but not returning from, an emergency
call.
B. The foregoing exemptions shall relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from
the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons.
C. The foregoing exemptions granted to the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle shall
apply only when the vehicle is making use of audible or visual signals meeting the
requirements of Title 23 of the Vermont Statutes Annotated.
8
§ 198-27. Severability.
The provisions of these special regulations regarding yield signs are severable. If any
provision of these special regulations or their application to any person or circumstances
or within any part of the town is held invalid, illegal, or unenforceable by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the invalidity shall not apply to any other portion of these special
regulations which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application thereof.
§ 198-28. When effective.
These special regulations shall become effective as of the date of adoption by the Board of
Selectmen.
Part 3
Stop Signs
[Adopted 2-21-1995]
ARTICLE IV
Stop Sign Regulations
§ 198-29. Authority and purpose.
Pursuant to 23 V.S.A. 1008, the following special regulations are adopted by the Town of
Rutland to regulate the operation and use of motor vehicles at intersections controlled by
stop signs within the limits of the Town of Rutland.
§ 198-30. Definitions.
Unless context otherwise requires in statutes relating to motor vehicles and the enforcement
of law regulating vehicles, the terms used in these special regulations shall be defined as
provided by 23 V.S.A. 4.
§ 198-31. Operation at intersection controlled by stop sign.
Except when directed to proceed by an enforcement officer or traffic-control signal, every
driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop at a
clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver
has view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle
which has entered the intersection from another highway, or which is approaching so
closely on said highway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such
driver is moving across or within the intersection.
9
§ 198-32. Designation of intersections controlled by stop signs.
Stop signs shall be erected on the following streets for the regulation of traffic at the
following intersections:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Abbey Lane [Amended 8-24-2015] South McKinley Avenue
Barrett Hill Road [Amended 8-24-2015] All (4-way) Barrett Hill Road
Barrett Hill Road [Amended 8-24-2015] East North Campbell Road
Barrett Hill Road [Amended 8-24-2015] West North Campbell Road
Bellevue Lane North US Route 4 East
Belock Drive West Quaterline Road
Birch Knoll Road [Amended 8-24-2015] West Post Road Extension
Blue Ridge Drive [Amended 8-24-2015] North Post Road
Blue Ridge Drive [Amended 8-24-2015] North Linda Drive
Boardman Hill East Quaterline Road
Briarwood Lane [Amended 8-24-2015] East McKinley Avenue
Cannon Drive [Amended 8-24-2015] East Townline Road
Carriage Runn West US Route 7 North
Cedar Avenue [Amended 8-24-2015] West North Grove Street
Cedar Avenue [Amended 8-24-2015] East US Route 7 South
Chasanna Drive South Post Road
Cold River Road East Stratton Road and Cold River Road
Colonial Drive [Amended 8-24-2015] West East Pittsford Road
Columbus Drive [Amended 8-24-2015] South Killington Avenue
Connor Drive East Town Line Road
Cop John Drive [Amended 8-24-2015] South Holiday Drive
Cop John Drive [Amended 8-24-2015] North US Route 7 South
Countryside Drive [Amended 8-24-2015] West East Pittsford Road
Curtis Brook Road South East Pittsford Road
Depot Lane North US Business Route 4
East Mountain View Drive [Amended 8-24-2015] North Gleason Road
East Pittsford Road [Amended 8-24-2015] West US Route 7 North
East Proctor Road [Amended 8-24-2015] South Maplewood Park
East Proctor Road North Maplewood Park
East Proctor Road South US Business Route 4
East Proctor Road West US Route 3
Easy Street [Amended 8-24-2015] North Post Road
Elbern Avenue [Amended 8-24-2015] North Gleason Road
Farrell Road [Amended 8-24-2015] East Cop John Drive
Flory Heights [Amended 8-24-2015] East Barrett Hill Road
Forest Way East Post Road
Georgeanna Boulevard [Amended 8-24-2015] West East Pittsford Road
Gleason Road East Town Line Road
Gloria Drive East Blueridge Drive
Grover Drive [Amended 8-24-2015] West Countryside Drive
Hawley Lane [Amended 8-24-2015] North Post Road
Hitzel Terrace [Amended 8-24-2015] North Killington Avenue
Killington Avenue East Town Line Road
10
Lester Lane [Amended 8-24-2015] East North Grove Street
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Lincoln Avenue East US Route 7 North
Linda Drive [Amended 8-24-2015] West Blue Ridge Drive
Lola Drive North East Pittsford Road
Maplewood Park West East Proctor Road
McKinley Avenue East US Route 7 North
McKinley Avenue West North Grove Street
McKinley Lane East North Grove Street
Meadow Way East Post Road
Nancy Lane [Amended 8-24-2015] West Susan Lane
North Campbell Road [Amended 8-24-2015] South Barrett Hill Road
North Campbell Road [Amended 8-24-2015] North Barrett Hill Road
Northwood Park Road [Amended 8-24-2015] East Post Road Extension
Old Falls Road Northwest US Business Route 4
Old Route 4A [Amended 8-24-2015] East West Proctor Road
Old Route 4A Southwest US Business Route 4
Old Wood Road East North Grove Street
Pamela Drive [Amended 8-24-2015] East North Grove Street
Park Way East Post Road
Penock Lane [Amended 5-17-2005] West Wynnridge Drive
Pinecrest Road [Amended 8-24-2015] East East Pittsford Road
Pinnacle Ridge East US Route 7 North
Pinnacle Ridge West North Grove Street
Post Road Extension South Park Lane
Post Road North Post Road Extension
Post Road South US Route 4 East
Prior Drive [Amended 8-24-2015] South US Route 4 East
Prospect Hill Road West US Route 7 North
Prospect Hill Road [Amended 8-24-2015] South East Pittsford Road
Quality Lane North Cold River Road
Quarterline Road North Campbell Road
Quarterline Road South Belock Drive and Boardman Hill
Ranbury Road East US Route 7 South
Roy Avenue West Post Road
Russell Drive [Amended 8-24-2015] West East Pittsford Road
Russell Drive [Amended 8-24-2015] South East Pittsford Road
Sand Hill Circle [Amended 8-24-2015] West East Pittsford Road
Simmons Avenue Southwest US Business Route 4
Stratton Road South Cold River Road
Sugarwood Hill Road South Sugarwood Hill Road
Sugarwood Hill Road South US Route 7 North
Sunset Drive [Amended 8-24-2015] North Killington Avenue
Susan Drive North East Pittsford Road
Susan Lane [Amended 8-24-2015] South Killington Avenue
Susan Lane [Amended 8-24-2015] North Westridge Terrace
Susan Lane [Amended 8-24-2015] South Nancy Lane
Timber Lane [Amended 8-24-2015] East Post Road
Town Line Road East Town Line Road
11
Townline Road [Amended 8-24-2015] South Killington Avenue
Travis Terrace [Amended 8-24-2015] East Quarterline Road
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Victoria Drive [Amended 8-24-2015] North Killington Avenue
Viewmont Drive [Amended 8-24-2015] East North Grove Street
West Proctor Road South US Business Route 4
Westridge Terrace [Amended 8-24-2015] East Susan Lane
Wynnridge Drive [Amended 8-24-2015] West East Pittsford Road
§ 198-33. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. A violation of a special regulation regarding stop signs shall constitute a "traffic violation"
as defined in 23 V.S.A.
B. A violation of a special regulation •regarding stop signs shall constitute a violation of 23
V.S.A. 1008.
C. A violation of a special regulation regarding stop signs shall be enforced in the Vermont
Traffic and Municipal Ordinance Bureau pursuant to Chapter 24 of Title 23.
D. A person who violates a special regulation regarding stop signs shall be fined $50.
E. Upon conviction, points for the violation of 23 V.S.A. 1008 shall be assessed against the
violator's license to operate a motor vehicle as required by 23 V.S.A. 2502, and the
violator's license to operate a motor vehicle may be suspended pursuant to 23 V.S.A. 2505
and 2506.
§ 198-34. Operation of emergency vehicles.
A. These special regulations regarding stop signs shall not apply to the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle as defined in 23 V.S.A. 4(1) where:
1. The vehicle is operated by or under the direction of an on-duty law enforcement officer
in the performance of his or her duty;
2. A Fire Department vehicle is travelling to, but not returning from, a fire alarm; or
3. A public or private ambulance is travelling on, but not returning from, an emergency call.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may proceed
past a stop sign without stopping, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe
operation.
C. The foregoing exemptions granted to the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle shall
apply only when the vehicle is making use of audible or visual signals meeting the
requirements of Title 23 of the Vermont Statutes Annotated.
§ 198-35. Severability.
The provisions of these special regulations regarding stop signs are severable. If any
provision of these special regulations or their application to any person or circumstances
or within any part of the town is held invalid, illegal or unenforceable by a court of
12
competent jurisdiction, the invalidity shall not apply to any other portion of these special
regulations which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application thereof.
§ 198-36. When effective.
These special regulations shall become effective as of the date of adoption by the Board of
Selectmen.
Part 4
Speed Limits
[Adopted 8-3-1998]
ARTICLE V
Speed Limit Regulations
§ 198-37. Definitions.
As used in this Part, the following term shall have the meaning indicated:
MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes all vehicles propelled or drawn by power other than
muscular power.
§ 198-38. Designation of speed limits.
An operator of a motor vehicle shall not operate or drive a motor vehicle at a rate of speed
greater than the designated speed on the following designated streets or highways:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(MPH)
Location
Annette Terrace
Town Highway 74
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 9 and extending
southeast .30 miles to the intersection with Town Highway 77
Avenue A
Town Highway 40
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 39 and extending
north 0.12 miles and terminating in a dead end
Avenue B
Town Highway 41
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 39 and extending
north 0.12 miles and terminating in a dead end
Barrette Hill Road
Town Highways 28 and 21
[Amended 9-28-1998]
25
Beginning at the Rutland City line and extending 0.39 miles to the
intersection with Town Highway 43
Bellevue Lane
Town Highway 63
[Amended 9-28-1998]
35
Beginning at the intersection with US Route 4 East extending
southeast 0.18 miles and terminating in a dead end
Birch Knoll Road
Town Highway 20
35
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 16 extending
east 0.22 miles and terminating in a dead end
Bittersweet Lane
Town Highway 88
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 4 and extending
south 0.14 miles and terminating in a dead end
13
Blue Ridge Drive
Town Highway 55
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 9 and extending
south 0.40 miles and terminating in a dead end
Blueberry Lane
Town Highway 14
[Amended 9-28-1998]
35
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 13 and extending
north 0.43 miles and terminating in a dead end
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(MPH)
Location
Boardman Hill Road
Town Highway 35
35
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 22 and extending
west 0.35 miles to the West Rutland Town line
Briarwood Lane
Town Highway 57
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 19 and extending
southwest 0.14 miles and terminating in a dead end
Business Route 4
[Amended 3-24-2015]
35
Beginning at the Rutland City / Rutland Town Municipal boundary
line, which is located which is located 820 feet west of the Ripley
Road / Business Route 4 intersection, extending 0.62 miles to the
western section of Town Highway 43
Business Route 4
[Amended 3-24-2015] 40
Beginning at the western section of Town Highway 43 and extending
west .038 miles to the Rutland Town / West Rutland municipal
boundary
Campbell Road
Town Highways 21 and 31
[Amended 9-28-1998]
35
Beginning at the Rutland City line and extending north 1.7 miles and
terminating ac the intersection with Town Highway 28
Cedar Avenue
Town Highway 12
[Amended 9-28-1998]
35
Beginning at the intersection with US Route 7 North extending west
0.48 miles to the intersection with Town Highway 4
Chasanna Drive
Town Highway 37
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 9 extending
northeast 62 miles and terminating in a dead end
Cheney Hill Lane
Town Highway 103
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 11 and extending
north 0.10 miles and terminating in a dead end
Cold River Road
Town Highway 5
[Amended 9-28-1998]
35
Beginning at the intersection of U.S. Route 7 South, extending 1.78
miles southeast to the Clarendon Town line
Colonial Drive
Town Highways 78 and 98
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 1 and extending
southeast 0.45 miles to the intersection with Town Highway 98 then
east 1 mile to the intersection with Town Highway 78
Columbus Drive
Town Highway 46
[Amended 6-27-2006]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 10 extending north
0.06 miles to the intersection with Town Highway 45
Connor Drive
Town Highway 65
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 8 extending west
0.24 miles to the intersection with Town Highway 75
Countryside Drive
Town Highway 72
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 1 extending east –
north 0.42 miles to the intersection with Town Highway 48
14
Creek Road
Town Highway 2
35
From the Clarendon Town line north 1.04 miles to the Rutland City
line
Crestway Drive
Town Highway 71
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 61 and extending
west 0.27 miles and terminating in a dead end
Crossman Drive
Town Highway 86
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 8 and extending
west 0.08 miles and terminating in a dead end
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(MPH)
Location
Curtis Brook Road
Town Highway 105
[Amended 6-18-2002]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 1 and extending
north ___ to a dead end
David Road
Town Highway 96
[Amended 9-28-1998]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 45 extending north
0.27 miles to the intersection with Town Highway 95
Deborah Drive
Town Highway __
[Amended 6-27-2006]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway __ extending north
___ to the intersection with Town Highways 45 and 47
Depot Lane
Town Highway 29
35
Beginning at the intersection with U.S. Business Route 4 and
extending south 0.10 miles and terminating in a dead end
East Mountain View Drive
Town Highway 93
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 10 and extending
south 0.27 miles and terminating in a dead end
East Pittsford Road
Town Highway 1
[Amended 9-28-1998]
35
From U.S. Route 7 North 3.20 miles to the Pittsford Town line
East Proctor Road
Town Highway 59
[Amended 9-28-1998]
25
From U.S. Business Route 4 west, north 0.59 miles to Route 3
East Ridge Terrace
Town Highway 45
[Amended 6-27-2006]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 46 extending
northwest 0.35 miles to the intersection with Town Highway 47
Easy Street
Town Highway 56
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 9 and extending
south 0.17 miles and terminating in a dead end
Elbern Avenue,
Town Highway 50
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 10 and extending
south 0.16 miles and terminating in a dead end
Farnham Lane,
Town Highway 69
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 66 extending east
0.09 miles and terminating in a dead end
Flory Heights,
Town Highway 38
[Amended 6-14-2016]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 21 and extending
north - southeast - west 0.40 miles to the intersection with Town
Highway 21
Forest Way,
Town Highway 34
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 30 and extending
west 0.08 miles and terminating in a dead end
Georganna Drive,
Town Highway 78
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 1 extending
southeast 0.17 miles to the intersection with Town Highway 98
15
[Amended 10-18-2018]
Gleason Road
Town Highway 10
35
From the Rutland City line east 0.55 miles to the Town of Mendon
line
Gloria Drive
Town Highway 77
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 9 extending
southeast 0.38 miles to the intersection with Town Highway 55
Heather Lane
Town Highway 101
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 86 extending
southwest 0.29 miles and terminating in a dead end
Hitzel Terrace
Town Highway 66
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 10 extending south
0.43 miles and terminating in a dead end
Janice Avenue
Town Highway 47
[Amended 6-27-2006]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 45 extending north
0.17 miles to the intersection with Town Highway 97
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(MPH)
Location
Karen Drive
Town Highway 75
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 65 extending 0.26
miles to the north, west and south to the intersection with Town
Highway 65 and then extending 2.2 miles south, east and north to the
intersection with Town Highway 75
Killington Avenue
Town Highway 10
35
From the Rutland City line east 0.47 miles to the Mendon Town line
Lester Lane
Town Highway 105
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 4 extending west
0.12 miles and terminating in a dead end
Lilac Lane
Town Highway 68
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 66 extending east
.08 miles and terminating in a dead end
Linda Drive
Town Highway 62
35
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 55 extending east
— south 0.29 miles to the intersection with Town Highway 55
Lynette Drive
Town Highway 99
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 75 extending
northeast 0.24 miles to the intersection with Town Highway 75
Maplewood Drive
Town Highway 39
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 59 extending east
0.06 miles and terminating in a dead end
McKinley Avenue
Town Highways 19 and 18
[Amended 9-28-1998]
35
From U.S. Route 7 North, west 1.96 miles to a dead end
Middle Road
Town Highway 3 35
Beginning at the intersection with the Clarendon Town line and
extending northeast 0.32 miles to the intersection with US Route 7
South
Nancy Lane
Town Highway __
[Amended 6-27-2006]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway __ and extending
to the intersection with Town Highway __
North End Drive
Town Highway 95
[Amended 9-28-1998]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 94 extending east
0.04 miles to the intersection with Town Highway 96
16
North Grove Street
Town Highway 4
35
From the Rutland City line, north 2.75 miles to the Town of Pittsford
Town line
Northwood Park Road
Town Highway __
[Amended 8-8-2006]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 16 and extending
__ to __
Oak Ridge Drive
Town Highway 91
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 64 extending
northeast 0.06 miles and terminating in a dead end
Old Route 4
Town Highway 42
[Amended 9-28-1998]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 6 west 0.16 miles
to the intersection with U.S. Business Route 4
Old Wood Road
Town Highway 87
35
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 4 extending
southwest 0.21 miles and terminating in a dead end
Ox Yoke Drive
Town Highway 92
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 51 extending
north 0.31 miles and terminating in a dead end
Pamela Drive
Town Highway 52
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 4 extending east
0.06 miles then south 0.13 and-then east 0.10 miles to the
intersection with Town Highway 4
Penock Lane
Town Highway __
[Amended 5-16-2005]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Wynnridge Drive extending ____
to the end of Penock Lane
Perkins Road
Town Highway 26
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the Rutland City line and extending east 0.30 miles and
terminating in a dead end
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(MPH)
Location
Pinnacle Ridge Road
Town Highway 11
35
Beginning at the intersection with US Route 7 North extending
west 0.31 miles to the intersection with Town Highway 4
Post Road
Town Highway 9
(school district)
[Amended 12-18-2001]
25
Between a point .40 miles east of U.S. Route 7 North and a point 1
mile east of U.S. Route 7 North, whenever the lights on the 25 miles
per hour speed limit signs in the vicinity of the School District are
flashing.
Post Road
Town Highway 9
[Amended 12-18-2001]
35
Town Highway #9 from U.S. R. 7 North to U.S. Rt. 4 East, except
whenever the lights on the 25 miles per hour speed limit signs
between a point .40 miles east of U.S. Rt. 7 North and a point 1 mile
east of U.S. Rt. 7 North are flashing, at which time the speed limit
for the section of Post Road between a point .40 miles east of U.S.
Rt. 7 North and a point 1 mile east of U.S. Rt. 7 North shall be 25
miles per hour as set forth above.
Post Road Extension
Town Highway 16
[Amended 8-24-2006]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 9 extending north
0.32 miles and terminating in a dead end
Prospect Hill Road
Town Highways 13 and 14
[Amended 9-28-1998]
35
Beginning at the intersection with US Route 7 North and extending
east 0.70 miles and south 0.38 miles to the intersection with Town
Highway 1
Quality Lane
Town Highway 83
35
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 5 extending
southeast 0.47 miles and terminating in a dead end
17
Quaterline Road,
Town Highway 22
[Amended 9-28-1998]
35
Beginning at the Rutland City line extending south 1.1 miles and
terminating where Town Highway 22 becomes a Class IV roadway
Ranbury Road
Town Highway 67
[Amended 9-28-1998]
35
Beginning at the intersection with U.S. Route 7 South extending
west 0.32 miles
Roy Avenue
Town Highway 25
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 30 extending eastnorth
0.29 miles and terminating at the intersection with Town
Highway 30
Russell Drive
Town Highway __
[Amended 8-8-2006]
35
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 72 and extending
___ to the intersection with Town Highway 1
Ruth Avenue
Town Highway 97
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 45 extending
north 0.14 miles and terminating in a dead end
Sand Hill Circle
Town Highway __
[Amended 6-13-2006]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 1 and extending
____ to the intersection with Town Highway 1
Seward Road
Town Highway 36
[Amended 9-28-1998]
35
Beginning at the intersection with US Route 7 South extending east
0.26 miles and terminating in a dead end
Simons Avenue
Town Highway 43
[Amended 9-28-1998]
35
Beginning at the intersection with US Business Route 4 and
extending east and north 0.03 miles to the intersection with US
Business Route 4
Stratton Road
Town Highway 27
35
Beginning at the intersection of Town Highway 5, extending north
0.52 miles to the Rutland City line
Sugarwood Hill Road
Town Highway 64
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with U.S. Route 7 North extending
north then east then west 1.12 miles to the intersection with U.S.
Route 7 North
Sunset Drive
Town Highway 70
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 10 and extending
southeast 0.44 miles to the intersection with Town Highway 10
Sunset Lane
Town Highway 53
35
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 82 extending
west — south 0.35 miles and terminating in a dead end
Susan Lane
Town Highway 45
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 10 and extending
northeast 0.38 miles to the intersection with Town Highway 97
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(MPH)
Location
Tamarack Lane
Town Highway 15
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 1 and extending
north 0.33 miles and terminating in a dead end
Timber Lane
Town Highway 33
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 51 extending
southwest 0.21 miles and terminating in a dead end
Town Line Road
Town Highway 8
[Amended 9-28-1998]
35
From U.S. Route 4 East, south 1.90 miles to the intersection with
Town Highway 10
18
U.S. Route 7 North
[Amended 3-24-2015] 40
Beginning at Town Highway 1, extending south .9 miles to Rutland
Town / Rutland City municipal boundary line
U.S Route 4 East
[Amended 3-24-2015]
35
Beginning at Town Highway 10 extending 2,875 feet to the east,
Norman Rockwell Museum
U.S. Route 4 East
[Amended 3-24-2015] 40
Beginning at a distance of 2,875 feet from the intersection with
Town Highway 10 extending 1.3 miles east to the Rutland Town /
Mendon municipal boundary line
U.S. Route 7 South
[Amended 3-24-2015] 45
Beginning at the Clarendon / Rutland Town municipal boundary line
extending north 3,588 feet to Diamond Run Mall Place, northern
most ingress/egress
U.S. Route 7 South
[Amended 3-24-2015] 40
Beginning at the intersection of Diamond Run Mall Place, northern
most ingress/egress extending .7 miles to the north to the Rutland
Town / Rutland City municipal boundary
Victoria Drive
Town Highways 53 and 82
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 10 and extending
south, west, and north to the intersection with Town Highway 53
Viewmont Drive
Town Highway 61
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 4 and extending
west — south 0.28 miles and terminating in a dead end
West Proctor Road
Town Highway 6
[Amended 9-28-1998]
35
From U.S. Business Route 4 West, north 0.88 miles to the Proctor
Town line
West Ridge Terrace
Town Highway 94
[Amended 10-18-2018]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 45 and extending
west-north 0.50 miles to the intersection with Town Highway 95
Windcrest Road
Town Highway 35
35
Beginning at the intersection with US Route 7 South and extending
east 0.60 miles and terminating in a dead end
Winkfield Road
Town Highway 102
35
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 11 and extending
south 0.08 miles and terminating in a dead end
Wynnridge Drive
Town Highway __
[Amended 5-16-2005]
25
Beginning at the intersection with Town Highway 1 and extending
__ to the end of Wynnridge Drive.
§ 198-39. Signs.
Signs indicating the speed limits provided for in this Part 4 shall be posted conspicuously
within the highway limits at the point where such speed limits become effective under
this Part 4.
§ 198-40. Emergency vehicles.
The speed limitations set forth in this Part 4 shall not apply to vehicles when operated
with due care for safety under the direction of law enforcement officers in the
performance of their duties, nor to public or private ambulances when travelling in
emergencies.
19
§ 198-41. Violations and penalties.
A person who violates any provision of this Part 4 shall be fined not more than $100. In
addition, the operator's license of any violator may be suspended pursuant to 23 V.S.A. §
§ 2505-2506.
§ 198-42. Repeal of prior speeding regulations.
Any other speeding regulations in the •Town of Rutland which are applicable to the
aforementioned highways and streets are repealed as of the effective date of this Part 4.
However, any violation which occurred prior to the effective date of this Part 4 may be
prosecuted under the provisions of any applicable prior ordinance, as though such earlier
ordinance had not been repealed.
§ 198-43. Severability.
If any part of this Part 4 is held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remaining part shall be severable and shall continue in force and effect.
Page 1 of 10
WATER Chapter 206
WATER ARTICLE I
Allocation; Utilization Permits
§ 206-1. Definitions.
§ 206-2. Determination of allocation.
§ 206-3. Notice of determination of allocation.
§ 206-4. Waiver of allocation procedures.
§ 206-5. Reallocation.
§ 206-6. Review of determination of allocation.
§ 206-7. Increase of usage.
§ 206-8. Excessive use prior to determination of allocation.
§ 206-9. Utilization permit required.
§ 206-10. Issuance or denial of utilization permit.
§ 206-11. Standards for issuance of permit.
§ 206-12. Conditions of permit.
§ 206-13. Conditions on utilization.
§ 206-14. Expiration of permit; extensions.
§ 206-15. Consideration of permit applications in filing priority order.
§ 206-16. Manner of giving notice.
§ 206-17. Filing fees.
§ 206-18. Successors in title.
§ 206-19. Violations and penalties.
§ 206-20. Severability.
§ 206-21. Effective date.
ARTICLE II Water Rates
§ 206-22. Definitions.
§ 206-23. Town administration costs to be covered.
§ 206-24. Metering.
§ 206-25. Establishment of rate to be paid.
§ 206-26. Dates to render bills.
§ 206-27. When bills due and payable.
§ 206-28. Defective meters.
§ 206-29. Use of water in absence of meter.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Rutland as the Board of Water
Commissioners: Art. I, 8-18-86; Art. II, 6-22-87.
Page 2 of 10
ARTICLE I
Allocation; Utilization Permits
[Adopted 8-18-1986]
§ 206-1. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
BOARD — The Board of Water Commissioners of the Town of Rutland, pursuant to 24
V.S.A. § 3312.
DEVELOPMENT — Any change or expansion in use of property or any building or
structure thereon, any construction, reconstruction, conversion, alteration or enlargement of
any building or structure and any other activity on property resulting in increased demand
for water.
STRUCTURE — Any assembly of materials for occupancy or use.
§ 206-2. Determination of allocation.
After a building or structure has had at least thirty-six (36) months of actual usage, its town
water allocation shall be based upon its average water usage over the twelve (12) months just
prior to the date of determination thereof by the town. Average water usage shall be
calculated by dividing the total gallonage utilized over such twelvemonth period by three
hundred sixty (360) days. The quotient rounded up to the nearest one hundred (100) gallons
per day shall be the property's water allocation, notwithstanding the amount specified in any
original approval or permit for water.
A. For purposes of the foregoing determination, portions of any thirty-six- or twelve-month
period which have elapsed prior to the effective date of this Article shall be counted.
B. If a notice of determination has issued to a property owner under the Policy, then until
further redetermination under this Article, the amount stated in such determination, or in
any revision thereof by the Board under § 206-6 hereafter, shall be the town water
allocation for the building or structure involved.
§ 206-3. Notice of determination of allocation.
The owner of a building or structure shall be given written notice of the determination of the
water allocation for such owner's building or structure, calculated in accordance with § 206-2
above. Thereafter, an owner desiring to utilize for such building or structure more than the
amount specified in the notice shall apply for a permit for such additional amount pursuant to
§§ 206-9 through 206-15 of this Article. A notice of determination given under the Policy
Page 3 of 10
shall be deemed a notice under this section. Forthwith upon the effective date of this Article,
the Board shall cause to be given to each owner who received a notice of determination under
the Policy a further notice to the effect that such owner may have a review of such
determination under § 206-6 hereafter.
§ 206-4. Waiver of allocation procedures.
The Board may waive or modify, in whole or in part, the provisions of §§ 206-2 through 206-
8 in circumstances where it determines that a particular twelve-month history is not
representative of a building's or structure's water usage because of interruption of usage,
leaks or otherwise or in circumstances where strict application of §§ 206-2 through 206-8
would result in an inequitable situation.
§ 206-5. Reallocation.
The Board may, at any time after a building or structure has used town water for thirty-six
(36) months, determine or re-determine the water allocation of such building or structure,
based upon average water usage for the twelve-month period just prior to the date of
determination or redetermination. In such event, the owner shall be given notice pursuant to §
206-3 above.
§ 206-6. Review of determination of allocation.
A property owner who receives a notice of right to have a review of a determination made
under the Policy or who receives a notice determining such owner's water allocation under
this Article, may have such determination reviewed by the Board by filing a written request
for review with the Rutland Town Clerk within thirty (30) days of the date that the town
gives the notice of right to have a review or notice of determination of water allocation under
this Article, as the case may be. The Board shall, upon filing of such a request for review,
proceed promptly, upon notice to the property owner and hearing, to determine the water
allocation to which such owner is entitled.
A. If the review request is as to a determination under the Policy, the water allocation shall be
established as of the date of determination under the policy.
B. If the review request is as to a determination under this Article, the water allocation shall
be established as of the date of determination under this Article.
C. If a request for review is not filed as prescribed i n this section, the determination in the
notice made under the Policy or this Article, as the case may be, shall be binding on such
property owner.
Page 4 of 10
§ 206-7. Increase of usage.
Upon determination of an owner's water allocation, whether by a written notice of
determination, with no review request having been filed as provided above, or upon
determination by the Board in a review proceeding, such determination shall be deemed to
amend any permit or approval of an owner to use Town Water for a building or structure, and
such property owner shall not, without a permit issued pursuant to §§ 206-9 through 206-15
of this Article, utilize more water for such building or structure than the amount specified in
such determination. After a determination of allocation has been made, an increase in usage
without a permit, caused by any development, shall be deemed a violation of this Article.
Whether there has been such an increase in usage shall be established by comparing gallons
per day averaged over a calendar month with the number of gallons per day in such
determination of allocation. However, an increase in usage where no development has taken
place, caused by normal temporary fluctuations or leakage, shall not be deemed a violation.
§ 206-8. Excessive use prior to determination of allocation.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed as permitting utilization of town water in excess
of the amount permitted in any approval or permit during any period of time before a
determination has been made under §§ 206-2 through 206-8.
§ 206-9. Utilization permit required.
An owner desiring to utilize town water for a new use or to service a new building or
structure or to meet demand caused by any development shall first apply to the Board for a
permit to do so. A separate application shall be filed for each use, building or structure
involved. Such permit application shall be made on a form approved by the Board, or, if no
form has been approved, then application shall be made by letter. No application shall be
accepted unless signed by all owners of the property involved. Such application shall be
accompanied by the prescribed fee and shall include the following information:
A. A brief description of the building or structure for which water usage is requested, its
location, its proposed use and, if the application is for increased usage, a description of the
proposed development.
B. The amount of new or increased water usage requested, stated in gallons per day as
averaged over a calendar month, consistent with the terminology of the water agreement
between the City of Rutland and the Town of Rutland.
C. In the event that the application involves construction of a new subsystem or connecting
system (as those terms are used in the agreement between the city and town), plans and
specifications for the construction thereof.
Page 5 of 10
D. If the application involves construction of a new subsystem or connecting system, the
maximum amount of water to be provided through such system and the maximum rate of
draw through such system, consistent with the terminology in the agreement between the
city and the town.
E. Such other information, including without limitation data, plans or documents as may be
necessary or as the town may require in order to properly evaluate the application. Such
information shall include the design and specifications for water conservation devices and
multiple use or recycling systems, as required under these regulations. [Amended 3-12-
1990]
§ 206-10. Issuance or denial of utilization permit.
When the application is complete, the Board shall, after notice to the property owner and an
opportunity to be heard, issue, issue with conditions or deny the permit application. A
separate permit shall be issued for each use, building or structure and shall state the
maximum water utilization for such use, building or structure, expressed in gallons per day as
averaged over a calendar month. In the event of a denial, the reasons shall be stated in
writing.
§ 206-11. Standards for issuance of permit.
The Board shall apply the following standards in determining whether a permit should issue:
A. Whether the application contains all necessary supporting plans and documentation,
prepared in accordance with sound engineering practice and acceptable to the town.
B. The amount of water for which application is made shall not exceed the amount
reasonably necessary to provide adequate water service for the use, building or structure or
development proposed.
C. The amount of water for which application is made shall not, in combination with other
users, the amounts in other approvals and permits previously issued and the amounts
involved in then pending permit applications filed prior to the property owner's
application, cause the town's water consumption to exceed five hundred thousand
(500,000) gallons per day, as averaged over a calendar month.
D. The proposed water usage shall not have an adverse effect on the ability of the town to
provide fire protection services or the availability of water to other users, whether by
reduction in pressure or otherwise.
E. The proposed water usage or any construction related to it shall not cause the town to
violate any of the terms or conditions of the agreement between the City of Rutland and
the Town of Rutland pertaining to water.
Page 6 of 10
F. The proposed water usage shall not cause the town to be in violation of any agreement
between the town and the city pertaining to the supply of sewage disposal services.
G. The new use, new building or structure or development shall utilize water-conserving
devices, fixtures and systems and shall incorporate multiple use or recycling where
technically and economically practical. The property owner shall utilize the best available
technology for such devices, fixtures, systems, and applications and shall demonstrate
provision for continued efficient operation of any systems involved. [Added 3-12-1990]
§ 206-12. Conditions of permit.
The Board may grant a permit for a lesser amount of water than that applied for and attach
such reasonable conditions to any permit as may be necessary so that the proposed water
usage will be in compliance with the standards, terms and conditions of this Article and will
not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 206-13. Conditions on utilization.
Whether or not stated on a permit, any utilization of town water shall be subject to the terms
and conditions of any contract between the City and Town of Rutland for the supply of
water, now existing or hereafter made, and any amendments, modifications, and renewals
thereof and all applicable town policies and ordinances, rates and rules now or hereafter in
effect, and redetermination of the amount which may be used pursuant to §§ 206-2 through
206-8 of this Article.
§ 206-14. Expiration of permit; extensions.
A. A permit for utilization of town water shall expire and become null and void at the
expiration of twelve (12) months from the date of issuance by the Board unless within that
time the property owner commences utilization of town water for the use, building or
structure involved in such permit. If a permit expires because of failure to commence such
usage, then the property owner shall, before using town water for such use, building or
structure, submit a new permit application, with the supporting documentation and
information required by § 206-9 and any required fees, the granting or denial of which
permit shall be subject to all the terms of this Article.
B. A permit may be extended by the Board for an additional twelve-month period from the
expiration of the original twelve-month period if:
(1) Written application for an extension is made to the Board before expiration of the first
twelve-month period.
(2) The Board determines that the property owner continues to have a bona fide intention
to complete the project, that the owner during the first twelve-month period has
Page 7 of 10
diligently pursued the development of the project and that there is a reasonable
expectation that the owner will begin utilization of water pursuant to the permit by the
end of the extension period.
C. If, by the end of the second twelve-month period, town water utilization was not
commenced for the use, building or structure involved in such permit, then the permit
shall expire and become null and void unless again extended as provided hereafter, and the
owner shall, before using town water for such use, building or structure, submit a new
permit application in the same manner as required by § 2G6-14A above. [Amended 3-27-
89]
D. [Added 3-27-89] A water permit may be extended upon written application made before
expiration of the second twelve-month period or any further extension period if:
(1) The Board determines that the owner is still diligently pursuing the project; and
(2) The owner has not been able to commence utilization because the owner is in
litigation before administrative bodies or courts relating to the obtaining of necessary
permits for the project.
Any extension granted under this Subsection shall not be for more than one (1) year, and
further extensions may be granted for one-year periods if Subsection D(l) and (2) are met.
E. A permit may be extended upon written application made to the Board before expiration
of the second twelve-month period or any further extension period, if the Board
determines that there has been a substantial start on construction. Such extension shall be
for such additional time and on such conditions as may be equitable. [Amended 3-27-89]
F. The Board, after notice to the property owner and hearing, may, at any time during the
initial twelve-month period or any extension thereof, revoke a permit if it determines that
utilization of town water for the use, building or structure involved in the permit has not
commenced and that the property owner has abandoned development of such use, building
or structure. The Board shall not revoke any permit without first giving the property owner
at least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place at which the Board shall hold its
hearing. [Editor's Note: Pursuant to the addition of Subsection D 3-27-89, former
Subsections D through F have been re-designated as E through G, respectively.]
G. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COMMENCEMENT OF UTILIZATION - Active commencement of town water usage for a
use, building or structure which is substantially complete and able to be used or occupied for
its designed purpose.
Page 8 of 10
§ 206-15. Consideration of permit applications in filing priority order.
Each permit application shall be considered in the order of its filing priority.
§ 206-16. Manner of giving notice.
A. Any notice required to be given under this Article shall be deemed to have been given
when deposited in the United States mail, registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested, addressed to the property owner at such owner's address as carried on the books
of the town for water billing purposes or, if at the time of notice such owner is not a user
of town water, then to the address shown on the property owner's permit application or
such other address as the property owner may in writing designate in connection with such
application.
B. In the event a property owner who has applied for town water transfers title, notice shall
be deemed given if given to such successor in title.
§ 206-17. Filing fees.
The Board may prescribe reasonable fees for the filing of any request for review or permit
application.
§ 206-18. Successors in title.
A. Any rights of a property owner under this Article or any permit issued under this Article
shall insure to the benefit of such owner's successors in title. Any obligations imposed on
a property owner by this Article or by a permit issued under this Article shall bind such
owner's successors in title.
B. The Board shall keep a file on each owner pertaining to determinations and permits issued
under this Article, which shall be available for inspection by the public at reasonable times
during business hours.
§ 206-19. Violations and penalties.
A. A person who without a permit issued under this Article, utilizes town water for a new
use, building or structure or to meet demand caused by any development, or who increases
water usage over the maximum amount specified in a permit or any notice of
determination issued or referred to under §§ 206-2 through 206-8 by reason of any
development, or who violates any provision of this Article or the terms of any permit,
approval or order of the Board or the Selectmen shall be fined not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.). Each week that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Page 9 of 10
B. The town may resort to any legal remedy to enforce this Article or the terms of any
permit, approval or order, including actions for injunctive relief.
§206-20. Severability.
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this Article or
any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Article or any part thereof.
§206-21. Effective date.
This Article shall become effective sixty (60) days after the date of its adoption.
ARTICLE II
Water Rates Adopted 6-22-1987
§206-22. Definitions.
As used hereafter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
BASIC RATE — The rate per one hundred (100) cubic feet of town water charged by the
city to the town from time to time under the Municipal Water Agreement. The basic rate
is currently eighty-three and one-third cents ($.831/3) per one hundred (100) cubic feet,
but the rate shall increase or decrease with changes in the rate charged by the city to the
town, without further amendment of these water rates.
MUNICIPAL WATER AGREEMENT — The agreement, dated March 2, 1972, between
the City of Rutland and the Town of Rutland relating to the sale by the city to the town
of water.
TOWN WATER — Water supplied to the town by the city under the Municipal Water
Agreement, for distribution within the town pursuant to that agreement.
§ 206-23. Town administration costs to be covered. [Amended 1-29-1990]
The town incurs costs of its own in administering the distribution of water pursuant to the
Municipal Water Agreement, which the Board finds are covered by a charge of twenty
percent (20%) of the basic rate.
§206-24. Metering.
Payment for town water consumed within the town shall be based upon the quantity of water
used by each user, which shall be determined by a meter attached to the user's water supply
Page 10 of 10
prior to the commencement of service. Any such meter shall be installed by the property
owner at the property owner's expense, and both the meter and the installation thereof shall
be approved by the town.
§ 206-25. Establishment of rate to be paid.
Each property owner within the town shall pay, for water consumed on the property owner's
premises, the basic rate, plus ten percent (10%) thereof.
§ 206-26. Dates to render bills.
Water bills shall be rendered quarterly for the quarters ending the 20th days of December,
March, June and September.
§ 206-27. When bills due and payable.
Water bills shall be due and payable thirty (30) days from the date of rendition by the town.
§ 206-28. Defective meters.
If, for any cause, any meter fails to register the amount of water passing through it, the
property owner shall pay to the town for water passing through the defective meter at the
average daily water consumption rate based upon the previous quarter, as recorded by the
meter when in operating order. However, if the meter was not in operating order for the
entirety of such previous quarter or if during such previous quarter a less water-intensive use
was being made of the premises or for part of the time water was not used, such that water
consumption would not be fairly representative, then water consumption while the meter is
defective shall be that amount for which the city lawfully charges the town.
§ 206-29. Use of water in absence of meter.
No property owner shall take any town water during any period of time when a meter is not
installed. If any property owner takes town water during a period of time when a meter is not
installed, the amount of water consumed during such period of time shall be that amount for
which the city lawfully charges the town.
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
Chapter 185
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 185-1. Establishment of regulations.
§ 185-2. Title.
§ 185-3. Subdivision and development subject to town control.
§ 185-4. Conditions prerequisite to subdivision.
§ 185-5. Considerations.
§ 185-6. Authority of Planning Commission.
§ 185-7. Waivers and variances.
§ 185-8. Amendments.
§ 185-9. Enforcement.
§ 185-10. Severability.
§ 185-11. Effective date.
§ 185-12. Definitions.
ARTICLE II
Application and Approval Procedures
§ 185-13. Approval required.
§ 185-14. Submission of application.
§ 185-15. Submission date.
§ 185-16. Sketch plan procedure.
§ 185-17. Minor subdivision procedure.
§ 185-18. Major subdivision procedure.
§ 185-19. Preliminary plat.
§ 185-20. Final plat review and approval.
§ 185-21. Final plat endorsement and filing.
§ 185-22. Conditions on final plat approval.
ARTICLE I II
Submission Requirement
§ 185-23. Sketch plan.
§ 185-24. Preliminary plat
§ 185-25. Final plat
§ 185-26. Use of metric units.
ARTICLE IV
General Requirements and Design Standards
§ 185-27. Planning standards.
§ 185-28. Streets.
§ 185-29. Town highways.
§ 185-30. Access roads.
§ 185-31. Pedestrians.
§ 185-32. Utilities.
§ 185-33. Water.
§ 185-34. Sewage disposal.
§ 185-35. Storm water drainage.
§ 185-36. Recreation areas.
§ 185-37. Schools.
§ 185-38. Site preservation and improvements.
§ 185-39. Management organizations.
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
Typical Cross Section: Road Construction
Approved 9-15-80
Adopted 11-4-80 by a Special Town Meeting.
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 185-1. Establishment of regulations.
Whereas the Town of Rutland has created a Planning Commission
and has adopted and has in effect a Town Plan^ under the Vermont
Planning and Development Act, 24 V.S.A. Chapter 117, herein
referred to as "the Act," there are hereby established subdivision
regulations for the Town of Rutland.
§ 185-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Town of Rutland Subdivision
Regulations."
§ 185-3. Subdivision and development subject to town control.
It is hereby declared by the Town of Rutland that consideration of
the subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the
subdivided plat is subject to the control of the municipality, pursuant
to the Town Plan, which calls for the orderly, efficient and economical
development of the town.
§ 185-4. Conditions prerequisite to subdivision.
Land to be subdivided shall be of such a character that it can be
used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril
from fire, flood or other menace, and land shall not be subdivided
unless proper provision has been made for drainage; erosion control;
water; sewage; and capital improvements, such as schools, parks,
recreational facilities, transportation facilities and improvements.
§ 185-5. Considerations.
The Selectmen of the Town of Rutland, pursuant to the authority
conferred upon them by 24 V.S.A. Chapter 117, hereby adopted the
following regulations governing the subdivision of land. The Rutland
Town Planning Commission shall administer these regulations for the
purpose of assuring orderly growth and coordinated development in
the Town of Rutland and to assure the comfort, convenience, safety,
health and welfare of its citizens. Furthermore, the review of
subdivision regulations shall be based on the following broad
considerations:
A. Conformance with and implementation of the Town Plan,
zoning regulations and other applicable bylaws.
B. Recognition of a desirable relationship to land form, topography,
geology, groundwater and surface water hydrology,
including the natural drainage pattern, and to the groundwater
table.
C. Recognition of desirable standards of subdivision design,
including provision for safe and convenient pedestrian and
vehicular traffic and for suitable building sites for the land use
contemplated.
D. Provision of adequate safeguards to protect the general public
from the perils and hazards of flooding, fire, soil erosion, air
and water pollution or other threats to public health, safety
and welfare.
E. Provision for the preservation, protection and for conservation
of natural resources, such as land, air, vegetation, water,
agricultural and visual resources, upon which the continued
prosperity of the Town of Rutland and surrounding region
depend.
F. Provisions for public facilities and services, such as neighborhood
parks, open space, other recreation areas, school sites,
police and fire protection, off-street parking, water supply,
sewage disposal, and other facilities and services deemed
necessary for general public health and convenience.
G. Encouragement of variety, innovation, flexibility, greater
efficiency and open space in the designing layout and use of
land in cluster, planned unit and planned residential
developments as provided under the Vermont Planning and
Development Act.
§ 185-6. Authority of Planning Commission.
The Commission is hereby authorized and empowered to do all acts
and things set forth and provided in § 4401 and §§ 4413 through 4421
of the Act, including but not limited to the approval, modification or
disapproval of all plats filed and the approval of the development of
such plats previously filed in the Town Clerk's Office if such plat or
plats are entirely or partially undeveloped under the subdivision
regulations.
§ 185-7. Waivers and variances.
The procedures and requirements for the submission and processing
of plats and the standards for the design and layout established by
this chapter may be waived or varied by the Planning Commission,
subject to appropriate conditions, when the Planning Commission
finds that compliance with any procedure, requirement or standard is
not requisite in the interest of the public health, safety and general
welfare due to the special circumstances of a particular plat or plats
or is inappropriate because of inadequacy or lack of connecting
facilities adjacent or in proximity to the subdivision; however, any
waiver or variance granted shall pertain only to that particular
subdivision for which it was granted and shall not set a precedent for
similar action for any other subdivision. When a waiver or variance
has been requested with respect to a subdivision application, the notice
of the public hearing on such application shall specify that such has
been requested, the section or sections of this chapter to which the
request pertains and a concise statement of the nature and the reasons
for the request.
§ 185-8. Amendments.
This chapter may be amended according to the requirements and
procedures established in §§ 4403 and 4404 of the Act.
§ 185-9. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced in accordance with §§ 4444 and 4445
of the Act
§ 185-10. Severability.
The invalidity of any provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other part.
§ 185-11. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon adoption at a
regular or special town meeting.
§ 185-12. Definitions.
A. Unless the content clearly indicates to the contrary, words in
the singular include the plural, and those in the plural include
the singular. The word "building" includes "structures" and
shall be construed as if followed by the phrase "or part
thereof. The word "may" is permissive; the words "shall" and
" will " are mandatory.
B. Certain means of references and words used herein shall be
defined as listed below.
ACT — Vermont Planning and Development Act 24 V.S.A.
Chapter 117.
AUTHORIZED AGENT OR REPRESENTATIVE— A
person or group of persons who have been duly
authorized, in writing , filed with the Commission by the
subdivider, to act in his or her behalf.
BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENT — Any revision to a plat
legally filed with the Town which creates no new
building lots and which will have no impact on rights-of-way,
roads, or other public facilities. A boundary
adjustment shall not be considered a subdivision under
these regulations. [ Added 5-24-1999]
COMMISSION— The Planning Commission of the
municipality, created under 24 V.S.A. Chapter 117,
Subchapter 2.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM— Any
sewage disposal system, other than a municipal sewage
disposal system, owned by the same person that disposes
of sewage for domestic, commercial, industrial or
institutional uses to two or more customers.
COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — Any water
system owned by the same person t h a t supplies water for
domestic, commercial, industrial or institutional uses to
two or more customers.
CONSTRUCTION DRAWING — The drawing showing
the location, profile grades, size and of drains,
sewers, water mains, underground fire alarm ducts,
underground power and telephone ducts, pavements,
cross sections of streets, miscellaneous structures, etc.
EASEMENT - The authorization of a property owner for
the use, by another and for a specified purpose, of any
designated part of his or her property.
FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT — The final drawings on
which the subdivider's p l an of subdivision is presented to
the Planning Commission for approval and which, if
approved, may be filed for record with the Municipal
Clerk.
LEGISLATIVE BODY— The duly elected and duly
constituted Board of Selectmen.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — All subdivisions not classified
as minor subdivisions, including but not limited to
subdivisions of more than 10 lots, or any size subdivision
requiring any new street or extension of municipal
facilities, or the creation of any public improvements.
MINOR SUBDIVISION - Any subdivision containing
not more than 10 lots fronting on an existing street, not
involving any new street or road, or the extension of
municipal facilities, or the creation of any public
improvements, and not adversely affecting the
remainder of the parcel, adjoining property or municipal
facilities and not in conflict with any provision or portion
of the Town Plan, zoning ordinance, Official Map or this
chapter.
MUNICIPALITY — The Town of Rutland.
MUNICIPAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM— Any
sewage disposal system owned and operated by the
municipality that disposes of sewage for domestic,
commercial, industrial or institutional uses.
OFFICIAL M A P — The map authorized under 24
V.S.A.§ 4401(b)(3) and adopted according to 24 V.S.A.
§§ 4403 and 4404 and modified according to 24 V.S.A.
§ 4423.
OPEN SPACE — Land unoccupied by structures,
buildings, streets, rights-of-way and automobile parking
lots.
PERSON — An individual, a corporation, a partnership,
an association or any other incorporated or
unincorporated organization, group or legal entity.
PLAT — A map or representation on paper of a piece of
land subdivided into lots and streets, drawn to scale.
PRELIMINARY PLAT— The preliminary drawings
indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be
submitted to the Planning Commission for its
consideration.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM— Any water system(s)
owned by the same person that supplies water for public,
domestic, commercial or industrial uses to 10 or more
customers by pipe connection or by containers.
REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION— Planning
Commission for a region created under Subchapter 3 of
the Vermont Planning and Development Act, Title 24
V.S.A. Chapter 117.
RESUBDIVISION — A change of any preexisting
subdivision, whether or not depicted upon a recorded or
approved subdivision plat, if such change affects any
street layout, area reserved for public use, lot line or any
map or plan legally recorded.
SKETCH PLAN — A sketch of the proposed subdivision,
showing information specified in Article III of this
chapter, to enable the subdivider to save time and
expense in reaching general agreement with the
Planning Commission as to the form of the subdivision
and objectives and requirements of those regulations.
STREET — Any road, highway, avenue, street, land or
other way between right-of-way lines, commonly used by
the public for vehicular traffic.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person, firm, corporation,
partnership or association which shall lay out for the
purpose of sale or development any subdivision or part
thereof, as defined herein, either for himself or others.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a parcel of land, with
or without streets, into two or more lots, plots or other
legal or actual division of l a n d for transfer of ownership,
building development or sale. "Subdivision" includes
" resubdivision . " "Subdivision" excludes boundary
adjustment. [ Amended 5-24-1999]
TOWN P L A N — A plan adopted pursuant to 24
V.S A . § § 4384 and 4385.
ARTICLE II
Application and Approval Procedures
§ 185-13. Approval required.
Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any
contract is made for the sale of any part thereof and before any
permit for the erection of a structure in such proposed
subdivision shall be granted, the owner or his authorized agent
shall apply for and secure approval of such proposed subdivision
in accordance with this chapter.
§ 185-14. Submission of application.
All applications, plate or plans shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission in care of the Town Clerk, during regular
Town office hours, not less t h a n seven days prior to the meeting
of the Planning Commission at which the application, plat or
p l a n is to be considered. All applications shall be on forms
prepared by and acceptable to the Planning Commission and
available at the Town office. The plat or plan shall conform to
the requirements established in subsequent sections hereof. I n
the event that a waiver or variance is requested, the nature of
such request and the reasons therefor shall be set forth in an
attachment to the application.
§ 185-15. Submission date.
The date of submission of any plat for purposes shall be
the next regular meeting of the Planning Commission held
seven days following the receipt of the plat and other materials
by t h e Town Clerk.
§ 185-16. Sketch plan procedure.
A. Purpose. The sketch plan procedure is a preliminary
process designed to acquaint the Planning Commission
with the general nature of a subdivision prior to the
filing of a formal application and plat and to permit
preliminary determinations to avoid undue confusion or
expense in the filing of a formal application and plat.
B. Requirements of the sketch plan. The sketch plan shall
consist of two copies of a print or survey of the property
on which shall be depicted or which shall be
accompanied by the information set forth in Article III of
this chapter.
C. Attendance at meeting. The subdivider or his
authorized representative shall attend the meeting of
the Planning Commission to discuss the requirements of
these regulations for street improvements, drainage,
sewerage, water supply, fire protection and similar
aspects, as well as the availability of existing services
and other pertinent information.
D. Classification. At this meeting the Planning Commission shall
classify the subdivision as a major subdivision or as a minor
subdivision.
E. Town Plan and zoning. The Commission shall study the sketch
plan to determine whether or not it conforms to or would be in
conflict with the Town Plan and the zoning regulations;
developments proposed by any public agency, existing private
and public development, facilities and services, and for any
special problems that may be encountered.
F. Conformance. The Commission shall determine whether the
sketch plan meets the purposes of this chapter and may make
specific written recommendations for changes.
G. Planned residential development or planned unit development
Where the subdivider submits a proposal for a planned
residential development requirements of § 4407(3) of the Act
shall be met in addition to the requirements of this chapter
and the zoning regulations. Where a subdivider submits a
proposed planned unit development, the requirements of
§ 4407(12) of the Act shall be met, in addition to requirements
of this chapter and the zoning regulations.
§ 185-17. Minor subdivision procedure.
A. Plats required. A minor subdivision shall require only the
submission of a final plat
B. Time of submission. The final plat shall be submitted not more
than six (6) months following the determinations of the
Planning Commission relative to the sketch plan.
C. Fees. The fee for application as a major subdivision shall be set
by the legislative body.
§ 185-18. Major subdivision procedure.
A. Plats required. A major subdivision shall require submission
of a preliminary plat followed by submission of a final plat.
B. Time of submission. The final plat shall be submitted not more
than six (6) months following the determinations of the
Planning Commission relative to the sketch plan.
C. Fees. The fee for application as a major subdivision shall be set
by the legislative body.
§ 185-19. Preliminary plat
A. Filing. The subdivider shall file six (6) copies each of an
application for subdivision and the preliminary plat or
separate sheets specified in § 185-24B and shall pay the
application fee.
B. Attendance at meeting. The subdivider or his duly authorized
representative shall attend the meeting of the Planning
Commission to discuss the preliminary plat.
C. Review. The Commission shall study the practicability of the
preliminary plat Particular attention shall be given to the
arrangement location and width of streets, their relation to
the topography of the land, water supply, sewage disposal,
drainage, lot sizes and arrangement, the future development of
adjoining lands as yet unsubdivided and the requirements of
the Town Plan and zoning regulations.
D. Preliminary approval. Within twenty-one (21) days after
formal submission of a preliminary plat, the Planning
Commission shall take action to approve, with or without
modifications, or disapprove such preliminary plat. The
ground of any modification required or the ground for
disapproval shall be clearly stated in the findings of fact and
conclusions of the Commission. Failure of the Commission to
act within such twenty-one-day period shall constitute a
preliminary approval of the preliminary plat Where the
Planning Commission deems appropriate, it may hold a
hearing on the preliminary plat pursuant to 24 V.S.A. § 4447.
E. Conditions and changes. When granting preliminary approval
to a preliminary plat, the Commission shall state the
conditions of such approval, if any, with respect to the specific
changes which it will require in the preliminary plat the
§ 185-19 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 185-21
character and extent of the required improvements for which
waivers may have been requested and the amount of
improvement or the amount of all bonds therefor which it will
require as prerequisite to the approval of the subdivision plat.
F. Decision. The action of the Commission and any conditions
attached thereto shall be noted on three (3) copies of the
preliminary plat. One (1) copy shall be returned to the
subdivider, one (1) retained by the Commission and one (1)
forwarded to the legislative body.
G. Limitation. Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute
approval of the subdivision, rather it shall be construed only as
permission to seek final plat approval.
§ 185-20. Final plat review and approval.
A. Filing. The subdivider shall file six (6) copies of the final plat
and other information and, in the event that the subdivider has
not made a filing under the preliminary plat review and
approval procedure, shall file six (6) copies of the application
and shall pay the application fee.
B. Public Hearing. The Planning Commission shall notice the
final plat for public hearing according to 24 V.S.A. §§ 4414
and 4447 and shall conduct such public hearing upon such plat
in accordance with the Act.
C. Decision. The Planning Commission shall, within forty-five
(45) days after the public hearing, approve, modify and
approve or disapprove such plat. Failure of the Commission to
act within such forty-five (45) days shall be deemed approval.
I f approved, the final plat shall be subject to the conditions to
approval set forth in § 185-22. The approval provided for in
this section shall be deemed final insofar as rights of appeal
may be affected.
§ 185-21. Final plat endorsement and filing.
A. Filing requirement for all plats. The approval of the Planning
Commission or certification by the Clerk of the municipality of
its failure to act within forty-five (45) days shall expire ninety
(90) days from such approval or certification unless, within
such ninety-day period, such plat shall have been duly filed or
recorded in the office of the Clerk of the town.
B. Endorsement or certification for a new street No plat showing
a new street or highway may be filed or recorded in the office
of the Clerk of the municipality until the approval of the
Planning Commission is endorsed, in writing, on such plat or
the certificate of the Clerk of the municipality, showing the
failure of the Planning Commission to take action within the
forty-five-day period, is attached thereto and filed or recorded
with said plat
C. Sectional filing. The Planning (Commission may permit the
plat to be divided into two (2) or more sections, subject to any
conditions the Planning Commission deems necessary to
ensure the orderly development of the subdivision, and i t may
permit endorsement and filing of such sections in lieu of
endorsement and filing of the entire plat The expiration of
approval or certification referred to in § 185-21A shall not
occur with respect to any permitted sections so long as the first
section, comprising not less than ten percent (10%) of the lots of
the subdivision shall be filed within the ninety-day period and
the remaining sections, none of which shall comprise less than
ten percent (10%) of the lots of the subdivision, shall be filed
within two (2) years of approval or certification.
§ 185-22. Conditions on final plat approval.
A. Improvements. Plat approval shall be conditioned upon the
streets and other required improvements being satisfactorily
installed in accordance with the plat and this chapter.
B. Bonding alternative. In lieu of completion of the streets and
required improvements, the Planning Commission may accept
from the owner for the benefit of the town a performance
bond, issued either by a bonding or surety company approved
by the legislative body or by the owner with security
acceptable to the legislative body, in an amount sufficient to
cover the full cost of said new streets and required improvements
and their maintenance for a period of two (2) years after
completion as is estimated by the Planning Commission or
such town departments, officials or independent engineers as
the Commission may designate. The amount and term of any
bond shall comply with the requirements of 24 V.S.A. §§ 4418
and 4419.
C. Effect and satisfaction of conditions. No sales, leases,
conveyances or transfers of any lots or all or any part of the
property shall take place and no permits for the erection of
any structures upon any lot of the subdivision shall be issued
until the above conditions shall have been satisfied. Satisfaction
of such condition shall be evidenced by a certificate of
compliance executed by the Chairman of the Planning
Commission and duly filed or recorded with the plat, which
certificate shall specify such compliance and shall indicate any
effect of the same upon persons acquiring any interest in any
lot or all or any part of the property.
ARTICLE III
Submission Requirements
§ 185-23. Sketch plan.
A. General requirements. The sketch plan shall be a rough sketch
of the proposed subdivision drawn upon a perimeter survey of
the property.
B. Contents. The sketch plan shall contain, either on the plan or
on a separate sheet:
(1) The name and address of the owner of record.
(2) The name and address of the applicant if different
(3) The name and address of the owners of contiguous property.
(4) The boundaries and area of all contiguous property of the
owner
(5) The boundaries and area of property which is subdivided.
(6) The proposed subdivision lines.
(7) The name, address and professional capacity of the
preparer.
(8) The numerical and graphic scale of the plan, the date and
North arrow.
(9) Existing features and facilities, including roads, public
utilities and utility easements, wooded areas, structures,
watercourses, ledges, wet areas and excessively steep
slopes.
(10) Proposed improvements, including roads, utilities and
utility easements, rights-of-way and structures.
C. Location map. The sketch plan shall be accompanied by a
location map consisting of a United States Geological Survey
map upon which the entire property of the subdivider and the
property to be subdivided shall be depicted and identified.
§ 185-24. Preliminary plat
A. General requirements. The preliminary subdivision plat shall
consist of one (1) or more sheets of drawings, each of which
shall conform to the following requirements:
(1) It shall show all dimensions in feet or decimals of a foot.
(2) It shall be drawn to a scale not in excess of one hundred
(100) feet to the inch, nor in excess of sixty (60) feet to the
inch for subdivisions having lots of less than one hundred
(100) feet frontage.
(3) No plat shall exceed twenty-four by thirty-six (24 x 36)
inches in size.
B. Contents. The preliminary subdivision plat shall contain,
either on the plat, the application or a separate sheet,
information and data and shall depict the subdivision as
follows:
(1) Identifying the title of the subdivision.
(2) The name of the municipality.
(3) The name and address of the record owner and the subdivider.
(4) The name and professional credentials of the plat
designer.
(5) The date, true North point and scale.
(6) The boundaries and area of contiguous total land owned
by the owner and of land within the proposed subdivision
made and certified by a licensed land surveyor tied into
an existing reference point.
(7) Identification of the zoning district or districts applicable
to the area to be subdivided and the entire tract.
(8) Proposed subdivision lot lines, with bearings and
distances.
(9) Streets, highways, easements, sidewalks and alleys,
including names and widths, existing and proposed.
(10) Buildings, existing and proposed.
(11) Watercourses, existing and proposed.
(12) Municipal and public utility easements and rights-of-way,
existing and proposed.
(13) Sewer mains and connections to municipal or community
sewer systems or on-site community or private sewage
disposal facilities, including sizes and elevations, existing
and proposed.
(14) Water mains and connections to municipal or community
water systems or on-site community or private water
supplies and lines, including sizes and elevations, existing
and proposed.
(15) Drainage systems and connections to municipal or
community systems, including sizes and elevations and
showing culverts with rim and invert elevations, existing
and proposed.
(16) Parks and other public open spaces, existing and
proposed.
(17) Other essential features, existing and proposed.
(18) The location of all trees on the site, outlines of wooded and
open areas and all other natural features or site elements,
existing or proposed, and an indication of which natural
features or site elements are to be preserved.
(19) All information specified in Subsection B(9) through (18)
hereof with respect to adjacent land of the owner and
with respect to adjacent land of others, to a distance of
one hundred (100) feet.
(20) Contour lines based on accurate ground surveys or
combination of ground/aerial surveys, at intervals of five
(5) feet of existing grades and of proposed finished grades
where a change of existing ground elevation will be five
(5) feet or more.
(21) Typical cross sections and profiles of proposed grading,
streets, highways and sidewalks.
(22) If a private sewage disposal system is proposed, location
and results of tests to ascertain subsurface soil, rock and
groundwater conditions and depth to groundwater, unless
pits are dry at a depth of eight (8) feet; and the location
and results of percolation tests.
(23) Preliminary designs of any bridges or culverts which
may be required.
(24) All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use
and the conditions of such dedication.
(25) Requested waivers and variances and the reasons
therefor.
C. Location map. The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by
a location map drawn at the scale of one (1) inch equals two
thousand (2,000) feet to show the relation of the proposed
subdivision to the adjacent properties and to the general
surrounding area.
§ 185-25. Final plat
A. General requirements. The final subdivision plat shall consist
of one (1) or more sheets of drawings, each of which shall
conform with the following requirements:
(1) They shall be in compliance with Chapter 17, entitled
"Filing of Land Plats," Title 27 of Vermont Statutes
Annotated as the same shall regulate the filing of such
plats.
(2) They shall have a margin of one-half inch outside of
the border line on all sides.
(3) They shall have a space three and one-half (3%) inches
long by two (2) inches high reserved for the approval
stamp and signature of the Chairman of the Planning
Commission.
(4) They shall be prepared by a land surveyor duly licensed
in Vermont.
B. Contents. The final subdivision plat shall contain information
and data and shall depict the subdivision as follows:
(1) The identifying title of the subdivision.
(2) The name of the municipality.
(3) The name and address of the record owner and the
subdivider.
(4) The name, license number and seal of the licensed land
surveyor.
(5) The date, true North point and scale.
(6) The boundaries and area of contiguous total land owned
by the owner and of land within the proposed subdivision
made and certified by a licensed land surveyor tied into
an existing reference point.
(7) Identification of the zoning district or districts applicable
to the area to be subdivided and affecting the entire tract
(8) Proposed subdivision lot lines, with bearings and
distances.
(9) Streets, highways, easements, sidewalks and alleys,
including names and widths, existing and proposed.
(10) Buildings, existing and proposed.
(11) Watercourses, existing and proposed.
(12) Municipal and public utility easements and rights-of-way,
existing and proposed.
(13) Sewer mains and connections to municipal or community
sewer systems or on-site community or private sewage
disposal facilities, including sizes and elevations, existing
and proposed.
(14) Water mains and connections to municipal or community
water systems or on-site community or private water
supplies and lines, including sizes and elevations, existing
and proposed.
(15) Drainage systems and connections to municipal or
community systems, including sizes and elevations and
showing culverts with rim and invert elevations, existing
and proposed.
(16) Parks and other public open spaces, existing and
proposed.
(17) Other essential features, existing and proposed.
(18) The location of all trees on the site, outlines of wooded and
open areas and all other natural features or site elements,
existing or proposed, and an indication of which natural
features or site elements are to be preserved.
(19) All information specified in Subsection B(9) through (18)
hereof with respect to adjacent land of the owner and
with respect to adjacent land of others to a distance of one
hundred (100) feet.
(20) Contour lines based on accurate ground surveys or a
combination of ground and aerial surveys, at intervals of
five (5) feet of existing grades and of proposed finished
grades, where change of existing ground elevation will be
five (5) feet or more.
(21) All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public
use and the conditions of such dedication.
(22) The length of all straight lines, the deflection angles,
radii, length of curves and central angles of all
curves, tangent distances and tangent bearings for
each street.
(23) Lots within the subdivision numbered in numerical
order and containing the area of each lot indicated
in square feet or in acreage to the nearest 0.01 of an
acre.
(24) Permanent reference monuments shown thus ” ם
(25) All lot corner markers shown thus "0." They shall be
of metal, at least % inch in diameter and at least 24
inches in length, and located in the ground to
existing grade.
(26) Monuments which shall be set at all corners and
angle points of the boundaries of the subdivision,
and monuments required by Town specifications for
new roads, at all street intersections, angle points
and street lines, points of curve, and such
intermediate points as shall be required by the
engineer.
(27) Before a subdivision proposal can be approved by
the Planning Commission, subdividers shall certify,
in writing, that all proposed streets will comply with
design requirements contained in the "Town of
Rutland Select Board's Policies Regarding
Documentation Required with Request For
Acceptance of Roads as Town Highways" before
Town acceptance of such streets is requested by the
subdivider, his successors or assignees, or the
owners of any lots created by the subdivision
proposal. [Added 5-24-1999]
§ 185-26. Use of metric units.
In all cases herein where measurements are expressed in
traditional units of feet and inches, appropriate metric units
may be utilized, provided that such shall not affect mandatory
measurements of roads or like facilities or the overall map sizes
provided for herein or in other applicable ordinances.
ARTICLE IV
General Requirements and Design Standards
§ 185-27. Planning standards.
A. Character of the land. All land to be subdivided shall be,
in the judgment of the Commission, of such a character
that it can be used for building purposes without danger
to public health or safety or to the environment. Land
subject to periodic flooding, poor drainage, inadequate
capability to withstand structures, including streets,
utilities, and buildings, or other hazardous conditions
shall not ordinarily be subdivided. In addition,
development shall be in conformance with the policies
and recommendations of the Town Plan concerning
shallow soils, steep slopes, poorly drained soils and
prime agricultural lands.
B. Energy conservation. In order to conserve energy, all
subdivisions shall use the least areas of roadway and t he
least length of sewer, water and utility lines within environmentally
and economically sound limits. Buildings
should be sited so as to take advantage of southeast,
south and southwest orientations where possible.
Landscaping should be effectively used for providing
wind barriers and reducing heat loss and heat gain.
Cluster development (planned residential and planned
unit development) should be encouraged wherever
feasible and desirable.
C. Reserved strips. No privately owned reserved strip,
except on open space areas, shall be permitted which
controls access to any part of the subdivision or to any
other parcel of land from any street or from any land
dedicated to public use or which may be so dedicated.
D. Lot layout. The layout of lots shall conform to the
requirements of the zoning regulations, where in force,
and shall be appropriate for the intended construction.
Comer lots shall have extra width to permit a setback on
each street. Consideration in lot layout shall be given to
topographic and soils conditions.
E. Preservation of existing features. Due regard shall be
given to the preservation and protection of existing
features, trees, scenic points, brooks, streams, rock
outcroppings, water bodies, agricultural lands and other
natural resources and historic resources.
§ 185-28. Streets.
A. Layout. In order to create a logical and efficient network,
the arrangement of streets in the subdivisions shall
provide for the continuation of principal and secondary
streets of adjoining subdivisions and for their projection
when adjoining property is not yet subdivided. This
condition will facilitate fire protection, movement of
traffic and construction or extension, presently or when
later required, of needed utilities and public services,
such as sewers, water and drainage systems. Where, in
the opinion of the Commission, topographic or other
conditions make such continuance undesirable or
impracticable, the above conditions may be modified.
B. Topography. Streets shall be logically related to the
topography so as to produce usable lots, reasonable
grades and safe intersections i n appropriate relation to
the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets.
C. Horizontal alignment at intersections. Intersections of
streets shall be as close EIS possible to 90°.
D. Vertical alignment at intersection. The gradient, where
possible, within 50 feet of intersections shall not exceed
3%.
E. Access. Paved access shall be available for fire,
ambulance and police vehicles to within 100 feet of the
principal drives, dwellings, commercial or industrial establishments
and institutions.
F. Cut and embankment slopes. A l l slopes shall be well
rounded to form a smooth transition f r om the shoulder
edge to existing grades.
G. Dead-end streets, cul-de-sac and turnarounds. Dead end
streets or cul-de-sac shall terminate in a
turnaround with a minimum radius of 60 feet or square
area not less than 120 feet on a side, as desired.
Provisions shall be made for temporary turn arounds for
temporary dead-end streets. The above represents right-ofway
limits.
H. Street jogs. Street jogs with center line offsets of less
than 200 feet shall not be allowed.
I . Street names. Streets shall be identified by name on the
proposed plat. Proposed streets which are obviously in
alignment with others already existing and named shall
bear the names of existing streets. I n no case shall the
names for proposed streets duplicate existing street
names within the Town, irrespective of the suffix, be it
street, avenue, boulevard, driveway, place or court.
J . Street signs. All street signs and posts, as approved by
the Town, shall be provided and installed by the
subdivider.
K. Residential and commercial drives. Residential and
commercial drives shall meet the standards and
requirements of Detail A, B or C of the Standards For
Residential and Commercial Drives, Vermont Standard
B-71.
§ 185-29. Town highways.
All streets shall be installed by the subdivider in accordance
with the following minimum requirements for street
construction. The subdivider is responsible for the provision of
all engineering, labor and materials necessary to conform to
these regulations and any additional requirements the
Planning Commission may consider necessary.
A. Classification of streets. The classification of new streets
and streets not shown on the Town Plan shall be as
determined by the Commission. The following standards
shall apply to all streets:
(1) Standards.
Classification Minimum pavement width (ft) R-O-W (ft) Maximum Minimum Center
Gradient Line Radius of Curve (ft)
Collector 24 ft 50 ft 10% 100 ft
Local 20 ft 50 ft 10% 80 ft
(2) Typical cross section: road construction.
B. Greater right-of-way width. The Commission may
require greater right-of-way widths where it is judged
t h a t the demands of present or future traffic make it
desirable or where topographic conditions necessitate
greater width for grading.
C. Gradient. The maximum gradient for all streets shall not
exceed 10%, with the exception that the Commission
may modify, with the compliance of the Select Board and
Road Commissioner, the maximum and minimum
gradient for short lengths of streets where, in its
judgment, existing topographic conditions or the
preservation of natural features indicate that such
modification will result in the best subdivision of land.
The minimum gradient shall allow positive drainage.
D. Paving. All streets to be maintained by the Town shall be
paved in accordance with the current State of Vermont
Agency of Transportation Standard Specifications for
Construction.
E. Subbase. The road subbase shall consist of a minimum of
12 inches of clean run or bank gravel with no stones
exceeding four inches in diameter. A minimum of three
inches of crushed gravel shall be applied on the r u n of
bank gravel base.
F. Drainage.
(1) For a roadway, there shall be an eighteen-inch
galvanized metal pipe minimum with drop inlets or
catch basins as required.
(2) For drives, there shall be a twelve-inch galvanized
metal pipe minimum.
(3) For an underdrain there shall be a six-inch
perforated, galvanized metal pipe as required.
(4) Location, construction, depth and amount of
drainage shall be in accordance with Vermont
standards.
G. Slopes. Guardrails with treated wood or steel posts shall
be provided, plus two feet of shoulder, widening for fills
over 10 feet with slopes of 1:2 or steeper. For slopes of 1:3
or flatter, no guardrail is required. Slopes are to be
top soiled, seeded, fertilized and mulched in accordance
with Vermont specifications.
H. Town highway ordinance. In all instances, the Town
highway ordinance shall govern.
§ 185-30. Access roads.
A. I f the access road to the subdivision is a Class 4 road, the
Commission shall require the subdivider to improve the
access road to municipal highway construction
standards. If in the Municipal Five-Year Highway Plan,
the Class 4 road is not intended to be reclassified as
Class 3, the subdivider must make arrangements for
maintenance of the access road which are satisfactory to
the Commission until such time as the legislative body
may reclassify the road.
B. The Commission may require the subdivider to improve
any access road, where it intersects with new streets or
driveways in the subdivision, to facilitate traffic
circulation and pedestrian and vehicular safety.
C. Access management. [Added 5-24-1999]
(1) Streets, driveways, and intersections shall be
designed and construction in conformance with the
Roadway Policies established in the current Rutland
Municipal Development Plan.
(2) Exceptions to the requirement above may be
granted only if it can be documented that such an
exception would be consistent with the Municipal
Development Plan and desirable to provide for
continuity with streets, driveways, and intersections
in adjoining subdivisions or developed areas.
§ 185-31. Pedestrians.
Where necessary, in the judgment of the Commission,
rights-of-way for pedestrian travel and access may be required
to facilitate pedestrian circulation within the subdivision and to
provide access to public property.
§ 185-32. Utilities.
A. Utility lines. All electric, telephone, cable TV and
outdoor lighting distribution lines shall be placed
underground in accordance with utility company specifications.
In areas of extremely shallow soils, the Planning
Commission may waive this requirement. The subdivider
shall coordinate the design with the utility companies to
ensure adequate and suitable areas for underground
installation for the proposed subdivision and areas
adjacent to the subdivision.
§ 185-32 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 185-33
B. Extension of municipal utilities. All subdivisions shall make
adequate provisions for water supply, storm water and sanitary
sewage disposal and required utilities and improvements.
Contingent on fire district approval, the Commission may
require the extension of public waters and sewers to and
within a proposed subdivision, without cost to the municipality,
where existing lines are, in the judgment of the Commission,
within a reasonable distance of the proposed subdivision.
C. Connections to municipal utilities. Prior to paving, the
subdivider shall install laterals from all utilities to the street
property line of each building lot. Any residential building
constructed in the subdivision shall have house connections
installed and shall have such connections extended inside of
the building. All such utility system installations shall be at
the expense of the subdivider.
D. Depth of utility mains. Water and sewer mains must be laid
below the depth of frost penetration of the area. Sewer lines
shall be set lower than water mains.
E. Easements. A ten-foot-wide easement to accommodate public
utilities shall be reserved along every road or such other
reasonable and practicable places. Such easement shall be
depicted upon the final plat. Every deed to a lot in the
subdivision shall specifically exempt the easement interest
from its operation. The easement area shall be deemed to be
owned by the subdivider or the subdivider's heirs, successors
and assigns and shall not be construed as increasing any setback
distances in relation to the edge of the road right-of-way.
§ 185-33. Water
A. For subdivisions which will connect to a public municipal
water supply system, applications for extensions to the
municipal system shall be approved by the officers arid agents
of a municipality entrusted with the care and superintendence
of a municipal water supply system.
B. The Commission may require that community water supply
system which is unconnected to municipal systems be designed
in such a way that it may eventually be connected to a public
municipal water supply system.
C. For subdivisions which will have individual water supplies, the
subdivider shall provide evidence of the location and availability
of potable water in adequate quantities.
D. The following standards shall be met for those subdivisions
which will have community water systems or individual water
supplies:
(1) Due consideration shall be given to the drainage patterns
in the area.
(2) Building sites and new roadways shall be located far
enough away from underground water concentrations or
surface areas which take in water to prevent runoff from
roads or leachate from septic systems from contaminating
water supplies.
(3) Buildings and septic systems shall be located sufficiently
above floodwater levels and high groundwater areas to
prevent the pollution of surface water.
§ 185-34. Sewage disposal.
A. For subdivisions which will connect to a municipal sewage
disposal system, applications for extensions shall be approved
by the officers and agents of a municipality entrusted with the
care and superintendence of a municipal sewage disposal
system.
B. The Commission may require that community sewage disposal
systems which are unconnected to municipal systems be
designed in such a way that they may be connected eventually
to a municipal sewage disposal system. Community sewage
disposal systems shall meet the requirements of the municipal
health regulations.
C. Individual septic systems shall meet the requirements of the
municipal health regulations and Vermont Health Regulations
Chapter 5, Sanitary Engineering, Subchapter 10, Part III.
D. Subdivisions using subsurface sewage disposal shall meet the
following standards.
(1) All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be located at
least one hundred (100) feet from a drilled well and one
hundred fifty (150) feet from any other form of water
supply.
(2) All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be located at
least two hundred fifty (250) feet from a watercourse or
standing body of water used as a source of public
drinking water.
§ 185-35. Storm water drainage.
An adequate surface storm water drainage system for the entire
subdivision area shall be provided. The subdivider may be required by
the Commission to carry away by pipe or open ditch any spring- or
surface water that may exist either previous to or as a result of the
subdivisions. A culvert or other drainage facility shall, in each case, be
large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire
upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the subdivision.
Where it is anticipated that additional runoff incidental to the
development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream
drainage facility so that there will be drainage to private property or
an increase in the expenditure of public funds, the Commission shall
not approve the subdivision until provision has been made for the
improvement of said condition. Where a subdivision is traversed by a
watercourse or drainage way, there shall be provided a storm water
drainage easement of such width as to encompass the twenty-five yearflood
area of such watercourse, which easement shall be
indicated on the final plat.
§ 185-36. Recreation areas.
A. Where a proposed park, playground or other recreation area is
shown on the comprehensive plan to be located, in whole or in
part, in a proposed subdivision, the Commission shall require
that such area or areas be shown on said plat However, the
area indicated on the plat shall not exceed fifteen percent
(15%) of the total area of the plat
B. If the Commission determines that there is no proposed park,
playground or other recreation area in the Comprehensive
Plan located in a proposed subdivision or if the Commission
determines that such a proposed recreation area of adequate
size cannot be suitably located in the proposed subdivision, the
Commission shall require, as a condition to the approval of the
plat a payment to the municipality of an amount to be
determined by the Board of Selectmen. The payment shall be
used by the municipality to serve the area in which the
subdivision is located. Fees paid pursuant to this section shall
be deposited in a special fund to be used for acquisition and
development of park and recreational facilities.
§ 185-37. Schools.
Where a subdivision will accommodate a total of more than one
hundred (100) dwellings, the Commission may require the designation
of necessary public school sites or a payment in lieu thereof. Prior to
imposing a condition of school site dedication, the Commission shall
contact the Board of Education of the school district(s) of which the
municipality is a part If a Board of Education declares an interest in
a site within the proposed subdivision, the Commission shall require
the subdivider to' set aside the site and to show such area on the plat
If the Commission determines that there is no interest in a school site
or that a school site cannot be suitably located within the proposed
subdivision, the Commission may require, as a condition to the
approval of such plat payment to the municipality of an amount to be
determined by the legislative body. The payment shall be used by the
municipality for the acquisition and development of school sites or
capital improvements to school structures.
§ 185-38. Site preservation and improvements.
A. Natural cover. Land shall be subdivided and improved in
reasonable conformity with existing topography in order to
minimize grading, cut and fill and to retain, insofar as
possible, the natural contours, limit storm water runoff and
conserve the natural cover and soil. After application for
approval has been made to the Commission, no topsoil, sand or
gravel shall be removed from the subdivision for any other
purpose than to meet construction needs for that particular
subdivision or to meet any requirements of these regulations.
B. Shade trees. The Commission may require that suitable
hardwood shade trees, such as sugar maple, norway maple,
red maple, ash or oak, be planted along streets where trees do
not exist. A l l trees shall measure at least ten (10) feet in height
and at least two (2) inches in diameter measured at a point six
(6) inches above finished grade level.
C. Erosion and sediment control. The smallest practical area of
land should be exposed at any one (1) time during development.
Land should not be left exposed during the winter
months. Where necessary, temporary vegetation and/or
mulching and structural measures may be required by the
Commission to protect areas exposed during the development.
Sediment basins shall be installed and maintained during
development to remove sediment from runoff water and from
land undergoing development.
D. Excavation and grading. The entire area of work shall be
brought to the required lines and grades by excavation or
filling. A minimum of four (4) inches of topsoil shall be
provided to cover all finished slopes. All streets shall be graded
from property line to property line to approved grade and
cross section. The Commission may require the developer to
submit evidence of boring and/or other soil investigations to
determine the depth composition and stability of the subgrade
within the road section. Materials for embankment shall be
placed in successive horizontal layers not exceeding six (6)
inches in depth. They shall be thoroughly compacted. The
Commission may require embankments to be planted with
stabilizing shrub or ground cover and seeded with a deep root
perennial grass to prevent erosion.
§ 185-39. Management organizations.
When a development involves common ownership of community
facilities, open spaces or other commonly held property, a management
organization to operate and maintain these facilities shall be
required by the Commission. A prospectus shall be submitted by the
subdivider describing this organization, its financing and membership,
which must meet the requirements of the Commission.

TOWN OF RUTLAND
ZONING REGULATIONS
i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I: Enactment, Objectives, Purpose, and Scope ...................................................... 1
Section 101 - Enactment ............................................................................................................. 1
Section 102 - Objectives and Intent ............................................................................................ 1
Section 103 - Purpose and Scope ................................................................................................ 1
Article II: Definitions .............................................................................................................. 1
Article III: Establishment of Zoning District and Zoning Map ........................................... 2
Section 301 - Establishment of Zoning Districts ........................................................................ 2
Section 302 - Zoning Map .......................................................................................................... 2
Section 303 - Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries ....................................................... 2
Section 304 - Table I: Minimum Lot Sizes, Required Yards, Maximum Building Heights ...... 3
Section 305 - Contiguous, Undeveloped Lots in Common Ownership ...................................... 4
Section 306 - District Descriptions ............................................................................................. 4
Purpose: To accommodate essential public facilities and services and the town's utility based uses and facilities. ....................................................................................................................... 6
Section 307 - Application of Regulations ................................................................................... 6
Article IV: Permitted Uses ....................................................................................................... 6
Section 401 - Table II: Permitted Uses ...................................................................................... 6
Article V: General Regulations.............................................................................................. 8
Section 501 - Compliance with Zoning Regulations .................................................................. 8
Section 502 - Burden of Proof .................................................................................................... 9
Section 503 - Lots in Two Zoning Districts................................................................................ 9
Section 504 - Residential Buildings on Lots.............................................................................. 9
Section 505 - Required Frontage on, or Access to, Public Way or Waters ................................ 9
Section 506 - Required Yards - Measurement of Setbacks, Frontage and Depth ....................... 9
Section 507 - Reduction of Lot Area ........................................................................................ 10
Section 508 - Required Yard or Area ....................................................................................... 10
Section 509 - Corner Lot Exceptions ........................................................................................ 10
Section 510 - Existing Small Lots ............................................................................................ 10
Section 511 - Limitations on municipal bylaws ....................................................................... 11
Section 512 - Grading and Excavation ..................................................................................... 11
Section 513 - Filling of Land .................................................................................................... 11
Section 514 - Demolition of Structures .................................................................................... 11
Section 515 - Temporary Uses and Structures .......................................................................... 12
Section 516 - Campers .............................................................................................................. 12
Section 517 - More Than One Use on a Lot or of a Structure .................................................. 12
Section 518 - Accessory Dwelling Unit.................................................................................... 12
Section 519 - Mobile Homes, Manufactured Housing ............................................................. 13
Section 520 - Residential Care Home or Group Home ............................................................. 13
Section 521 - Child Care Facilities ........................................................................................... 13
Section 522 - Home Occupations ............................................................................................. 14
Section 523 - Gas Stations and Fuel Storage Facilities ............................................................ 15
Section 524 - Cottage Industry ................................................................................................. 15
Section 525 - Solar Energy Systems ......................................................................................... 16
Section 526 - Performance Standards ....................................................................................... 16
Section 527 - Parking Standards ............................................................................................... 17
ii
Article VI: Planned Unit Development................................................................................. 18
Section 601 - Planned Unit Development (PUD) ..................................................................... 18
Section 602 - PUD Application, Requirements, and Procedures .............................................. 18
Section 603 - General Standards for Review ............................................................................ 19
Article VII: Site Plan Approval .............................................................................................. 20
Section 701 - Site Plan Approval .............................................................................................. 20
Section 702 - Submission of Site Plan Map and Supporting Data ........................................... 20
Article VIII: Conditional Uses.................................................................................................. 21
Section 801 - Criteria ................................................................................................................ 21
Section 802 - Application for Conditional Use ......................................................................... 23
Article IX: Nonconforming Structures and Uses ................................................................ 24
Section 901 - Construction Approved Prior to Adoption or Amendment of Regulations ........ 24
Section 902 - Restoration of Use Nonconformity ..................................................................... 24
Section 903 - Discontinuance of Use Nonconformity .............................................................. 24
Section 904 - Maintenance of a Dimensional Nonconformity ................................................. 25
Section 905 - Expansion of a Dimensional Nonconformity ..................................................... 25
Section 906 - Restoration of a Dimensional Nonconformity .................................................... 25
Article X: Administration .................................................................................................... 25
Section 1001 - Zoning Administrator ....................................................................................... 25
Section 1002 - Zoning Permits ................................................................................................. 25
Section 1003 - Exemptions to Zoning Permit Requirement. .................................................... 26
Section 1004 - Zoning Applications ......................................................................................... 26
Section 1005 - Action by the Zoning Administrator ................................................................ 27
Section 1006 - Effective Date of Zoning Permit ...................................................................... 28
Section 1007 - Review of Application During Pendency of Proposed Adoption or Amendment of Zoning Regulations............................................................................................................... 28
Section 1008 - Completion ....................................................................................................... 28
Article XI: Enforcement ........................................................................................................ 29
Section 1101 - Violations of Zoning Regulations..................................................................... 29
Section 1102 - Enforcement Proceedings ................................................................................. 29
Section 1103 - Determination of Separate Offenses ................................................................. 29
Section 1104 - Schedule of Penalties and Waiver Fees ............................................................ 29
Article XII: Development Review Board ............................................................................... 29
Section 1201 - Development Review Board ............................................................................. 29
Section 1202 - DRB Meeting Procedure and Decisions ........................................................... 30
Section 1203 - General Powers and Duties of the DRB ........................................................... 30
Article XIII: Appeals ................................................................................................................. 31
Section 1301 - Exclusivity of Remedy ..................................................................................... 31
Section 1302 - Interested Persons ............................................................................................. 31
Section 1303 - Notice of Appeal From Decision of Zoning Administrator ............................. 32
Section 1304 - Hearing on Appeal ............................................................................................ 32
Section 1305 - Decisions on Appeals. ...................................................................................... 33
Section 1306 - Appeals from Decisions of the DRB ................................................................ 33
Section 1307 - Variances - General .......................................................................................... 33
Section 1308 - Variances - Renewable Energy Resource Structure ......................................... 34
Section 1309 - Waivers: ............................................................................................................ 34
iii
Article XIV: Planning Commission ......................................................................................... 35
Section 1401 - Continuation of the Planning Commission ....................................................... 35
Section 1402 - Appointment and Term of the Planning Commission ...................................... 35
Section 1403 - Meetings ........................................................................................................... 35
Section 1404 - Rules of Procedure and Ethics .......................................................................... 36
Section 1405 - General Powers and Duties of the Planning Commission ................................ 36
Section 1406 - Review of Zoning Amendments ....................................................................... 36
Section 1407 - Advisory Counsel to Other Agencies ............................................................... 36
Article XV: Other Provisions.................................................................................................. 36
Section 1501 - Interpretation of Regulation.............................................................................. 36
Section 1502 - Public Notice of Hearing .................................................................................. 37
Section 1503 - Fees ................................................................................................................... 37
Section 1504 - Amendments ..................................................................................................... 38
Section 1505 - Severability ....................................................................................................... 38
Section 1506 - Effective Date ................................................................................................... 38
Section 1507 - Appendix- Definitions ...................................................................................... 38
1
Rutland Town Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE I: ENACTMENT, OBJECTIVES, PURPOSE, AND SCOPE
Section 101 - Enactment
In accordance with the Vermont Planning and Development Act, 24 V.S.A., Chapter 117, hereinafter referred to as the "Act", there are hereby established Zoning Regulations for Rutland Town which shall be known and cited as the "Rutland Town Zoning Regulations".
Section 102 - Objectives and Intent
A. The objective of the Zoning Regulations is to establish standards and policies concerning development of land that further the goals of the Rutland Town Plan.
B. It is intended that standards and policies established by the Zoning Regulations promote the general health, welfare and quality of life of the residents; maintain the desirable features of the Town; protect and enhance the value of property; prevent overcrowding of land and secure adequate provisions concerning safety, and transportation, and other services such as water, sewage, schools, parks and other public requirements.
C. Careful consideration has been given, among other things, to the character of each district, with respect to its suitability for the particular uses indicated to insure the most appropriate use of the land and its context throughout the Town.
D. This ordinance does not affect the use of land or buildings in existence at the time of its adoption, except through change of status of non-conforming uses as stipulated herein.
Section 103 - Purpose and Scope
A. The purpose of this Regulation is for the promotion of the health, safety, or general welfare of the community by establishing regulations and conditions governing the erection and use of buildings, other structures and use of land and natural resources.
B. The scope of this ordinance includes primarily the establishment and designation of zoning districts in Rutland Town. The use regulations applying to each class of district are stipulated, as well as the general regulations applying to all districts. The methods of dealing with non-conforming uses are outlined. The administration of the Zoning Regulations and the duties of the Zoning Administrator are defined in detail.
ARTICLE II: DEFINITIONS
See Appendix beginning on page 41. Terms that appear in bold face type are defined terms for which the definitions may be found in the Appendix.
2
ARTICLE III: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICT AND ZONING MAP
Section 301 - Establishment of Zoning Districts
Rutland Town hereby establishes the following Zoning Districts:
See Section 304 - Table I for dimensional requirements of each district.
See Section 401 - Table II for uses permitted in each district.
Flood Hazard District
Description: The Flood Hazard Overlay District includes all lands in Rutland Town identified as areas of special flood hazard in and on the most current flood insurance studies and maps published by the department of Homeland Security (DJHS), Federal Emergency management Agency (FEMA), National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), as provided by the Secretary of the Agency of Natural Resources pursuant to 10 V.S.A. § 753 which are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of these regulations. The Zoning Regulations for the Flood Hazard Overlay District are available from the Flood Hazard Administrator.
Section 302 - Zoning Map
A. The location and boundaries of Zoning Districts are established as shown on the Official Zoning Map a copy of which is appended hereto as Appendix C (Page 52). The Official Zoning Map is hereby made a part of these Regulations, together with all future amendments. No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning Map except in conformance with this Regulation.
B. Regardless of the existence of copies of the Official Zoning Map, which may from time to time be made or published, the Official Zoning Map shall be the one located in the Town Clerk's office and it shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas.
Section 303 - Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. Boundaries indicated, as approximately following the centerlines of roads, streams, transportation and utility rights-of-way shall be construed to follow such centerlines;
B. Boundaries indicated, as approximately following lot lines shall be construed to follow such lot lines;
C. Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed as the low mean water level.
3
D. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features in A through C above shall be so construed;
E. Where circumstances are not covered by A through D above, the DRB shall interpret the district boundaries in consultation with the Planning Commission.
Rutland Town
Section 304 - Table I: Minimum Lot Sizes, Required Yards, Maximum Building Heights
The following requirements apply to all uses shown as Permitted (P) in Section 401 - Table II, Table of Uses.

Zone standards
District Minimum Lot Size Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Minimum lot depth Max. Building Height 
R1a  40,000 sq. ft.40 25 40 100 35
R1b 20,000 sq. ft. 25 15 25 75 35
R1c 80,000 sq. ft. 40 25 40 125 35
RB 40,000 sq. ft. 40 25 40 125 35
Ag 10 acres 40 25 40 200 45
OS 25 40 25 40 200 45
C1 40,000 sq. ft. 60 50/25 60/30 125 45
Industrial 40,000 sq. ft. 60 50/25 60/30 125 45
Municipal/Government/ Utility 40,000 sq. ft. 60 50/25 60/30 125 45
NOTES:
* For lots lacking a survey, see Section 506(A) ** When abutting a residential district
Section 305 - Contiguous, Undeveloped Lots in Common Ownership
Undeveloped lots owned by the same party and are contiguous are not exempt from minimum lot sizes in any district.
Section 306 - District Descriptions
N/P Res – Neighborhood/Planned Residential - Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet. where sewer service not provided; 20,000 square feet where sewer service provided.
Description: Areas of existing settlement within the town, selected adjacent areas, and areas suitable for modest and higher density residential development, depending upon the suitability for on-site sewage disposal and/or the presence of municipal sewer systems.
Purpose: To maintain the traditional social and physical character of these areas, by providing for higher density residential development in areas that are suitable for such development due to the capability of the land or the presence of public sewer facilities. Residential development occurring in this district should provide for a variety of dwelling types and, through the use of clustering techniques and their associated higher density, allow for reduced construction costs, affordable per unit costs, conservation of open space and prime agricultural soils, and buffering between lower and higher density development.
Clustering: Residential development may be clustered according to the following provisions:
Open Space Requirement. Residential development may be clustered provided that at least one half of a parcel is designated as open space; the remaining portion is considered the parcel's developable area.
Development Density.. Up to six (6) units per acre (single-family) may be constructed, provided half of the entire parcel of land is not developed.
Maximum Number of Units per Structure. The maximum number of residential units per structure is four.
Minimum Development Size. The minimum size of a clustered residential development is 80,000 square feet.
R/C - Residential/Commercial - Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet
Description: Areas with commercial activity compatible with residential uses and having capability for future sewer services;
Purpose: To allow for a mixture of light commercial, single-family and duplex residential.
5
C - Commercial - minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet where sewer service provided; 80,000 square feet where sewer services not provided.
Description: Land located on arterials that are suitable for commercial clusters that could serve as part of the regional retail center.
Purpose: To cluster and consolidate a variety of retail and other commercial services in suitable locations to meet the needs of local and regional residents. The character of the area should be protected and enhanced with the provision of landscaping and screening. The scale of development in this district should be compatible with adjacent commercial and residential structures. Residential development may be permitted.
AGR/RR – Agricultural/Rural Residential - minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet per 10 acres (example: one 40 acre parcel could support four 40,000 sq. ft. dwelling lots)
Description: Areas that are presently being farmed or are prime farmlands with potential to be farmed, and have rural character that should be conserved through large lot residential development. .
Purpose: To protect existing farms from development and to maintain prime farmland for future farming purposes, and to provide for residential and other compatible uses at densities of one unit per ten (1 0) acres. Open space preservation and other techniques for preserving the rural character of these areas are encouraged.
CNS - Conservation - minimum lot size: 25 acres for single-family residential.
Description: Special forest and/or open lands which are of particular ecological or aesthetic importance. Includes public watersheds as well as certain lands that are not well suited for residential or commercial development because of topography, soil composition, or wetlands.
Purpose: To preserve certain forest and open lands in a relatively undeveloped state and/or to protect public watersheds, wetlands, and water supplies.
I– Industrial- minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet with sewer service, 80,000-sq. ft. without sewer service.
Description: Existing industrial developments that have favorable site conditions, are serviced by public sewer, and have access to arterial highways and/or rail facilities.
Purpose: To accommodate the expanding industrial sectors of the town. Provides for employment opportunities in manufacturing, warehousing, research and development, and allows commercial uses which specifically serve the industries or their employees in areas serviced by good transportation facilities and public utilities.
Municipal/Government/ Utility - minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet.
Description: Lands currently used or planned to be used, for municipal and governmental purposes, including schools, town offices, fire stations, police headquarters, recreation facilities,
6
landfills, salt storage facilities, highway maintenance garages, and cemeteries. Includes developed and undeveloped land owned by electric utilities.
Purpose: To accommodate essential public facilities and services and utility uses and facilities.
Section 307 - Application of Regulations
No division of a parcel into two (2) or more parcels, construction, exterior reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure, or any mining, excavation or landfill, or any change in use of any building, structure, or land or extension of use shall occur except in compliance with all regulations in this Ordinance for the district in which it is located.
ARTICLE IV: PERMITTED USES
P = Means the use is permitted as a matter of right after obtaining a permit in accordance with Section § 1002.
C = Means that the use is permitted in the designated district but subject to review by the DRB in accordance with the conditions set forth in Article VIII.
Some of the above uses may require a STATE PERMIT.
ANY USES NOT SPECIFICALLY PERMITTED ARE PROHIBITED
Section 401 - Table II: Permitted Uses
USES
Neighborhood/Planned Residential
Residential/Commercial
Agricultural/Rural Residential
Conservation
Commercial
Industrial/
Commercial
Municipal/
Government/Utility
Accessory use or building
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Animal Boarding/ Kennel
C
C
P
P
P
Auto Service Station w/Retail Store-Mini-Mart
C
P
P
Banks
P
P
Barber/Beauty Shop
C
P
P
Bed and Breakfast Lodging
C
P
P
P
P
Camp(Cottage)
P
P
Camp (Organized Recreation)
P
P
7
USES
Neighborhood/Planned Residential
Residential/Commercial
Agricultural/Rural Residential
Conservation
Commercial
Industrial/
Commercial
Municipal/
Government/Utility
Car Wash
P
P
Cemetery
P
Club or Lodge, Private
P
P
Community Care Facility
C
P
P
Community Center
P
P
P
P
Contractor's Yards
C
P
P
Cottage Industry
C
P
C
P
P
Day Care (Adult) Facilities
C
C
C
P
P
P
Dwelling Unit
One Family
P
P
P
P
C
Two-Family
P
P
P
C
Multi-Family
(3-4 units)
C
P
Fam Child Care Home (Small)
P
P
P
P
C
Fam. Child Care Home (Large)
w/site plan approval
P
P
P
P
C
Forestry
P
P
P
P
Freight/Truck Terminal
P
Gas Station
P
P
Hotel/ Motel
C
C
C
C
P
P
Home Occupation
P
P
P
P
C
House of Worship
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Industry
C
P
C
Mobile Home Park
P
Motor Vehicle Sales & Service: New and Used
P
P
Municipal Building
C
C
C
C
C
C
P
Office
C
P
P
P
P
8
USES
Neighborhood/Planned Residential
Residential/Commercial
Agricultural/Rural Residential
Conservation
Commercial
Industrial/
Commercial
Municipal/
Government/Utility
Planned Unit Development
C
C
Recreation Facility Indoor/Outdoor
C
C
C
C
P
P
P
Recycling Center
P
P
P
Restaurant, Bar
P
P
Retail
C
C
P
P
Sand, Gravel, Soil Extraction/Quarry
C
C
C
C
P
P
P
School
C
C
C
C
P
P
P
Storage, Enclosed
P
P
P
Storage, Open
P
P
P
Veterinarians
w/o Boarding
C
C
P
P
Warehouse
P
P
P
Wildlife Refuge
P
P
Wholesale Distributor, Use
P
P
Temporary Structure
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
ARTICLE V: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section 501 - Compliance with Zoning Regulations
A. No land, building, or premises, or part thereof, shall hereafter be used, and no building or part thereof, or other structure, shall be constructed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, moved or altered, except in conformity with this Regulation.
B. No lot shall have an area, width, or a front, side or rear yard, less than that set forth unless otherwise provided for in this Regulation.
C. No building or buildings shall occupy in the aggregate a greater percentage of lot area than set forth unless otherwise provided for in this Regulation.
9
Section 502 - Burden of Proof
Any person applying to the Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission, or the DRB bears the burden of proof for each and every requirement and element of these Regulations.
Section 503 - Lots in Two Zoning Districts
Where a district boundary line divides a lot of record at the time such line is adopted, the regulations for the less restricted part of such lot shall extend not more than thirty feet into the more restricted part.
Section 504 - Residential Buildings on Lots
There shall be no more than one residential or primary building on a lot except for Planned Unit Developments.
Section 505 - Required Frontage on, or Access to, Public Way or Waters
Land development may be permitted on lots which do not have frontage either on a highway or public waters, provided that access to a public way through a permanent easement or right-of-way has been approved in accordance with standards and process specified in Rutland Town’s subdivision bylaws. Any such permanent easement or right-of-way providing access to lots which do not have frontage either on a highway or public waters shall be at least 20 feet in width. 24 V.S.A. § 4412(3).
Section 506 - Required Yards - Measurement of Setbacks, Frontage and Depth
A. The front yard setback as set forth for the district in question in Section 304 - Table I shall be measured from the front property line (the lot line that adjoins the public way) when the lot is described by a survey prepared by a licensed surveyor, that in turn identifies and references physical monuments or markers that exist on the ground. For lots that lack such a survey, the front yard setback shall consist of a line that runs parallel to the center line of the adjoining public way and calculated as the distance set forth in Section 304 - Table I for the district in question, plus one half of the width of the public way, with the total measurement to be taken from the centerline of the public way. Unless a building is a pre-existing, non-complying structure, no part of a building may intersect with the front yard setback line.
B. The side yard setback shall consist of a line that runs parallel to the lot lines that intersect with the center line of the public way at such distance as specified in the district in which the lot is located. See Section 304 - Table I. Unless a building is a pre-existing, non-complying structure, no part of a building may intersect with the side yard setback line.
C. The rear yard setback is measured from the lot line that is opposite and most distant from the center line of the public way at such distance as specified in the district in which the lot is located. See Section 304 - Table I. Unless a building is a pre-existing, non-complying structure, no part of a building may intersect with the rear yard setback line.
10
D. Lot depth is measured from the center line of the public way. No part of the rear lot line shall be closer to the center line of the public way than the distance specified in district in which the lot is located. See Section 304 - Table I.
E. Lot frontage is the distance between the lot lines that intersect with the center line of the public way. A lot shall have the no less lot frontage than the minimum specified in district in which the lot is located. See Section 304 - Table I.
F. Where a lot fronts on public waters, rather than a public way, “mean water line” shall replace “center line of the public way” in this section.
Section 507 - Reduction of Lot Area
No lot shall be so reduced in area that the area, yards, frontage, coverage, or other requirements of these regulations do not conform to the requirements herein prescribed for each district. The provisions of this section shall not apply when part of a lot is taken for a public purpose or where provisions are modified under Article VI (Planned Unit Developments).
Section 508 - Required Yard or Area
A. Space required under these regulations to satisfy area, yard or other open space requirements in relation to one building shall not be counted as part of a required open space for any other building.
Section 509 - Corner Lot Exceptions
Any yard adjoining a street shall be considered a front yard. A corner lot shall be considered to have only front yards and side yards.
Section 510 - Existing Small Lots
A. A lot in individual and separate and non-affiliated ownership from surrounding properties in existence on the effective date of these Regulations may be developed for the purpose permitted in the District in which it is located, even though not conforming to minimum lot size requirements unless the lot has a lot area of less than one-eighth acre or the lot has a minimum width or depth dimension of less than 40 feet.
B. Development is prohibited of an existing small lot that has a lot area of less than one-eighth acre or the lot has a minimum width or depth dimension of less than 40 feet.
C. If an existing small lot subsequently comes under common ownership with one or more contiguous lots, the existing small lot shall be deemed merged with the contiguous lot for purposes of this chapter. However, an existing small lot shall not be deemed merged and may be separately conveyed, if:
1. The lots are conveyed in their preexisting, non-conforming configuration;
11
2. On the effective date of any zoning regulations, each lot had been developed with a water supply and wastewater disposal system;
3. At the time of transfer, each water supply and wastewater system is functioning in an acceptable manner; and
4. The deeds of conveyance create appropriate easements on both lots for replacement of one or more wastewater systems, potable water systems, or both, in case there is a failed system or failed supply as defined by 10 V.S.A. § 1972.
Section 511 - Limitations on municipal bylaws
(a) The following uses may be regulated only with respect to location, size, height, building bulk, yards, courts, setbacks, density of buildings, off-street parking, loading facilities, traffic, noise, lighting, landscaping, and screening requirements, and only to the extent that regulations do not have the effect of interfering with the intended functional use:
(1) State- or community-owned and operated institutions and facilities.
(2) Public and private schools and other educational institutions certified by the state department of education.
(3) Churches and other places of worship, convents, and parish houses.
(4) Public and private hospitals.
(5) Regional solid waste management facilities certified under 10 V.S.A. chapter 159.
(6) Hazardous waste management facilities for which a notice of intent to construct has been received under 10 V.S.A. § 6606a.
Section 512 - Grading and Excavation
Any earth left exposed as a result of land development activity shall be stabilized to prevent erosion.
Section 513 - Filling of Land
A zoning permit is required for the depositing of rock, concrete, stone, gravel, sand, cinders, stumps, and soil used for the filling of land where such activity will alter existing drainage patterns, cause soil erosion, or otherwise adversely affect the community.
Section 514 - Demolition of Structures
Within six months after a permanent or temporary building or structure has been destroyed, demolished or left in a dilapidated state, all structural materials shall be removed from the site,
12
and any excavation remaining shall be covered over or filled to the normal grade and seeded by the owner.
Section 515 - Temporary Uses and Structures
Temporary permits may be issued by the Zoning Administrator for the period not exceeding one year after approval by the DRB for non-conforming uses incidental to construction projects, provided such permits are conditioned upon agreement by the owner to remove the structure or use upon expiration of the permit. Such permits may be renewed upon application for an additional period not exceeding one year.
Section 516 - Campers
A. No more than one camper may be stored, parked or otherwise located on a residential property.
B. A camper may be stored, parked or otherwise located on a property that is not otherwise developed with a structure, provided the undeveloped lot is abutting the applicant’s primary residence except as provided in subsection C below.
C. No camper may be occupied for more than seven days in any six-month period without first receiving a temporary use permit from the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may issue such a temporary use permit for a period not to exceed 30 days, provided the Applicant demonstrates the means to dispose of all wastewater in a safe and sanitary manner and the camper is otherwise in compliance with all other provisions of this Bylaw.
D. A camper cannot be used for living quarters on any property, which contains a principal dwelling
Section 517 - More Than One Use on a Lot or of a Structure
Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent two separate uses from occupying a single lot (meeting minimum lot size) or structure, provided that each use complies with all other applicable provisions of this regulation.
Section 518 - Accessory Dwelling Unit
A single accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted on any lot upon which a owner-occupied single-family dwelling is located, provided that:
1. the property has sufficient wastewater capacity,
2. the accessory dwelling unit does not exceed 30 percent of the total habitable floor area of the single-family dwelling, and
3. the accessory dwelling unit complies with the applicable setback, coverage, and parking requirements for the District in which the property is located.
13
4. Subsection 2 above shall not apply to an accessory dwelling unit provided by a “farm employer” to a “farm employee” as a “benefit of farm employment” as those terms are defined by 9 V.S.A. § 4469.
Section 519 - Mobile Homes, Manufactured Housing
This regulation shall not have the effect of excluding Affordable Housing as set forth in 24 V.S.A. § 4412(1).
A. Mobile homes, modular and prefabricated housing structures may not be parked, stored or otherwise located on any property without a building permit or temporary use permit.
B. If a State septic permit has been issued for the installation of a mobile or modular home, the structure may be temporarily parked or stored on the property where the installation is to be made provided the permanent installation shall be accomplished within fifteen days of the structure's arrival on the property.
C. Any application to construct a Mobile Home Park shall be treated as one for a Planned Unit Development under Article VI and the Subdivision Regulations.
Section 520 - Residential Care Home or Group Home
A state licensed or registered residential care home, or group home, serving not more than eight persons who have a handicap or disability as defined in 9 V.S.A. § 4501, shall be considered by right to constitute a permitted single-family residential use of property, except that no such home shall be so considered if it is located within 1,000 feet of another existing or permitted residential care home or group home.
Section 521 - Child Care Facilities
A. Child Care Facility, Nonresidential: A child care facility in which the caregiver does not provide child care in the caregiver’s residence. A nonresidential child care facility shall require conditional-use approval in those districts in which such use is allowed. A nonresidential child care facility shall not include a family child care home.
B. Family Child Care Home, Small: The provision of child care by a caregiver in the caregiver’s residential home, which is exempt from state registration requirements pursuant to 33 V.S.A. § 3502(b)(1), shall be considered to constitute a permitted use of single-family residential property. A small family child care home shall require conditional-use approval in a commercial district. Section 3502(b)(1) of Title 33 exempts from the state registration requirement the provision of child care in the caregiver’s own residence for children of not more than two families, other than those of the caregiver.
C. Family Child Care Home, Large: A state-registered family child care home, as defined by 33 V.S.A. § 4902(3), shall be considered to constitute a permitted use of single-family residential property, but shall require site plan approval. A large family child care home shall require conditional-use approval in a commercial district. Section 4902(3) of Title
14
33 defines family child care home as a home in which the caregiver provides child care on a regular basis in the caregiver’s own residence for not more than 10 children at any one time (of which up to six children may be provided care on a full-time basis, and the remainder on a part-time basis).
Section 522 - Home Occupations
A. Home occupations are permitted in all districts in which residences are permitted. Residents may use 30% or less of a dwelling unit or a building accessory thereto for a home occupation provided that the use does not have an undue adverse effect upon the character of the residential area in which the dwelling is located.
B. The following uses qualify as home occupations: antique shop, dressmaking, home cooking, sewing, tailoring, teaching, the practice of an accountant, architect, artist, dentist, photographer, doctor, engineer, insurance agent, lawyer, musician, realtor, barber or beautician, computer programming.
C. Any other home occupation that is customary in residential areas shall be considered a conditional use and shall comply with the provisions of Article VIII.
D. The following requirements apply to all home occupations:
1. The dwelling, accessory structures and the lot maintain a residential appearance at all times;
2. The home occupation must clearly be secondary to the use of the site for residential purposes;
3. The home occupation must be conducted by a resident or the principal practitioner of the home occupation, within a portion of the dwelling or a building accessory thereto occupying in total area not more than 30% of the floor area of the dwelling.
4. The owner of the home occupation shall not have not more than two (2) employees;
5. There are no retail sales unless the items sold are the product of the owner’s own labor, or are antiques;
6. The home occupation does not generate unsafe or intrusive traffic, parking, noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference.
7. The home occupation shall not have more than one sign. Such signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet and shall not be illuminated.
8. A home occupation that is permitted may continue only as long as the permit holder occupies the dwelling. The permit shall expire upon relocation by the
15
permit holder and shall not run with the land nor be transferable to a new location with the original permit holder.
9. A home occupation shall not include commercial stables or kennels, garages or shops for repair of motor vehicles, and restaurants.
Section 523 - Gas Stations and Fuel Storage Facilities
A. In all districts where permitted, gasoline stations shall comply with the following:
1. A gasoline station shall not be located within the wellhead protection area.
2. Lot size shall be at least 20,000 square feet.
3. Lot frontage shall be at least 150 feet.
4. Lot depth shall be at least 125 feet.
5. Pumps, lubricating and other service devices shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from the front lot line and side and rear lot lines.
6. All fuel and oil shall be stored at least thirty-five (35) feet from any property line. Bulk fuel and oil shall, in addition to being placed underground, shall otherwise comply with State regulations.
7. All automobile parts and discarded vehicles are to be stored within a building, and no repair work is to be performed outside a building.
8. No signs shall extend beyond the pumps, nor exceed twenty (20) feet in height above grade.
9. There shall be no more than two (2) access driveways from the street, the maximum width of each shall be 25 feet.
10. A suitable curbed landscaped area shall be maintained at least five (5) feet in depth along all street frontage not used as a driveway in addition to any other landscaping as required by the DRB.
No commercial fuel storage facility shall be permitted in source water protection areas as designated by the Department of Environmental Conservation.
Section 524 - Cottage Industry
A. No more than fifty (50) percent of the floor area of the principal dwelling may be used for a cottage industry.
B. The use does not change the character of the area and, the dwelling, accessory buildings, and the lot maintains a residential appearance at all times.
16
C. The cottage industry is clearly secondary to the use of the site for residential purposes.
D. The use is conducted within a portion of the dwelling or a building accessory thereto by the bona fide year-round resident of the dwelling.
E. No more than two (3) employees, in addition to the principal owner, shall be permitted.
F. The use shall not generate traffic, parking, noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference beyond what normally occurs in the applicable zoning district.
G. Storage of equipment related to the cottage industry shall be within an enclosed structure or properly screened from adjacent residential uses.
Section 525 - Solar Energy Systems
A. The use of solar energy systems, whether as a part of a building or incidental to a building, are permitted accessory uses in all districts.
B. Certain architectural features needed for the operation of active and passive solar energy systems, including but not limited to overhangs, detached solar collectors, reflectors and piping may be permitted by the Zoning Administrator to project into the required yard if conformance with yard requirements will cause undue expense or unusual difficulties and such projections do not adversely affect the character of the neighborhood.
Section 526 - Performance Standards
The following performance standards must be met and maintained for all uses in all districts. No use, under normal conditions, shall cause, create or result in:
1. Regularly-occurring noise in excess of 65 decibels at the property line.
2. Clearly apparent constant vibration which, when transmitted through the ground, is discernible at property lines without aid of instruments for more than three (3) minutes in a thirty (30) minute period.
3. Any electromagnetic disturbances or electronic transmissions or signals which will repeatedly and substantially interfere with the reception of radio, television, or other electronic signals, or which are otherwise detrimental to public health, safety and welfare (except from telecommunications facilities which are specifically licensed and regulated through the Federal Communications Commission).
4. Glare, lumen, light or reflection which constitutes a nuisance to other property owners or tenants, which impairs the vision of motor vehicle operators, or which is otherwise detrimental to public health, safety and welfare. This applies to signs as well as other uses.
17
5. Liquid or solid waste or refuse which violate State and/ or local standards; or are in excess of available capacities for proper disposal which cannot be disposed of by available existing methods without undue burden to municipal or public disposal facilities; which pollute surface or ground waters; or which is otherwise detrimental to public health, safety and welfare.
6. Undue fire, safety, explosive, radioactive emission or other hazard which endangers the public, public facilities, or neighboring properties; or which results in a significantly increased burden on municipal facilities and services.
7. Harmful wastes to be discharged into the sewer system, streams or other bodies of water.
Section 527 - Parking Standards
A. Required Off-Street Parking
For all development hereafter authorized by Zoning Permit there shall be provided off-street parking spaces at least as set forth below:
1. Residential uses: Two parking spaces per dwelling unit. The parking spaces required for all residential dwellings shall be located on the same lot or within 500 feet.
2. Lodging facilities: Hotel, motel, lodge, country inn, guest house: One parking space per lodging unit. Where the total of lodging units exceeds ten (10), there shall be one parking space per lodging unit plus such additional spaces as calculated by multiplying the total number of lodging units by 15%. Any fractional result yielded by this calculation shall be rounded up to the next whole number (example: 14.2 parking spaces becomes 15 spaces).
3. Places of public assembly: Every structure used as a theater, amusement facility, auditorium, community center, club, stadium, library, museum, church, hall, or other place of public or private assembly, one parking space for every three seats.
4. Commercial business use: Four parking spaces for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of area as calculated from the footprint(s) of the building(s) on the property used for business.
5. Restaurant, eating, and drinking establishments: One parking space for each three seats, each three standees, and each three employees.
6. Industrial, Wholesale, Warehouse, Storage, Freight and Trucking Uses: One parking space for every motor vehicle used in the business, plus one parking space for every two employees employed on the premises in the maximum shift.
7. Home Occupations and Cottage Industries: At least two (2) parking spaces must be provided in addition to the requirements of paragraph 1 (above).
18
8. Recreational Area: All parking site plans must be reviewed and approved by the DRB.
B. Reduction of Minimum Parking Requirements
An applicant may request that minimum parking standards established in subsection A be reduced. The applicant shall submit the request to the review DRB in writing. The request shall include the number of expected full and part-time employees, if applicable, and the expected numbers of customers at peak weekday and weekend hours during standard weeks and months, and any shared parking opportunities in the vicinity.
C. Pervious Surface Requirements
If a parking area containing more than 50 total parking spaces, at least 25% of the surface of the parking area shall be constructed of a semi-permeable or fully permeable material.
D. The requirement for parking space shall be a continuing obligation of the owner. All off- street parking shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner that provides for year-round use. These required parking spaces shall all be located on the same lot as the principal use or on a lot which is within 500 feet of the principal use. Parking shall not be permitted within 5 feet of the property line.
E. Design and Standards for Off-Street Parking
Parking spaces shall, at the minimum, meet the design standards depicted on Appendix A (Page 50).
ARTICLE VI: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
Section 601 - Planned Unit Development (PUD)
A. General intent: These PUD regulations are intended to permit and encourage more flexibility and creativity in the design of larger parcels.
B. The DRB may review an application for a PUD simultaneously with subdivision plat or site plan approval.
Section 602 - PUD Application, Requirements, and Procedures
A. A PUD application shall include a written statement setting forth the nature of all proposed modifications, changes or supplementations of existing zoning regulations.
1. If no subdivision of land is to take place, the application shall include a site plan in accordance with Article VII of these regulations.
B. Dwelling units may, at the discretion of the DRB, be of varied types, including one family, two-family, and multi-family construction.
19
C. If the application of this procedure results in lands available for park, recreation, open space, or other municipal purposes, the DRB as a condition for its approval may establish such conditions on the ownership, use, and maintenance of such lands as it deems necessary to assure the preservation of such lands for their intended purposes.
D. The minimum size of a PUD shall be 25 acres.
E. The base density for the development shall be calculated by dividing the maximum number of dwelling units per lot normally permitted for the zoning district in which it is located by the minimum lot size, as specified in Article III. For example, if two-family homes are acceptable in a 5-acre district, the maximum density allowed is 2/5 = .4 units/acre.
F. The following shall not be considered in the calculation of open space in a PUD: land for roads, slopes over 20%, waterbodies, floodplains, and/or wetlands.
G. The DRB decision shall be based on the criteria listed under General Standards for Review and conditions limiting development on this site such as shallow depth of soil, wetness, and steep slopes, and the site plan or subdivision review.
H. The DRB may increase or decrease the setback requirements if, in its judgment, the special circumstances of a proposed development would make such requirements inappropriate. Side and rear setback requirements, as listed in Article III and as used in this Section, shall be interpreted as the side and rear setback requirement required for the PUD as a whole and not as the setback requirements for each particular structure placed in such PUD.
I. The DRB may allow for a greater density or intensity of residential land use within some section or sections of the development than within others, which shall be offset by a lesser density in any other section.
Section 603 - General Standards for Review
The following general standards shall be met in order for the DRB to approve the PUD application:
A. The PUD is consistent with the Town Plan.
B. The PUD is an effective and unified treatment of the project site. Specifically, the plan makes appropriate provisions for the protection of the Town’s fragile natural resource and scenic areas.
C. The development plan is proposed to be completed over a reasonable period of time.
20
ARTICLE VII: SITE PLAN APPROVAL
Section 701 - Site Plan Approval
A. No zoning permit shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator for any use or structure until the DRB grants site plan approval. Notwithstanding, the following uses or structures are exempted:
1. Single-family and two-family dwellings
2. Accessory structures
Section 702 - Submission of Site Plan Map and Supporting Data
A. The owner shall submit six (6) sets of site plan maps and supporting data to the DRB which shall include the following information presented in drawn form and accompanied by written text:
1. Name and address of the owner of record and adjoining lands. Name and address of person or firm preparing the map (if different). Scale of map, north arrow and date.
2. Survey or sketch of the property showing existing features, including contours (if available), structures, roads, utility easement, rights of way, land use and deed restrictions.
3. Site plan showing proposed structure(s), locations and land use areas; streets, driveways, traffic circulation, parking and loading spaces and pedestrian walks; landscaping plans, including site grading, landscape design and screening.
4. Construction sequence and time schedule for completion of each phase for buildings, parking spaces and landscaped areas of the entire development.
B. Site Plan Review Procedure
The DRB shall take into consideration the following objectives in conducting its review:
1. Site plans that retain the maximum possible meadowland for potential agricultural use and maximum possible land of scenic value shall be given favorable consideration. The DRB shall encourage structures and roads to be located on the edges of properties, where such siting furthers their preservation.
2. Safety of pedestrian and vehicular circulation between the site and the street network including:
(i) location, number and width of access points, curve radii at access points, acceleration or deceleration lanes on adjacent public streets;
(ii) sight distance improvements;
21
(iii) shared access with adjoining properties; and,
(iv) location of sidewalks and/or other walkways.
(v) Particular consideration shall be given to visibility at intersections, to traffic flow and control, to pedestrian safety and convenience, and to access in case of an emergency.
3. Consideration shall be given to the items in (2) above and effect of noise, glare, or odors on adjoining properties. Refuse and service areas should be included in this consideration. Provisions for snow removal should also be made.
4. Adequacy of circulation, parking and loading facilities. Adequacy of on-site circulation, parking, and loading facilities. In the case of a Planned Unit Development, no more than 2 parking spaces per unit shall be accommodated in any single parking area. Particular attention shall be given to safety, including aisle widths to accommodate emergency vehicles, traffic movement patterns and location of parking areas to prevent conflicts with entering and exiting traffic onto a public street, location of loading docks and number and size of parking spaces.
5. Adequacy of landscaping, screening and setbacks with regard to achieving maximum compatibility and protection to adjacent properties.
6. All private lighting shall be placed, directed, and shielded so that the light points downward and does not create direct light to shine on other properties. Lighting shall not interfere with pedestrian or motorist vision. Lighting shall be placed in a manner that will not create a nuisance to other premises, or interfere with traffic.
7. Protection of existing or proposed renewable energy resources, such as solar collectors and windmills, on this and adjoining properties.
8. Adequate stormwater management measures to ensure that no additional stormwater runoff is generated beyond the boundaries of the property and that existing drainage patterns are not altered in a manner which impacts neighboring properties, town highways or surface waters.
ARTICLE VIII: CONDITIONAL USES
Section 801 - Criteria
A. Zoning permit shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator for any use or structure which requires conditional use approval only after the DRB grants such approval. In considering its action, the DRB shall make findings that the proposed conditional use does not create undue adverse impact as set forth below:
1. The proposed conditional use shall not have an undue adverse effect on the capacity of existing or planned community facilities
22
(i) Water and Sewer. The project shall have sufficient water and sewer capacity available for its needs and shall not result in an unreasonable burden on the municipality's present or planned water or sewer systems (if Town water or sewer are not involved, the property must have adequate capability for on-site water supply and wastewater disposal in accordance with Town regulations and applicable State Statutes and Regulations). The DRB may solicit input from the appropriate Town Official and require engineering reports by the applicant.
(ii) School Impact. The project shall not cause an unreasonable burden on the ability of the Town or School districts to provide educational services. The DRB may solicit input from the School Boards.
(iii) Municipal Impact. The project shall not place an unreasonable burden upon the ability of the Town to provide municipal services, including but not limited to fire, police, ambulance/rescue, highway, and public works, maintenance, and recreation. The DRB may solicit input from the appropriate local officials.
2. The proposed conditional use shall not have an undue adverse effect on the character of the neighborhood, or area affected.
(i) "Neighborhood" means in the same area; nearby including but not limited to the area within sight and/or sound. "Character of a neighborhood" refers to the distinctive traits, qualities or attributes; its appearance and essential nature, pattern of uses, and sense of community; the factors which give it identity.
(ii) A goal of the Town Plan is to allow for appropriate mixed uses to generally encourage balanced diversity, while protecting the essential character of neighborhoods. The existence of one conditional use in a neighborhood shall not be interpreted as justification for another similar conditional use to be located there.
(iii) When considering the "character of the neighborhood or area", the DRB shall consider the following:
(a) Existing neighborhood uses, types of buildings, noise and traffic.
(b) Historic buildings and features; intensity, uniformity or mix of uses and buildings; mass, scale and spacing of buildings; scenic views, aesthetics, open space.
3. The proposed conditional use shall not have an undue adverse effect on traffic on roads and highways in the vicinity.
23
(i) The project shall have adequate traffic access, circulation and parking, and shall not cause unreasonable traffic congestion or unsafe conditions with respect to pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other transportation facilities.
(ii) The DRB shall consider town traffic plans and studies and may require the applicant to submit traffic engineering studies.
4. The proposed conditional use shall not have an undue adverse effect upon the use of renewable energy resources.
5. The proposed conditional use shall meet the site plan requirements as specified in Article VII.
B. In granting conditional use approval, the DRB may attach such reasonable written conditions as it deems necessary, including without limitation, the provision of a performance bond or other form of security to secure compliance with the permit and its conditions.
Section 802 - Application for Conditional Use
A. The owner and/or applicant shall submit six (6) sets of a site plan and supporting data to the DRB, which shall include the following information presented in drawn form and accompanied by written text:
1. Name and address of the owner of record of this, adjoining lands, and lands adjacent (across a road); name and address of applicant - if different than owner; name and address of person or firm preparing the plan; description of the property giving location; scale of map, north arrow, and date.
2. Survey of the property showing existing features, including contours, structures, large trees, streets, utility easements, rights-of-way, land use and deed restrictions, zoning classification, existing surface waters (brooks, ponds, etc.), if any, and the location of proposed structures with distance from lot lines indicated.
3. Site plan showing proposed structure(s), locations and land use areas; streets, access points, driveways, traffic circulation, parking and loading spaces and pedestrian walks; utilities both existing and proposed, including placement of poles; and including water wells and sewage treatment facilities; landscaping plans, including site grading, planting design, screening or fencing, detailed specifications of planting and landscaping materials to be used; existing and proposed above ground equipment such as propane tanks, transformers, etc.
4. Construction sequence and anticipated time schedule for the completion of each phase for buildings, parking spaces and landscaped areas of the entire development.
5. A traffic study if issues of safety are a concern.
24
6. The location and size of proposed signs.
7. A certification signed by the applicant that all adjoining and adjacent property owners have been notified of the application.
8. The additional information required in Section 702 to the extent not included in this Subsection A.
B. In the exercise of its discretion, the DRB may waive submission of any the information identified in Subsection A above.
1. The applicant shall submit to the DRB a written request for a waiver and shall specify the requirement(s) of Subsection A for which waiver is requested, together with the reason(s) for the request. for waiver. The applicant shall include a preliminary site plan providing sufficient information upon which the DRB can make a decision. The DRB may require such additional information as it deems necessary.
C. A request for a waiver shall not be considered an application for purposes of timing requirements relating to action on applications.
ARTICLE IX: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES
Existing uses at the time of this Ordinance’s adoption are permitted with the following conditions.
Section 901 - Construction Approved Prior to Adoption or Amendment of Regulations
Nothing contained in these Regulations shall require any change in a nonconformity where such nonconformity conformed to all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations prior to the enactment of these regulations.
Section 902 - Restoration of Use Nonconformity
Any use nonconformity (of land or a structure) which has been destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, act of God, or by vandalism or public enemy, may be restored or reconstructed by the commencement of construction within one year of such damage to the same use and/or structural dimensions and location as existed before such damage and the completion of the construction or restoration within two (2) years.
Section 903 - Discontinuance of Use Nonconformity
A nonconformity shall not be re-established if such nonconformity has been discontinued for a period of at least one year or has been changed to or replaced by, a conformity. Intent to resume a nonconformity shall not confer the right to do so. If a nonconformity is not reestablished within one year from the commencement of the discontinuance, the future use of the lot or structure shall be in conformance with the provisions of these regulations.
25
Section 904 - Maintenance of a Dimensional Nonconformity
A dimensional nonconformity may be normally maintained and repaired provided that such action does not increase the degree of non-compliance.
Section 905 - Expansion of a Dimensional Nonconformity
A dimensional nonconformity may be expanded or developed as required by law or ordinance or as may be required for safety or necessary to secure or insure the continued advantageous use of the building during its lifetime.
Section 906 - Restoration of a Dimensional Nonconformity
A. Any dimensional nonconformity which has been destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, act of God, or by vandalism or public enemy, may be restored within a one (1) year period, to the same dimensional nonconformity as existed before such damage.
B. Restoration shall be commenced within one (1) year and shall be completed within two (2) years.
ARTICLE X: ADMINISTRATION
Section 1001 - Zoning Administrator
A. A Zoning Administrator shall be nominated by the Planning Commission and appointed by the Selectboard to administer these Regulations for a term of three years as provided in 24 V.S.A. § 4448.
B. The Zoning Administrator shall literally administer these Regulations and shall not have the power to permit any land development that is not in conformance with this regulation.
C. In so doing the Zoning Administrator shall inspect developments, maintain records, and perform other necessary tasks to carry out the provisions of these Regulations.
D. The Selectboard may remove the Zoning Administrator for cause after consultation with the Planning Commission.
Section 1002 - Zoning Permits
A. Land development may be commenced in Rutland Town only after the Zoning Administrator has issued a zoning permit.
B. Hereafter the division of a parcel into two (2) or more parcels, the construction, exterior reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building(s) or other structure(s), or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any change in the use of any building or other structure, or land, or extension of use of land shall commence only
26
in compliance with all regulations in this bylaw for the district in which the development is to be located.
C. A permit shall not be required for interior or exterior changes that do not change the permitted use or footprint of a structure or modify any conditions that may have been set by these Regulations.
Section 1003 - Exemptions to Zoning Permit Requirement.
A. The following shall not require a zoning permit:
1. Fences, hedges or walls which do not interfere with corner visibility and which are no more than eight (8) feet in height.
2. Porches, terraces, decks, or steps which are in conformance with all front, side, and rear setback requirements for the district.
3. Doghouses, storage sheds, tree houses, or similar structures having less than 200 square feet in floor area and less than 12 feet in height and which are in conformance with all front, side, and rear setback requirements for the district.
4. Any sign erected by the Town or State for directional information or traffic control purposes.
5. Re-conveyance of a pre-existing conforming lot as provided in Section 511(C).
6. Highway road maintenance.
7. Installation of consumer satellite dishes not exceeding twenty-four inches (24”) in diameter and not exceeding applicable district setback or height limits, or those commonly used in residential service.
Section 1004 - Zoning Applications
A. All applications shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on forms furnished by him/her and shall be accompanied by six (6) copies of a plan, no smaller than 11”X17”, no smaller than 1” to 40’ drawn to scale, showing
1. The dimensions of the lot, including existing property boundaries;
2. The location, footprint and height or existing and proposed structures or additions;
3. The location of existing and proposed accesses (curb cuts), driveways and parking areas
4. The location of existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way;
27
5. Existing and required setbacks from property boundaries, road rights-of-way, surface waters and wetlands;
6. The location of existing and proposed water and wastewater systems; and
7. Other such information as required by the Zoning Administrator to determine conformance with these regulations
Section 1005 - Action by the Zoning Administrator
A. The Zoning Administrator shall, within thirty (30) days of receiving a complete application, either issue or deny a zoning permit, or refer the application as appropriate to the DRB and/or state agency for review.
B. An application shall not be deemed complete until the applicant has submitted all information required by these Regulations.
C. If the permit application is denied, the Zoning Administrator shall so notify the applicant in writing and state the reason(s) therefore.
D. If the Zoning Administrator fails to act with regard to a complete application for a permit within thirty (30) days, whether by issuing a decision or by making a referral to the DRB and /or state agency, a permit shall be deemed issued on the 31st day.
E. No zoning permit shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator for any use or structure which requires the approval of the DRB until such approval has been obtained. For permit applications that must be referred to a state agency for review, no zoning permit shall be issued before a response has been received from the state or the expiration of thirty (30) days following the submission of the application to the state.
F. Each zoning permit issued under this Section shall contain a statement that the permit may be appealed within fifteen (15) days of the date of issuance.
G. Within three (3) days following the issuance of a zoning permit, the Zoning Administrator shall:
1. Deliver a copy of the permit to the listers of the municipality and
2. Post a notice of permit, on the form prescribed by the Town, within view of the nearest public right-of-way until the time for appeal has expired.
H. Within thirty (30) days following the issuance of a zoning permit, the Zoning Administrator shall:
1. Deliver the original or a legible copy of the permit to the town clerk for recording.
28
2. File a copy of the permit in the town office where all municipal land use permits are kept.
I. The issuance of a zoning permit does not relieve the applicant of any responsibility for obtaining other required local, state or federal permits or approvals as necessary.
Section 1006 - Effective Date of Zoning Permit
A. A zoning permit shall not take effect until the expiration of fifteen (15) days from the date of issuance (the appeal period).
B. If notice of appeal is properly filed with respect to a zoning permit, the permit shall not take effect until the final adjudication of the appeal.
C. No site work or construction shall occur until the zoning permit becomes effective.
Section 1007 - Review of Application During Pendency of Proposed Adoption or Amendment of Zoning Regulations
A. If a public notice for a first public hearing is issued by the Selectboard with respect to the adoption or amendment of these Zoning Regulations, the Zoning Administrator, for a period of 150 days following that notice, shall review any new application filed after the date of the notice under the proposed zoning regulation or amendment and the existing Regulations. If the new zoning regulation or amendment has not been adopted by the conclusion of the 150-day period, or if the proposed zoning regulation or amendment is rejected, the permit shall be reviewed under the existing Zoning Regulations.
B. Upon request of the applicant, an application that has been denied under a proposed zoning regulation or amendment that has been rejected, or that has not been adopted within the 150-day period, shall be reviewed again, at no cost, under the existing Zoning Regulations.
Section 1008 - Completion
All activities as authorized by the issuance of the permit shall be commenced within one (1) year of the effective date of the permit and shall be completed within two (2) years of the effective date or the permit shall become null and void. If a permit expires, the applicant must reapply to the Zoning Administrator and obtain another zoning permit to complete the activities as initiated under the original permit. The Zoning Administrator may allow an extension up to one (1) year.
29
ARTICLE XI: ENFORCEMENT
Section 1101 - Violations of Zoning Regulations
Violations of these Zoning Regulations shall be enforced as prescribed pursuant to 24 V.S.A. §§ 4451, 4452, and 4454, or through a municipal complaint issued and prosecuted pursuant to Chapter 59 of Title 24, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
Section 1102 - Enforcement Proceedings
Enforcement proceedings under 24 V.S.A. §§ 4451, 4452, and 4454 shall be initiated by the Zoning Administrator by issuance of a Notice of Violation as prescribed therein. Enforcement proceedings brought under Chapter 59 of Title 24 shall be considered a violation of a civil ordinance and initiated by the Zoning Administrator through the issuance of a municipal complaint as provided therein.
Section 1103 - Determination of Separate Offenses
Regardless of whether enforcement is sought under 24 V.S.A. §§ 4451, 4452, and 4454 or under Chapter 59 of Title 24, any financial penalty shall not exceed the amount set forth in 24 V.S.A. § 4451, provided however, that each day that a violation is continued shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 1104 - Schedule of Penalties and Waiver Fees
The Selectboard shall establish, and may amend from time to time, the schedule of penalties and waiver fees for various categories of zoning violations enforced pursuant to 24 V.S.A., Chapter 59.
ARTICLE XII: DEVELOPMENT REVIEW BOARD
Section 1201 - Development Review Board
A. There shall be a Development Review Board (DRB) for Rutland Town.
B. The DRB shall consist of five (5) members unless otherwise determined by the Selectboard. These may be members of the Planning Commission.
C. Members of the DRB shall be appointed and any vacancy filled by the Selectboard. The terms of each member shall be for three (3) years unless otherwise determined by the Selectboard. Members may be reappointed to successive terms.
D. The Selectboard may also appoint one or more alternates to serve on the DRB for a term of up to three (3) years.
E. The Selectboard upon written charges and after public hearing may remove any member of the DRB for cause.
30
Section 1202 - DRB Meeting Procedure and Decisions
A. Meetings of the DRB shall be conducted pursuant to 24 V.S.A. § 4461 held at the call of the Chair and at such times as the DRB may determine.
B. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less than a majority of the members of the DRB and any action thereof shall be taken by the concurrence of a majority of the members of the DRB.
C. The DRB shall keep minutes of its proceedings, including an accurate record of the name and address of interested persons who participate in a municipal review procedure or appeal, including a record of their participation.
D. In any hearing, there shall be an opportunity for each person wishing to achieve status as an interested person as defined in Section 1302.
E. The DRB shall keep a written record of the name, address, and participation of each of these persons.
F. Minutes shall also indicate the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating this, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions.
G. Once approved by the DRB, minutes shall constitute a public record.
H. The DRB shall issue its decisions in writing and shall include a statement of the factual bases upon which the DRB has made its conclusions. The minutes of the meeting may suffice, provided the factual basis and conclusions relating to the review standards are set forth therein.
Section 1203 - General Powers and Duties of the DRB
A. The DRB is a body with limited powers. Except as specifically provided herein and in accordance with the provisions of 24 V.S.A., Chapter 117, the DRB may not amend, alter, invalidate or affect any plan or bylaw of the Town or the implementation or enforcement thereof, or allow any use not permitted by these Regulations or any other bylaw.
B. The DRB shall annually elect its own officers (Chair and others).
C. The DRB shall adopt, review, and amend as necessary from time to time rules of procedure to effectuate the provisions of these Regulations and rules of ethics with respect to conflicts of interest.
D. The DRB shall have all powers and duties to administer the provisions of these Regulations, where authorized, including without limitation, the power to hear and act upon:
1. Appeals from any decision, act or failure to act by the Zoning Administrator;
31
2. Variance requests;
3. Waiver requests;
4. Application for site plan approval;
5. Application for conditional-use approval;
6. Applications for subdivision approval;
7. Applications for planned unit development; and
8. Any other reviews required by these Regulations.
E. If more than one type of review is required for a project, the reviews, to the extent feasible, shall be conducted concurrently.
ARTICLE XIII: APPEALS
Section 1301 - Exclusivity of Remedy
A. The exclusive remedy of an interested person with respect to any decision or act of the Zoning Administrator, or any failure to act with respect to any one or more of the provisions of these Zoning Regulations shall be an appeal to the DRB.
Section 1302 - Interested Persons
For the purpose of these regulations, an interested person means any one of the following:
A. A person owning title to property, or a municipality or solid waste management district empowered to condemn it or an interest in it affected by this Zoning Bylaw who alleges that such regulation imposes on the property unreasonable or inappropriate restrictions of present or potential use under the particular circumstances of the case.
B. Rutland Town when the Town Plan or one or more of these Regulations are at issue in an appeal brought under 24 V.S.A., Chapter 117, or any municipality that adjoins the Rutland Town.
C. A person owning or occupying property in the immediate neighborhood of a property which is the subject of any decision or act taken under 24 V.S.A., Chapter 117, these regulations who can demonstrate a physical or environmental impact on the person’s interest under the criteria reviewed, and who alleges that the decision or act, if confirmed, will not be in accord with the policies, purposes, or terms of the plan or bylaw of the Town.
D. Any ten (10) persons who may be any combination of voters or real property owners within the municipality who, by signed petition to the DRB, allege that any relief requested by a person under this section, if granted, will not be in compliance with the policies, purposes or terms of the plan or regulations of the municipality; and
32
E. Any department and administrative subdivision of the state owning property or any interest therein within Rutland Town, and the Vermont Agency of Commerce and Community Development.
Section 1303 - Notice of Appeal From Decision of Zoning Administrator
A. An interested person may appeal any decision or act taken by the Zoning Administrator, by filing a notice of appeal with the Town Clerk, with copies to the Zoning Administrator and the Chair of the DRB, on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator. Such notice of appeal must be filed within fifteen (15) days of the date of such decision or act.
B. Any notice of appeal from a decision of the Zoning Administrator or for a variance, shall include:
1. The name and address of the appellant;
2. A brief description of the property with respect to which the appeal is made;
3. A reference to the regulatory provisions applicable to that appeal;
4. The relief requested by the appellant including any request for a variance from one or more provisions of these regulations; and
5. The alleged grounds why such requested relief is believed appropriate under the circumstances.
Section 1304 - Hearing on Appeal
A. The DRB shall set a date and place for a public hearing of an appeal under these Regulations, which shall be within sixty (60) days of the filing of the notice of such appeal.
B. The DRB may reject an appeal without a hearing and render a decision, with findings of fact, within ten (10) days of the filing of the notice of appeal, if the DRB considers that the issues raised have been decided in an earlier appeal or involve substantially or materially the same facts by or on behalf of that appellant.
C. The DRB shall give public notice of the hearing, and shall mail to the appellant a copy of such notice at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing date. Copies shall also be sent to adjoining property owners, if known, although failure to comply with this provision shall not invalidate any action taken.
D. Any interested person as defined in Section 1302 may appear and be heard in person or be represented by an agent or attorney at such hearing. Where a petition is submitted by ten or more persons, one person must be designated to serve as the representative of the petitioners regarding all matters related to the appeal.
33
E. Any hearing held under this Section may be adjourned by the DRB from time to time, provided however, that the date and place of the adjourned hearing shall be announced at that time.
Section 1305 - Decisions on Appeals.
A. The DRB shall render its decisions with findings of fact on each appeal in accordance with the provisions of Section 1202 within forty-five (45) days after adjournment of the hearing and, within that period, send to the applicant and the appellant, by certified mail, a copy of the decision.
B. Failure of the panel to issue a decision within this period shall be deemed approval and shall be effective on the forty-sixth (46th) day.
C. Copies of the decision shall also be mailed to every person or body appearing and having been heard at the hearing, and a copy filed with the Zoning Administrator and the clerk of the municipality as a part of the public records.
Section 1306 - Appeals from Decisions of the DRB
An interested person may appeal de novo a decision of the DRB to the Environmental Court in accordance with 24 V.S.A. § 4471.
Section 1307 - Variances - General
A. Requirements
The Zoning Administrator shall refer all variance requests to the DRB. The applicant for a variance shall follow the procedures for appeal set forth in Section 1303.
B. The DRB shall grant a variance from these Regulations, and render a decision in favor of the appellant, only if the DRB finds all of the following facts and specifies each such finding in its decision:
1. That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due to these conditions and not the circumstances generally created by the provisions of the Zoning Regulations in the neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
2. That as a result of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of these Regulations and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property.
3. That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant.
34
4. That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property, reduce access to renewable energy resources, nor be detrimental to the public welfare, and
5. That such variance, if authorized, represents the minimum that will afford relief and provide the least modification possible of these Regulations and of the Town Plan.
C. In rendering a decision in favor of an appellant under this Section, the DRB may attach such conditions to the variance as it considers necessary and appropriate under the circumstances to implement the various purposes of these Regulations and the Town Plan currently in effect.
Section 1308 - Variances - Renewable Energy Resource Structure
A. On an appeal where a variance from the provisions of these Regulation is requested for a structure that is primarily a renewable energy resource structure, the DRB may grant such variances, and render a decision in favor of the appellant only if all of the following facts are found and the finding is specified in its written decision.
1. It is unusually difficult or unduly expensive for the appellant to build a suitable renewable energy resource structure in conformance with the regulations;
2. That the hardship was not created by the appellant;
3. That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property, reduce access to renewable energy resources, nor be detrimental to the public welfare; and
4. That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that will afford relief and will represent the least deviation possible from the zoning regulation and from the plan.
B. In rendering a decision in favor of an appellant under this Section, the DRB may attach such conditions to the variance as it considers necessary and appropriate under the circumstances to implement the various purposes of these Regulations and the town plan currently in effect.
Section 1309 - Waivers:
Waivers may be granted for a permitted use by the Zoning Administrator to reduce dimensional requirements as needed to allow for disability accessibility, fire safety, and other requirements of law.
35
Where renovation or expansion is proposed for a residential structure, a waiver of setback or other dimensional requirements may be approved by the DRB if the following standards are satisfied:
1. The new or renovated part of the building does not extend beyond the existing nonconforming structure, unless needed to accomplish the intended goal (e.g. an expanded or improved entry deck).
2. The result will improve the property and the neighborhood.
3. The result will not alter the character of the neighborhood, impair reasonable or appropriate use of adjoining properties, nor cause harm to the public welfare.
4. Is helpful or necessary to allow for continued reasonable use of the property, including without limitation, to provide for disability accessibility, fire safety, and other requirements of law
5. The proposed work or construction does not encourage any more than necessary to accomplish the desired results.
ARTICLE XIV: PLANNING COMMISSION
Section 1401 - Continuation of the Planning Commission
There shall be a Planning Commission for the Rutland Town.
Section 1402 - Appointment and Term of the Planning Commission
A. The Planning Commission shall consist of five (5) members unless otherwise determined by the Selectboard.
B. The Selectboard shall appoint the members of the Planning Commission and shall fill any vacancies. The terms of each member shall be for two (2) years unless otherwise determined by the Selectboard. Members may be reappointed to successive terms.
C. The Selectboard may remove a member of the Planning Commission at any time by unanimous vote.
Section 1403 - Meetings
A. Meetings of the Planning Commission shall be held at the call of the Chair and at such times as may be determined. All such meetings shall be open to the public, except for deliberative and executive sessions.
B. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less than a majority of the members of the Planning Commission and any action thereof shall be taken by the concurrence of a majority of the members.
36
C. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings, indicating the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating this, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions.
D. Once approved by the Planning Commission, minutes of meetings shall constitute a public record.
Section 1404 - Rules of Procedure and Ethics
A. The Planning Commission shall adopt, review, and amend as necessary from time to time, such rules of procedure as it determines are necessary to effect the provisions of Article XIV Regulation and rules of ethics with respect to conflicts of interest.
Section 1405 - General Powers and Duties of the Planning Commission
A. The Planning Commission shall annually elect its own officers [Chair and others].
B. The Planning Commission shall review and update as needed or required the Rutland Town Plan of as provided in 24 V.S.A., Chapter 117, Subchapter 5.
C. The Planning Commission shall carry on a continuous review of the zoning regulation and town planning and initiate proposals for amendment as required, and any special studies and non-regulatory activities, including public outreach.
D. As part of the accomplishment of its duties the Planning Commission shall maintain records of its proceedings, studies and recommendations, as well as keep the Selectboard informed on the current status of these Regulations and their effectiveness within the Town.
Section 1406 - Review of Zoning Amendments
The Planning Commission shall receive and evaluate proposals for amendment of these Regulations, hold public hearings on such amendments after due public notice, and make recommendations to the Selectboard with respect to such amendments.
Section 1407 - Advisory Counsel to Other Agencies
Upon request, the Planning Commission shall serve as guide and counsel to the Selectboard of the Town, the Zoning Administrator, the DRB, and other public offices in matters relative to these Regulations.
ARTICLE XV: OTHER PROVISIONS
Section 1501 - Interpretation of Regulation
The provisions of these regulations shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Except as provided to the contrary in the Act or these regulations, it is not intended by these regulations to
37
repeal, annul or in any way impair any regulations or permits previously adopted or issued, provided, however, that where these regulations impose a greater restriction upon the use of a structure or land than are required by any other statute, ordinance, rule, regulations, permit, easement or agreement, the provisions of these regulations shall control.
Section 1502 - Public Notice of Hearing
A. A warned public hearing shall be required for conditional use review, appeals of decisions of the Zoning Administrator and variances, not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the public hearing.
1. Any public notice required for a warned public hearing under this Zoning Regulation shall be given by the publication of the date, place and purpose of such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the town, and the posting of a notice in three or more public places within the town, including the posting of a notice within view from the public right-of-way nearest to the property for which the application is being made, and written notification to the applicant and to owners of all adjoining properties without regard to public rights-of-way.
2. Where such hearing is called in reference to any amendment of this Zoning Regulation or any other matter relating to written material, such public notice shall include either the full text or a brief summary describing the principal provisions and a reference to a place within the municipality where copies of the proposed material may be examined.
B. All other types of development review hearings, including site plan review, shall be warned not less than seven (7) days prior to the date of the public hearing.
1. This shall include posting of a notice in three or more public places within the town, including the posting of a notice within view from the public right-of-way nearest to the property for which the application is being made, and written notification to the applicant and to owners of all adjoining properties without regard to public rights-of-way.
C. All public hearing notifications shall include a description of the proposed project and provide the recipient with information where more information may be obtained, and shall state that participation in the local proceeding is a prerequisite to the right to take any subsequent appeal.
Section 1503 - Fees
Fees may be established by the Selectboard in the exercise of its discretion in such amounts deemed appropriate to offset or cover the costs of the administration of these regulations, including without limitation , notice and publication, administrative time and expense, and the hiring of appropriate professionals to review various aspects of an application.
38
Section 1504 - Amendments
Any provision of this Regulation, as well as the boundaries of the various zoning districts established herein, may be amended or repealed subject to the provisions of 24 V.S.A., Chapter 117.
Section 1505 - Severability
If any provision of this regulation is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of this regulation, which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application.
Section 1506 - Effective Date
These Regulations shall take effect upon approval of a majority of members of the Selectboard at a meeting held after the final public hearing and shall be effective 21 days after adoption, in accordance with procedures contained in 24 V.S.A. § 4442.
Section 1507 - Appendix- Definitions
Except where specifically defined herein, all words used in these Regulations shall carry their customary meanings. Words used in the present tense include the future, and the singular includes the plural. The word "lot" includes "plot"; the word "building" includes "structure"; the word "shall" is mandatory; the words "occupied" or "used" shall be considered as though followed by "or intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied'; the word "person" includes "individual, partnership, association, corporation, or any other incorporated or unincorporated organization or group". The DRB shall clarify doubt as to the precise meaning of any word used in these Regulations.
Accessory Building or Use: A building, structure or use on the same property as a principal building used for purposes normally incidental to those of the principal building.
Affordable Housing: Means either of the following: Housing that is owned by its inhabitants, whose gross annual household income does not exceed 80 percent of the county median income, as defined by the United States department of Housing and Urban Development, and the total annual cost of the housing, including principal, interest, taxes and insurance, is not more than 30 percent of the household’s gross annual income, or
Housing that is rented by its inhabitants whose gross annual household income does not exceed 80 percent of the county median income, as defined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, and the total annual cost of the housing, including rent, utilities, and condominium association fees, is not more than 30 percent of the household’s gross annual income. 24 V.S.A. 4303 (1).
Agricultural Use: Land which is used for raising livestock, or agricultural or forest products, including general farming, pasture, orchard, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, truck farming and forestry, dairying, apiary, truck gardening, keeping of poultry, farm structures and the storage of agricultural equipment; and, as an accessory use, the sale of agricultural products.
39
Attached: Having a common wall and/or roof.
Auto Service Station with Retail Store/ Mini Mart: Any premises where gasoline and other petroleum products are sold and/or light maintenance activities such as engine tune-ups, lubrication, minor repairs, and carburetor cleaning are conducted. Service stations shall not include premises where heavy automobile and manufactured maintenance activities such as engine overhauls, automobile painting, and body fender work are conducted. This includes a retail store with gasoline pumps as a secondary use, often referred to as a mini-mart.
Basement: Any area of the building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on any or all sides.
Bed and Breakfast: A lodging facility located within a residential dwelling with accommodations of up to 5 rooms for transient guests.
Building Height: The vertical distance from the average finished grade surrounding the buildings to the highest point of the roof beams in flat roof; to the highest point on the deck of mansard roofs; to a level midway between the level of the eaves and highest point of pitched roofs or hip roofs; or to a level two-thirds of the distance from the level of the eaves to the highest point of gambrel roofs. For this purpose, the level of the eaves shall be taken to mean the highest level where the plane of the roof intersects the plane of the outside wall on a side containing the eaves. Towers, steeples, cupolas, chimneys, antennas, windmills, silos and similar structures are exempt from the building height considerations.
Building: Any structure enclosed by exterior walls and covered by a roof constructed or used or and intended for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, or personal property. Includes any carport, porch, covered terrace, deck, or steps.
Building Front Line: Line parallel to the center line of the public way transecting that point of the building which is closest to the center line of the public way. Where a lot fronts on public waters but not a public highway, “mean water line” shall replace “center line of the public way” in this definition.
Camp: A commercial establishment consisting of structures designed to be used periodically for recreational or educational activities for a public/private association or group.
Child Care Facility: Carries the definition provided in 33 V.S.A. § 4902(2) - any place or program operated as a business or service on a regular or continuous basis, whether for compensation or not, whose primary function is protection, care, and supervision of children under 16 years of age outside their homes for periods of less than 24 hours a day by a person other than a child's own parent, guardian, or relative, as defined by rules adopted by the department for children and families, but not including a kindergarten approved by the state board of education.
Child Care Facility, Nonresidential: A child care facility in which the caregiver does not provide child care in the caregiver’s residence. A nonresidential child care facility does not include a family child care home.
40
Commercial Fuel Storage Facility: A facility which stores fuel, including without limitation, gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene, liquid propane in tank(s) above or below ground for retail or wholesale sale, or for use in connection with a commercial business. Commercial Fuel Storage Facility does not include the storage of fuel in tank(s) inside a building.
Community Care Facility: Means an institution or distinct part of an institution that is primarily engaged in providing to its residents any of the following:
 Skilled nursing care and related services for residents who require medical or nursing care.
 Rehabilitation services for the rehabilitation of injured, disabled, or sick persons. or
 On a 24-hour basis, health related care and services to individuals who because of their mental or physical condition require care and services, which can be made available to them only through institutional care. 33 V.S.A. § 7102(7).
Contractor’s Yards: A lot or parcel which is used to store (exterior and/or interior) and maintain equipment and other materials used in the trade carried on by the contractor.
Cottage Industry: An activity, carried out in a dwelling or accessory structure, such as home offices, repair services, business and personal services, and goods produced or manufactured on site, employing no more than 3 people and which meets the conditions of Section 525. Cottage industries also include a use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial processing.
Coverage: That percentage of the lot area covered by all building areas.
Day Care, Adult: A place operated as a business or service on a regular or continuous basis, whether for compensation or not, whose primary function is protection, care and supervision of up to eight (8) senior citizens outside their homes for periods of less than twenty-four hours a day by a person other than a guardian or relative.
Development Review Board or DRB: The board appointed by the Selectboard to carry out the responsibilities assigned to it by these Regulations, including without limitation, to hear and decide appeals taken concerning the decisions or actions of the Zoning Administrator, to render decisions applications for conditional use, and to render decisions on requests for variances.
Dilapidated: Falling into partial ruin through neglect or misuse, decayed, deteriorated or in a state of disrepair.
Dwelling: Any building used by humans for habitation.
Dwelling Unit: Building or part thereof used as living, eating and sleeping quarters by members of one family, with a dedicated means of entrance and egress separate from that of other dwelling units. The terms “dwelling,” “single-family dwelling,” “two-family dwelling,” or “multi-family dwelling” shall not include a tourist home or motor lodge.
41
Dwelling, Single-Family: Detached building used as living quarters by one family.
Dwelling, Two-family: Single building used as living quarters by two families, living independently of each other.
Dwelling, Multi-family: A dwelling or group of dwellings on one lot, containing three or more separate living units, having separate or joint entrances, and including apartments, group homes, row houses, and condominiums; also multiple dwellings.
Environmental Court: The court to which appeals are taken from decisions of the DRB as provided by 24 V.S.A § 4471.
Essential Services: Functions provided by public and private utilities, necessary for the exercise of the principal use or service of the principal structure. These include facilities underground, surface and overhead. Erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by utilities for providing services.
Existing Small Lot: Means a lot in individual and separate and non-affiliated ownership from surrounding properties in existence on the effective date of the Regulations that does not conform to the minimum lot size requirements in the District in which it is located.
Facility: Means a residential care home, maternity home, nursing home, assisted living residence or therapeutic community residence licensed or required to be licensed pursuant to the provisions of 33 V.S.A. § 7103.
Family: One or more related or four or fewer unrelated persons living, sleeping, cooking, and eating on the same premises as a single housekeeping unit.
Family Child Care Home, Small: Means a child care facility in which the caregiver provides child care on a regular basis in the caregiver's own residence and the caregiver is exempt from the state registration requirement pursuant to 33 V.S.A. § 3502(b)(1) because the child care provided is limited to the children of not more than two families, other than that of the caregiver.
Family Child Care Home, Large: Means a child care facility as defined by 33 V.S.A. § 4902(3) in which the caregiver is licensed or registered by the State of Vermont for child care, and provides child care on a regular basis in the caregiver’s own residence for not more than 10 children at any one time (of which up to six children may be provided care on a full-time basis, and the remainder on a part-time basis).
Forestry: The use of the land for the purpose of maintaining forest resources and producing forest products.
Frontage: The portion of a lot adjacent and parallel to a public road right-of-way or mean watermark of a public waterway. In the case of corner lots, it shall be the portion of the lot that has or is proposed to have access to a highway or permanent easement right of way.
Front yard setback: See Section 506(A).
42
Functioning in an Acceptable Manner: For a wastewater system, this phrase means that the wastewater system does not qualify as a failed system as defined by 10 V.S.A. § 1972(5). For a potable water supply, this phrase means that the water supply does not qualify as a failed supply as defined by 10 V.S.A. § 1972(4).
Gas Station: Any premises where gasoline and other petroleum products are sold and/or light maintenance activities such as engine tune-ups, lubrication, minor repairs, and carburetor cleaning are conducted. Gas stations shall not include premises where heavy automobile and manufactured maintenance activities such as engine overhauls, automobile and manufactured painting, and body fender work are conducted. This does not include a retail store with gasoline pumps as a secondary use, often referred to as a mini-mart.
Group Home: Any residential facility operates under a license or registration granted or recognized by a state agency and that serves not more than eight persons, who have a handicap or disability as defined by 9 V.S.A. § 4501 and who live together as a single housekeeping unit.
Home Occupation: An occupation located in minor portion of a dwelling unit or a building accessory thereto that is customary in residential areas and does not have an undue adverse effect upon the character of the residential area in which the dwelling is located. Home occupation includes without limitation: antique shop, dressmaking, home cooking, sewing, tailoring, teaching, the practice of an accountant, architect, artist, dentist, photographer, doctor, engineer, insurance agent, lawyer, musician, realtor, barber or beautician, computer programming. See Section 522.
Interested Person: A person, as defined by 24 V.S.A. § 4465(b), and is therefore entitled to undertake an appeal. See Section 1302.
Junk: Means old or scrap copper, brass, iron, steel and other old or scrap or nonferrous material, including but not limited to rope, rags, batteries, glass, rubber debris, waste, trash or any discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped or ruined motor vehicles or parts thereof.
Junk Motor Vehicle: A discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped or ruined motor vehicle or parts thereof, or one that is allowed to remain unregistered for a period of ninety (90) days from the date of discovery.
Junkyard: Any place of outdoor storage or deposit which is maintained, operated, or used in connection with a business for storing, keeping, processing, buying or selling junk or as a scrap metal processing facility. Junkyard also means any place of outdoor storage or deposit, not in connection with a business which is maintained or used for storing or keeping four or more junk motor vehicles. Junkyard does not include a garage where wrecked or disabled motor vehicles are stored for less than ninety (90) days for inspection or repairs.
Land Development: The division of a parcel into two or more parcels, the construction reconstruction conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any change in the use of any building or other structure or land, or extension of use of land.
43
Light Commercial: The light commercial district can provide for modest commercial enterprises in a residential area, and which are not detrimental to the interest of the surrounding residential neighborhood.
Line of Building: The line of the face of the building nearest the lot line, including sun porches, and open or closed porches. Line of building shall not include outside steps, including landings, fire escapes, cellar hatchways, handicap ramps, chimneys.
Lot: Any undivided interest in land, whether freehold or leasehold, including but not limited to interests created by trusts, partnerships, corporations, countenances and contracts.
Lot area: Total area within a lot's boundary lines, excluding any part thereof lying within the boundaries of an existing or proposed Class 1, Class 2, Class 3 or Class 4 Town Highway. The areas of lands separated by a Class 1, Class 2, Class 3 or Class 4 Town Highway shall not be aggregated for purposes of calculating lot area.
Lot Line: Any line bounding a lot as herein defined.
Lot Line, Front: The line separating the lot from the street or road. If a lot abuts more than one street, each line is a front lot line.
Lot Line, Rear: The lot line most distant from the front lot line
Lot Line, Side: A lot line not a front or rear lot line.
Machinery Repair Shop, Minor: Any lot, including the building, which is used for the primary purpose of making major or minor repairs to machinery, such as bicycles, mowers, tractors, or small motors.
Mobile and Manufactured Home: A prefabricated dwelling unit that is:
 designed for long term and continuous residential occupancy,
 designed to be moved on wheels, as a whole or in sections,
 complete and ready for occupancy on arrival at the site, except for incidental unpacking, assembly, connections with utilities, and placing on support or a permanent foundation or installation as a unit in a previously prepared structure, and
 identical to immovable housing with respect to water supply and waste disposal.
Mobile and Manufactured Home Park: Any Parcel of land under single or common ownership or control which contains, or is designed, laid out or adapted to accommodate, more than two mobile homes. Nothing herein shall be construed to apply to premises used solely for storage or display of mobile homes. Mobile Home Park does not mean any parcel of land under the ownership of an agricultural employer who may provide up to four mobile homes used by full-time workers or employees of the agricultural employer as a benefit or condition of employment or any parcel of land used solely on a seasonal basis for vacation or recreational mobile homes. 10 V.S.A. 6201(2)
44
Modular or Prefabricated Housing: A dwelling unit constructed on-site and composed of components substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and transported to the building site for final assembly on a permanent foundation.
Nonconformity: Uses, lots, parcels or structures that do not conform to the present Zoning Regulations.
Nonconformity, Use: A use of land, lot, or structure which does not comply with the use regulations for the district in which it is located.
Nonconformity, Dimensional: A structure, lot or land or part thereof not in conformance with the dimensional requirements of this Regulation.
Official Zoning Map: The one true copy of the Town Zoning Map located in the office of the Town Clerk and adopted by the Planning Commission as the Town of Rutland, Vermont Future Land Use Map in connection with the adoption of the Town of Rutland Town Plan on September 18, 2007.
Office: A room or groups of rooms or portion of a building for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, government or service industry, administrative, executive, professional, research, or similar organizations providing no merchandise to be sold.
Park, Municipal: Any park or recreation area or facility owned by the Rutland Town.
Parking Space: A space, measuring ten (10) feet by twenty two (22) feet, for off-street parking of a motor vehicle in conformance with this ordinance.
Performance Bond: A document issued by a bonding or surety company approved by the DRB or by the owner with security acceptable to the DRB, in an amount sufficient to secure compliance with a permit and its conditions, including without limitation, to cover the cost of required improvements to infrastructure and the maintenance thereof, that is to be maintained for such period of time as is estimated by the DRB or such town department(s) or official(s) as the DRB may designate.
Principal Building: A building in which the primary use of the property on which it is located is conducted. Attachments are a part of a principal building.
Public Highway: A public way that qualifies as a highway as defined by 19 V.S.A. § 1(12).
Public Way: A travel way for vehicular traffic, which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties.
Quarry: A lot or land used for the purpose of extracting stone, sand , gravel, or top soil for sale or to be processed for commercial purposes.
Recreation, Private: Recreation uses privately owned and operated, including but not limited to picnic grounds, archery ranges, hiking and riding trails, hunting and fishing areas, wildlife sanctuaries, nature preserves, swimming areas and boat launching sites, golf driving range, golf
45
pitch and putt course, par three golf courses, hunting preserves, skating rinks, swimming pools, parks, beaches, tennis courts, indoor bowling alley, theater, table tennis and pool hall, gymnasium, health club, hobby workshop, archery range, riding stables.
Required Yard: The areas of a lot in which the applicable district regulations prohibit the location of a building or structures.
Residential Care Home: Any residential facility for the diagnosis or treatment of human ailments, including but not limited to hospital, sanitarium, nursing home, community care home, and hospice.
Restaurant: An establishment whose principal business is the selling of food and beverages to customers seated within or adjacent to the building.
Right-of-Way: A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a street, trail, water line, sanitary sewer, and / or other public utilities or facilities.
Self-Service Storage Facility. A building or group of buildings consisting of individual, small, self-contained units that are leased or owned for the storage of business and household goods.
Site Plan: A plan, to scale, showing uses and structures proposed for a parcel of land as required by these Regulations. It includes lot lines, streets, building sites, open space, buildings, major landscape features, and proposed utility lines, if any.
Structure: An assembly of materials for occupancy or use, including, but not limited to, a building, mobile and manufactured home or trailer, billboard, sign, wall or fence, except a wall or fence on an operating farm.
Street: A public thoroughfare, including road, highway, drive, lane, avenue, place, boulevard, and any other thoroughfare that affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
Subdivision: The division of a parcel of land, with or without streets, into two or more lots, plots or other legal or actual division of land for transfer of ownership, building, development, or sale. Subdivision does not include a boundary adjustment.
Setbacks: Distance between lot lines, structures or improvements (see tables)
Temporary Structure: A structure designed for use while a permanent structure is under construction, undergoing substantial repairs or reconstruction, or for a special event or conference, not to exceed 12-month period. An extension may be applied for subject to DRB approval.
Trailer Park/Campground/R.V. Park: Privately owned land leased to owners or occupants of transient trailers, recreational vehicles or tents.
46
Trailer/Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle intended to be used for a temporary dwelling, travel and recreational activities. It may be equipped to receive a supply of running water and be provided with bath facilities, flush toilet and sanitary connections.
Wind Energy Conversion System: Any device such as a wind charger, windmill or wind turbine which converts wind energy to a form of usable energy.
Yard: An open space at grade between a building and adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard, or the depth of the rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. See Appendix B (Page 51) for illustration of yard lot lines with respect to a surveyed lot. For lots without a survey, see Section 506(A).
 Front Yard: For lots described by a survey as set forth in Section 506(A), the yard between the front lot line and front line of a principal building extended to the sidelines of the lot. For lots that lack such a survey, the yard between the front line of a principal building extended to the sidelines of the lot and the centerline of the public way calculated as set forth in Section 506(A).
 Rear Yard: The yard between the rear lot line and the rear line of a principal building extended to the sidelines of the lot.
 Side Yard: The yard between the side lot line and the side yard line of the principal building extended to the front and rear yards.
Zoning Administrator: Refers to the person appointed by the Selectboard to administer the Zoning Regulations.
