
 
Zoning Regulations
Approved:	March 1969 Amended:
1971 – March 9
1976 – September 14
1982 – June 21
1983 – March 25
1985– April 7
1996– November 5
1999– August 2
2001– January 8
2001- August 6
2002– October 8
2003– June 23 (Added § 6.12 – Wireless Telecom Facilities) 2004– March 22 (Added § 3.9 – Setback Modifications) 2006– August 8 (Amended Official Zoning District Map only) 2009– April 27
2010– February 22 (Amended Official Zoning District Map only)
2013 – October 7 (Revised §3.3.5.a – Village Commercial parking; Added
§5.7.5 Directory Signs; Added new definitions §7.2 – for directory sign and driveway)
2014– May 27 (Added Jolina Court Interim Zoning attached to the
end of the document)
2014– June 24 (Amended §6.8.8, §6.8.16, §6.8.15)
2015– February 11 (Amended §6.8) March 30 (Amended §3.4)
September – (Amended Jolina Court Interim Zoning Regulations) 2016– May 23 – (Extended Jolina Court Interim Zoning Regulations for 1-
year)
2017 – February 28 (Amended §5.9 Accessory Dwellings & §7.1 Definitions) 2019 – September 25 (Added §3.10 Village Downtown District)
2020 – March 10 (Amended §3.10.3 Residential Density in the Village Downtown District)
2020 – May 12 (Added §3.9 Jolina Court District)
2020 – August 11 (Amended §3.10 Village Downtown District & §7.1 Definitions)
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
 
INTRODUCTION	1
1.	OVERVIEW	1
1.1	Purpose	1
1.2	Application of Zoning Regulations	1
1.3	Legal Status	1
1.4	Amendment or Repeal of Sections	1
1.5	Severability	1
1.6	Conflicting Ordinances or Regulations	1
1.7	Definitions and Index	2
2.	ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS - GENERAL	2
2.1	Establishment of Zoning Districts	2
2.2	Determination of Zoning District Boundaries	2
2.3	Zoning District Map	3
2.4	Uses and Exemptions for Districts - Generally	3
2.5	Land Capability	3
2.6	Administratively Created Lots	4
3.	ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS - SPECIFIC - USE INDEX	4
3.1	Agricultural / Residential District (A/R)	4
3.2	High Density Residential District (HDR)	6
3.3	Residential / Commercial District (R/C)	8
3.4	Gateway Commercial District (G)	11
3.5	Village Commercial District (V/C)	13
3.6	Commercial District (C)	16
3.7	Industrial / Commercial District (I/C)	18
3.8	Mobile Home Park District (MHP)	20
3.9	Jolina Court District (JC)	22
3.10	Village Downtown District (VD)	26
4.	REGULATIONS APPLYING TO ALL LOTS	30
4.1	Compliance with Public Works Specifications	30
4.2	Required Frontage on, or Access to, Roads or Public Waters	30
4.3	Approval for Interior Lots with No Frontage	30
4.4	Curb Cuts	31
4.5	Multiple Use of Lots	31
4.6	Nonconforming Lots	31
4.7	Nonconforming Structures	31
4.8	Setback Modifications	32
4.9	Nonconforming Uses	32
4.10	Noise	32
4.11	Exterior Lighting	33
4.12	Height of Buildings and Structures	35
5.	PERMITS AND APPROVALS	36
5.1	Applicability	36
5.2	Application Process, Decisions and Appeals	36
5.3	Process after Permit is Issued	38
5.4	Subdivision Review	39
5.5	Site Plan Review	39
5.6	Conditional Use Review	42
5.7	Signs	45
5.8	Boundary Adjustments	49
5.9	Accessory Dwellings	49
5.10	Requirements for Specific Structures	50
5.11	Home Occupations, Child Care Homes, Group Homes	51
5.12	Planned Unit Development (PUD) and Residential PUD	51
6.	SPECIAL ZONING REGULATIONS	54
6.1	Parking and Loading	54
6.2	Driveway Requirements	59
6.3	Pedestrian and Bike Ways	59
6.4	Swimming Pools	59
6.5	Mobile Homes and Travel Trailers	60
6.6	Taller Structures (Height Exemption)	60
6.7	Shoreline Protection Overlay District	60
6.8	Flood Hazard Overlay District	60
6.9	Wetlands	78
6.10	Water Supply Source Protection Area	78
6.11	Steep Slopes	78
6.12	Wireless Telecommunications Facilities	78
7.	DEFINITIONS	90
7.1	General	90
7.2	Specific	90
8.	ADMINISTRATION, APPEALS AND ENFORCEMENT	101
8.1	Administrative Officer	101
8.2	Development Review Board (DRB)	102
8.3	Violations and Enforcement	105
8.4	Appeals and Variances	105
8.5	Recording Requirements	106
8.6	Fee Schedule	107
8.7	Availability of Documents	107
8.8	Amendments of Statutes Referenced Herein	107
Index	108
Appendix A1	111
Appendix A2	112
Appendix B	113
Appendix C	114
Appendix D	115
 



























iii
 
INTRODUCTION

In accordance with the Vermont Municipal and Regional Planning and Development Act, 24 V.S.A., Chapter 117 (referred to herein as “the Act”), there are hereby established Zoning Regulations for the Town of Richmond which are set forth in the text and maps that constitute these regulations.

These regulations shall be known and cited as the “Town of Richmond Zoning Regulations.”

The regulations that follow do not intend to threaten or compromise any lawfully existing residence, structure or business; these lawfully existing uses and structures shall be grand-fathered and accepted at current locations and levels of activity, as provided in these Zoning Regulations.

Richmond’s rural character will be protected by zoning regulations that support current patterns of use; and by small-scale, rather than large-scale, development.




1.	OVERVIEW

1.1	Purpose

The purpose of these Zoning Regulations is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Richmond, Vermont and to enhance the value of property, to secure safety from fire and congestion, and to further the purposes of the Town Plan and the Act (§4302).

1.2	Application of Zoning Regulations

No “Land Development” (see definition, Section 7) shall commence without the issuance of a Zoning Permit, as provided in Section 5.1.

1.3	Legal Status

These Zoning Regulations shall become effective twenty-one (21) days after the date of adoption by the Richmond Selectboard, subject to §4442(d) of the Act. The zoning regulations heretofore in effect in the Town of Richmond shall be deemed repealed upon the Effective Date of these Zoning Regulations.

1.4	Amendment or Repeal of Sections

Any amendment, repeal of sections or revision of the other provisions of these Zoning Regulations shall be prepared in accordance with the Act as may be amended from time to time. Any request for an amendment to these Zoning Regulations, including the official Zoning District Map, shall be submitted in writing to the Planning Commission for consideration. A proposed amendment supported by a petition signed by not less than five percent of Richmond voters shall be corrected by the Commission only for technical deficiencies and warned for a public hearing. The Planning Commission shall prepare and approve a written report on all proposed amendments in accordance with the Act.

1.5	Severability

Invalidity of any section or provision of these Zoning Regulations shall not be held to invalidate any other section or provision of these Zoning Regulations.

1.6	Conflicting Ordinances or Regulations
 
In case of any inconsistency between a provision of these Zoning Regulations and a provision of any other applicable ordinance or regulation of the Town, the provision that was adopted or materially amended later than the other shall control unless otherwise required by law. Under Section 6.8.3.a), the provisions of the Flood Hazard Overlay District take precedence when they impose a greater restriction than other regulations. If any provision of these Zoning Regulations is or becomes inconsistent with the Act, the Act shall control.

1.7	Definitions and Index

Many of the terms used in these Zoning Regulations are defined in Section 7 and these definitions should be referred to for a correct interpretation of the regulations. Some of the more prominent terms are capitalized to draw attention to their having definitions, though many defined terms are not capitalized. Special definitions are in Section 6.8 and Section 6.12. The index in the final section of this document can also be used to find references to specific topics.



2.	ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS - GENERAL

2.1	Establishment of Zoning Districts

The Town of Richmond is divided into the following Zoning Districts in accordance with the Official Zoning District Map:

2.1.1	A/R - Agricultural / Residential District

2.1.2	HDR - High Density Residential District

2.1.3	R/C - Residential / Commercial District

2.1.4	G - Gateway Commercial District

2.1.5	V/C - Village Commercial District

2.1.6	C - Commercial District

2.1.7	I/C - Industrial / Commercial District

2.1.8	MHP - Mobile Home Park District

2.1.9	JC - Jolina Court District

2.1.10	VD – Village Downtown District


2.2	Determination of Zoning District Boundaries

If the location of a Zoning District boundary is at issue, then the following rules shall apply:

2.2.1	Centerlines - A boundary indicated on the Zoning District Maps as appearing to follow a road, stream, or right of way shall be construed to follow the centerline of such road, stream, or right of way.
2.2.2	Lot lines - A boundary indicated on the Zoning District Maps as appearing to follow a lot line shall be construed as following such lot line.
2.2.3	Shorelines - A boundary indicated as appearing to follow a shoreline shall be construed as following the shoreline at the normal mean water level.
2.2.4	Contour lines - A boundary indicated as appearing to follow a contour line showing elevation shall be construed as following such contour line.
2.2.5	Use of Scale - In cases where a Zoning District boundary is not indicated as appearing to follow any of the above, the boundary shall be determined by using the scale of the Zoning District Maps.
 
2.2.6	Divided Parcels - When a lot is divided by a Zoning District boundary line, Land Development in each portion of the lot shall meet the requirements of the Zoning District in which the portion of the lot lies. If the Zoning District boundary passes through a lot and results in an area of land in a Zoning District which is smaller than the minimum lot size permitted in the Zoning District, such area of land shall be considered to lie in the same district as the larger portion of the lot.

2.3	Zoning District Map

The written provisions of these Zoning Regulations shall apply to the Zoning Districts as shown on the official Zoning District Map, such Map being a part of these Zoning Regulations.

2.4	Uses and Exemptions for Districts - Generally

2.4.1	Application - Except as otherwise specifically provided in these Zoning Regulations, no use shall be allowed in a Zoning District except for those uses specifically mentioned as being allowed in such Zoning District. The DRB may, on appeal or in considering a conditional use application, allow a use which it finds is substantially similar to a use specifically mentioned as being allowed in such Zoning District.
2.4.2	Nonconforming Uses - Nonconforming uses shall be allowed to continue as provided in Section 4.9,
Nonconforming Uses, of these Zoning Regulations.
2.4.3	Uses Subject to Site Plan Review - Many allowed uses require “Site Plan Review” by the DRB under Section 5.5 of these Zoning Regulations. Such uses have been identified as having significant impacts on the area and/or resources of the Town. The uses to which site plan review applies are identified in section 5.5.1. If an application is considered under Conditional Use review (section 5.6), then Site Plan review criteria shall also be considered by the DRB, though no separate hearing is required.
2.4.4	Recreational Paths - Recreation paths shall be allowed in any district. Parcels of land which do not meet the lot area requirements for a Zoning District but which are suitable for recreation path use may be conveyed to the Town, a land trust, or similar group, to be utilized for such purposes.
2.4.5	Accepted Agricultural and Silvicultural Practices – In accordance with 24 VSA §4413, required agricultural practices as defined in the “Required Agricultural Practices Rule” from the Secretary of Agriculture, Food and Markets, and accepted silvicultural practices, as regulated by the “Acceptable Management Practices for Maintaining Water Quality on Logging Jobs in Vermont” from the Commissioner of Forests, Parks and Recreation, shall not be regulated by these Zoning regulations. However, a person shall notify the Administrative Officer in writing of the intent to build a Farm Structure and shall abide by all setback requirements approved by the Secretary of Agriculture.

2.5	Land Capability

No application shall be approved and no Zoning Permit shall be issued for Land Development unless the lot meets the following criteria in addition to the other applicable requirements of these Zoning Regulations. These criteria are designed to ensure the capability of the land to support the proposed Land Development.


2.5.1	Areas with Special Guidelines for Land Development - The following portions of a lot are governed by the following special provisions:
a)	Land within the Flood Hazard Overlay District must meet the provisions of Section 6.8, Flood Hazard Overlay District, of these Zoning Regulations;
b)	Land within the Water Source Protection Areas must meet the provisions of Section 6.10,
Water Supply Source Protection, of these Zoning Regulations;
c)	Land with a slope of 20% or more must meet the provisions of Section 6.11, Steep Slopes, of these Zoning Regulations; and,
d)	Land within 50 ft. of a shoreline must meet the provisions of Section 6.7, Shoreline Protection Overlay District, of these Zoning Regulations.
 
2.5.2	Non-Developable Portions - Each Lot must contain at least one contiguous 10,000 square foot area of land that is capable of supporting Land Development, excluding land on the lot that is subject to a permanent conservation easement held by a qualified organization in accordance with 10 VSA
§6301a(2). The following areas of a lot shall be deemed incapable of supporting any Land Development:
a)	Wetlands, streams, rivers, ponds, or lakes;
b)	Slopes equal to or greater than thirty-five percent - 35%;
c)	Publicly owned land or publicly owned or controlled Road or Highway right of ways;
d)	Privately owned vehicular or utility easements or rights of way;
e)	Those portions of a lot for which development rights have been transferred to another party; and,
f)	Any land within the flood hazard overlay district for uses not authorized within the flood hazard overlay district (Section 6.8).

2.6	Administratively Created Lots

2.6.1	A Zoning Permit may be issued by the Administrative Officer for the division of one (1) lot (the “original lot”) which exceeds 25 acres into two (2) lots (the “remainder lot” and the “new lot”) without DRB  review under the Richmond Subdivision Regulations as amended, provided neither the “remainder lot” nor the “new lot” shall be further subdivided within seven (7) years without DRB approval under the Town of Richmond Subdivision Regulations. Thereafter, either lot may be further subdivided per this section, subject to the same provisions provided within this section. A final plat showing the original and remainder lot shall be filed in the Richmond Town Clerk’s Office within 180 days of such approval. If not so filed, the approval shall be void.

2.6.2	No Zoning Permit may be issued by the Administrative Officer under this Section unless each lot created complies with all pertinent state and local statutes, regulations and ordinances relating to water supply, sewage disposal, vehicular access, environmental impact and other provisions of these Zoning Regulations and with the standards of the Richmond Subdivision Regulations.

2.6.3	A Zoning Permit for an administratively created lot may be appealed to the DRB under Section 8.4.1, and shall be recorded in the land records of the town in accordance with Section 8.5.






3.	ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS - SPECIFIC - USE INDEX

No Zoning Permit shall be issued for Land Development on any lot in any Zoning District unless such Land Development is permitted in that Zoning District and complies with the requirements and standards set forth for that Zoning District and all other rules and regulations applicable to such Land Development.

3.1	Agricultural / Residential District (A/R)

Purpose - The Residential /Agricultural District is designed primarily to retain and provide areas of low density housing, particularly of the single-family type, in a rural setting. Agricultural and forestry uses of all types are essential to the concept of a rural setting. Areas of moderate density housing surrounded by open space or working landscapes, as well as homesteading occupations and cottage industries are accepted features of  this district. Privacy, greenery, scenic views and vistas, local natural recreational opportunities, working residences and/or small residential clusters constitute the “character of the neighborhood”.

3.1.1	Allowable Uses on Issuance of Zoning Permit by Administrative Officer - The following uses shall be allowed in the A/R District after issuance of a Zoning Permit by the Administrative Officer. Unless otherwise provided, only one principal use may be approved on one lot:
 
a)	Accessory dwelling as provided in Section 5.9.
b)	Accessory uses and structures to uses in 3.1.1.
c)	Child Care Home as provided in Section 5.11.
d)	Group Home as provided in Section 5.11.
e)	Home Occupation as provided in Section 5.11.
f)	One bed and breakfast.
g)	One single-family residential dwelling.
h)	One two-family residential dwelling.
i)	Agriculture, silviculture and horticulture.

3.1.2	Allowable Uses Upon Issuance of Conditional Use Approval - The following uses may be allowed in the A/R District after issuance of conditional use approval by the DRB. Unless otherwise provided, only one principal use, with accessory structures, may be approved on one lot:

a)	Adaptive use, as provided in Section 5.6.8.
b)	Artist/Craft studio
c)	Cemetery.
d)	Cottage industry as provided in Section 5.6.7.
e)	Day care center.
f)	Extraction of earth resources as provided in Section 5.6.6.
g)	Inn or guest house.
h)	Kennel.
i)	Museum.
j)	Professional offices with a maximum size of 2500 square feet gross floor area.
k)	Personal Service with a maximum size of 2500 square feet gross floor area.
l)	Planned Residential Development, as provided in Section 5.12.
m)	Outdoor recreation facility or park.
n)	Religious or educational facility as provided in Section 5.10.4.
o)	Retirement community.
p)	State- or community-owned and operated institutions and facilities, to the extent allowed by Section 5.10.4.
q)	Agriculture, silviculture and horticulture, as provided in Section 2.4.5.
r)	Veterinary Clinics

3.1.3	Dimensional Requirement For lots in the A/R District - No Zoning Permit may be issued for Land Development in the A/R District unless the lot proposed for such Land Development meets the following dimensional requirements:

a)	Lot Area - No lot shall be less than one (1) acre. The purchase of additional land by the owner of such lot from an adjacent lot owner shall be permitted, provided such purchase does not create a lot of less than the minimum lot area required in the Zoning District for the lot on the part of the seller.
b)	Lot Dimensions - Each lot must contain a point from which a circle with a radius of fifty (50) feet can be inscribed within the boundary of the lot.
c)	Lot Frontage - No lot having frontage on a public or private road shall have less than one hundred (100) feet of continuous uninterrupted length of said frontage or the lot must have access to a public or private road with approval by the DRB pursuant to Sections 4.2, Required Frontage, and 4.3, Approval for Interior Lots with No Frontage.
d)	Lot Coverage - The total amount of ground on a lot that can be covered by any structure or impervious material shall not exceed 30%.
 
3.1.4	Dimensional Limitations for Structures on Lots in the A/R District - No Zoning Permit may be issued for a structure in the A/R District unless the structure proposed for the lot meets the following dimensional requirements:

a)	Height - The height of any structure shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet, except as provided in Section 6.6, Taller Structures, of these Zoning Regulations.
b)	Front Yard Setback - All structures shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from each front lot line, or fifty-five (55) from the center line of each public or private Road or Highway right of way contiguous to the lot, whichever is greater.
c)	Side Yard Setback - A principal structure shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from each side lot line. An accessory structure shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the side lot line.
d)	Rear Yard Setback - A principal structure shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from a rear lot line. An accessory structure shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the rear lot line.

3.1.5	Other Requirements Applicable to Lots in the A/R District - No Zoning Permit may be issued for Land Development in the A/R District unless the Land Development meets the following requirements:

a)	Parking Requirements - Parking requirement shall be regulated as provided in Section 6.1.
b)	Signs - Signs shall be regulated as provided in Section 5.7.
c)	Access - Access shall be regulated as provided in Section 4.1 through 4.4.
d)	Traffic Impact - Traffic shall not exceed 10 vehicle trip ends during the peak evening hours.

3.1.6	Residential PUD - Subdivision of lots using a Residential PUD under Section 5.12 of these Zoning Regulations is encouraged in the A/R District and is required for all subdivisions over nine (9) lots in the A/R District as provided in Section 5.12.2. The retention of agricultural, forest or outdoor recreational land will be encouraged in such Residential PUD subdivisions.

3.2	High Density Residential District (HDR)

Purpose - The standards of this district are designed to promote the higher density housing that is characteristic of village centers and growth areas. The efficient use of infrastructure will be served by allowing closer placement of residential units, with neighborhoods located close to the retail services of the commercial district. This proximity allows for energy-efficient pedestrian traffic, roadways and school bus traffic. Planning for road crossings, sidewalks, curbside trees, bikeways, pocket parks and recreational activities, and other amenities, will be crucial to maintaining an inviting atmosphere while encouraging high density residential growth. Various types of residential units may be permitted in a Residential PUD within the HDR district.

Traditional spacing and setbacks for houses shall be maintained to preserve the integrity of the New England village atmosphere. Home occupations within residences, day care facilities, proximity to schools and civic institutions, pedestrian pathways to essential services and close-knit residential groups constitute the “character of the neighborhood.”

3.2.1	Allowable Uses on Issuance of Zoning Permits by Administrative Officer - The following uses shall be allowed in the HDR District after issuance of a Zoning Permit by the Administrative Officer. Unless otherwise provided, only one principal use may be approved on one lot:

a)	Accessory dwelling as provided in Section 5.9.
b)	Accessory uses or structures to the uses in 3.2.1.
c)	Child care home, as provided in Section 5.11.
d)	Group home, as provided in Section 5.11.
e)	Home occupation, as provided in Section 5.11.
f)	One bed and breakfast.
 
g)	One single-family dwelling unit.
h)	One two-family dwelling.

3.2.2	Allowable Uses Upon Issuance of Conditional Use Approval - The following uses may be allowed in the HDR District after issuance of a conditional use approval by the DRB. Unless otherwise provided, only one principal use, with its accessory structures, may be approved on one lot.

a)	Adaptive uses as provided in Section 5.6.8.
b)	Artist/Craft studio.
c)	Cemetery.
d)	Cottage industry as provided in Section 5.6.7.
e)	Day-care center.
f)	One multi-family dwelling with three or four dwelling units except in a Residential PUD in the HDR District, where more than one multi-family dwelling may be permitted on a lot within a Residential PUD so long as the number of units proposed for the entire Residential PUD does not exceed the number which could have been approved for the subdivision of the lot without a Residential PUD, as provided in Section 5.12.
g)	Extraction of earth resources as provided in Section 5.6.6.
h)	Inn or guest house.
i)	Museum.
j)	Office, Professional with a maximum size of 2,500 square feet of gross floor area.
k)	Personal Service with a maximum size of 2,500 square feet gross floor area.
l)	Planned Residential Development, as provided in Section 5.12, if no subdivision of land is proposed (see Section 5.12.1).
m)	Outdoor recreational facility or park.
n)	Religious or educational facility as provided in Section 5.10.4.
o)	Retirement community.
p)	State- or community-owned and operated institutions and facilities, to the extent allowed by Section 5.10.4.
q)	Agriculture, silviculture and horticulture, as provided in Section 2.4.5.
r)	Veterinary Clinics

3.2.3	Dimensional Requirements for Lots in the HDR District - No Zoning Permit may be issued for Land Development in the HDR District unless that lot proposed for such Land Development meets the following dimensional requirements.

a)	Lot Area - Except as provided under Section 4.6.1, no lot served by a municipal water and sewer system shall be less than 2/3 acre. This minimum lot area requirement shall be increased to one
(1)	acre for any lot not served by municipal water and sewer systems. The purchase of additional land by the owner of a lot from an adjacent lot owner will be permitted, provided such purchase does not create a lot of less than such minimum size on the part of the seller. In the case of the use of a lot for a multi-family dwelling of 3 or more units for lots served by municipal water and sewer systems, two-third (2/3) acre of land per dwelling unit shall be required. In the case of a use of a lot for a multi-family dwelling of three (3) or more units, one (1) acre per dwelling unit shall be required for lots not served by municipal water and sewer systems.
b)	Lot Dimensions - Each lot must contain a point from which a circle with a radius of thirty-five (35) feet can be inscribed within the boundary of the lot.
c)	Lot Frontage - No lot having frontage on a public or private road shall have less than seventy- five (75) feet of continuous uninterrupted length of said frontage or the lot must have access to a public or private road with approval by the DRB pursuant to Sections 4.2 and 4.3.
d)	Lot Coverage - The total ground area of a lot covered by all structures, parking areas, walkways, driveways, and areas covered by impervious materials shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the total ground area of the lot.
 
3.2.4	Dimensional Limitations for Structures on Lots in the HDR District - No Zoning Permit may be issued for a structure in the HDR District unless the structure proposed for the lot meets the following dimensional requirements:

a)	Height - The height of any structure, with the exception of exemptions listed in Section 6.6, shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet.
b)	Front Yard Setback - All structures shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from each front lot line, or thirty-five (35) feet from the center line of each public and private Road or Highway right of way contiguous to the lot, whichever is greater.
c)	Side Yard Setback - A principal structure shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from each side lot line. An accessory structure shall be set back at least five (5) feet from each side lot line.
d)	Rear Yard Setback - A principal structure shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the rear lot line. An accessory structure shall be set back at least five (5) feet from the rear lot line.
e)	No Build Zone - No construction of improvements may occur within five (5) feet of any lot line (except for fences and walls which mark property boundaries or enclose portions of the property and are less than 6 feet high). “Construction of improvements” means all construction activities such as, but not limited to, driveways (except where adjacent to the public or private right of way providing access to the lot), fences, recreational improvements, parking areas, excavation, grading or filling.

3.2.5	Other Requirements Applicable to the HDR District - No Zoning Permit may be issued for Land Development in the HDR district unless the Land Development meets the following requirements:

a)	Parking Requirements - Parking requirements shall be regulated as provided in Section 6.1.
b)	Signs - Signs shall be regulated as provided in Section 5.7.
c)	Traffic Impact - No Zoning Permit shall be issued for a use which generates more than 10 vehicle trip ends during the P.M. peak hour for the first 40,000 square feet of lot area or fraction thereof, plus 1 vehicle trip end for each additional 1,000 square feet of lot area. In making the determination of traffic impact, the Administrative Officer or DRB shall utilize “Trip Generation - Seventh Edition - 2003”, Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE), or its equivalent, or any  subsequent and most recent publication thereof, and may use estimates from other sources, including local traffic counts, if the above publication does not contain data for a specific use or if a use contains unique characteristics that cause it to differ from national traffic estimates.
d)	Access - Access shall be regulated as provided in Sections 4.1 through 4.4.

3.2.6	Residential PUD - Subdivision of lots using a Residential PUD under Section 5.12 of these Zoning Regulations are encouraged in the HDR District and are required for subdivisions of over three (3) lots in the HDR District, as provided in Section 5.12.2, in order to encourage innovation of design and layout of residential uses.



3.3	Residential / Commercial District (R/C)

Purpose - The standards of this district are designed to allow residential use and residential-compatible commercial use to co-exist in a traditional village style; to allow for the transition of residences to residential appearing businesses in the “downtown village” area; and to encourage flexibility of economic development while protecting existing residences. The “character of the neighborhood” is primarily residential, with the addition of residential-compatible retail uses to uses found in other residential districts. Businesses shall resemble residences in size and architectural characteristics.

Traditional spacing and setbacks for houses will maintain the integrity of the New England village atmosphere. Home occupations within residences, day care facilities, proximity to schools and civic
 
institutions, pedestrian pathways to essential services and close-knit residential groups constitute the “character of the neighborhood”.

3.3.1	Allowable Uses on Issuance of Zoning Permits by Administrative Officer - The following  uses shall be allowed for any lot in the R/C District after issuance of a Zoning Permit by the Administrative Officer. Unless otherwise permitted, only one principal use shall be permitted on one lot:

a)	Accessory dwelling as provided in Section 5.9.
b)	Accessory uses or structures to the uses in 3.3.1.
c)	Child care home, as provided in Section 5.11.
d)	Group home, as provided in Section 5.11.
e)	Home occupation, as provided in Section 5.11.
f)	One bed and breakfast.
g)	One single-family dwelling unit.
h)	One two-family dwelling.

3.3.2	Allowable Uses Upon Issuance of Conditional Use Approval - The following uses shall be allowed in the R/C District upon issuance of a conditional use approval by the DRB. Unless otherwise provided, only one principal use, with its accessory structures, may be approved on any one lot.

a)	Adaptive uses as provided in Section 5.6.8.
b)	Artist/Craft studio.
c)	Cemetery.
d)	Cottage industry as provided in Section 5.6.7.
e)	Day care center.
f)	One multi-family dwelling with three or four dwelling units.
g)	Extraction of earth resources as provided in Section 5.6.6.
h)	Funeral parlor.
i)	Inn or guest house.
j)	Museum.
k)	Office, Business.
l)	Office, Professional.
m)	Personal service business.
n)	Planned Unit Development, which may be a Planned Residential Development, as provided in Section 5.12, if no subdivision of land is proposed (see Section 5.12.1).
o)	Outdoor recreational facility or park.
p)	Religious or educational facility as provided in Section 5.10.4.
q)	Restaurant, standard.
r)	Retail business.
s)	Retirement community.
t)	State- or community-owned and operated facilities, to the extent allowed by Section 5.10.4.
u)	Agriculture, silviculture and horticulture, as provided in Section 2.4.5.
v)	Veterinary Clinics



3.3.3	Dimensional Requirement for Lots in the R/C District - No Zoning Permit may be issued for Land Development in the R/C District unless the lot proposed for such Land Development meets the following dimensional requirements:

a)	Lot Area - Except as provided under Section 4.6.1, no lot served by a municipal water and sewer system shall be less than 1/3 acre. This minimum lot area requirement shall be increased to one
 
(1)	acre for any lot not served by municipal water and sewer systems. The purchase of additional land by the owner of a lot from an adjacent lot owner will be permitted, provided such purchase does not create a lot of less than the minimum area required in the Zoning District on the part of the seller. In the case of use of a lot for 3 or more dwelling units served by municipal water and sewer systems, one-third (1/3) acre of land per dwelling unit shall be required and one (1) acre of land per dwelling unit shall be required for lots not served by municipal water and sewer systems.
b)	Lot Dimensions - Each lot must contain a point from which a circle with a radius of twenty-five
(25) feet can be inscribed within the boundary of the lot.
c)	Lot Frontage - No lot having frontage on a public or private road shall have less than seventy- five (75) feet of continuous uninterrupted length of said frontage or the lot must have access to a public or private road with approval by the DRB pursuant to Sections 4.2 and 4.3.
d)	Lot Coverage - The total ground area of a lot covered by all structures, parking areas, walkways, driveways, and areas covered by impervious materials shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the total ground area of the lot.

3.3.4	Dimensional Limitations for Structure on Lots in the R/C District - No Zoning Permit may be issued for a structure in the R/C District unless the structure proposed for the lot meets the following dimensional requirements:

a)	Height - The height of any structure shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet, except as provided in Section 6.6.
b)	Front Yard Setback - All structures shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from each front lot line, or thirty-five (35) feet from the center line of each public or private Road or Highway right of way contiguous to the lot, whichever is greater. Accessory structures shall be placed no closer to the front lot line than the principal structure.
c)	Side Yard Setback - A principal structure shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from each side lot line. An accessory structure shall be set back at least five (5) feet from the side lot line.
d)	Rear Yard Setback - A principal structure shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the rear lot line. An accessory structure shall be set back at least five (5) feet from the rear lot line.

3.3.5	Other Requirements Applicable to Lots in the R/C District - No zoning Permit may be issued for Land Development in the R/C District unless the Land Development meets the following requirements:

a)	Parking Requirements - Parking Requirements shall be regulated as provided in Section 6.1.
b)	Loading Space Requirements - Off-Road or Highway loading requirements shall be as required in Section 6.1.
c)	Signs - Signs shall be regulated as provided in Section 5.7.
d)	Traffic Impact - No permit or approval shall be issued for a use which generates more than 35 vehicle trip ends during the P.M. peak hour for the first 40,000 square feet of lot area or fraction thereof, plus 1 vehicle trip end for each additional 1,000 square feet of lot area. In making the determination of traffic impact, the Administrative Officer or DRB shall utilize “Trip Generation - Seventh Edition - 2003”, Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) , or its equivalent, or any subsequent and most recent publication thereof, and may use estimates from other sources, including local traffic counts, if the above publication does not contain data for a specific use or if a use contains unique characteristics that cause it to differ from national traffic estimates.
e)	Access - Access shall be regulated as provided in Sections 4.1 through 4.4.
f)	Character of the Neighborhood Standards - In addition to the specific standards listed under Section 5.6.2 for conditional use approval, any non-residential use in the R/C District shall also meet the following standards prior to issuance of conditional use approval:
i.	A non-residential use shall not exceed 2500 square feet gross floor area per floor with a two-story maximum. A building containing dwelling units, a group home, or a guest house is a “residential use” for the purposes of this subsection.
 
ii.	All new structures or additions to existing structures shall be residential in character with style, massing, lot placement and scale similar to those found in the existing residential neighborhood.
iii.	For conversions of residences to commercial or multi-family use, fire escapes, signs, storefront windows or other features that will compromise the architectural integrity of the building shall not be placed on the front of the building.



3.4	Gateway Commercial District (G)

Purpose - The standards of this district are designed to allow for commercial uses in an area that has importance as a scenic entrance to the Town of Richmond. The rural character of the northern approach to the Town will be enhanced by carefully planned commercial development, and urban strip development will  be avoided. Accesses here will be carefully managed, curb cuts will be few, and internal circulation required to avoid impeding the flow of traffic on Route 2. Green space, landscaping to screen parking from both Route 2 and other “character of the neighborhood” criteria must be met in order to retain the flavor of an entranceway to a dynamic yet rural and historic small town.

3.4.1	Allowable Uses on Issuance of Zoning Permits by Administrative Officer - The following  uses shall be allowed for any lot in the G District after issuance of a Zoning Permit by the Administrative Officer. Unless otherwise permitted, only one principal use shall be permitted on one lot:

a)	Accessory dwelling as provided in Section 5.9.
b)	Accessory uses or structures to the uses in 3.4.1.
c)	Bed and breakfast.

3.4.2	Allowable Uses Upon Issuance of Conditional Use Approval - The following uses, with accessory structures, may be allowed in the G District after issuance of conditional use approval by the DRB.

a)	Adaptive use as provided in Section 5.6.8.
b)	Amusement arcade.
c)	Artist/Craft studio.
d)	Automobile service station.
e)	Bank.
f)	Business yard.
g)	Catering service.
h)	Cemetery.
i)	Cottage industry as provided in Section 5.6.7.
j)	Day care center.
k)	Dwelling, single-family attached to a principal structure approved for a permitted or conditional use.
l)	Dwelling, two-family
m)	Dwelling, multi-family with three or four dwelling units.
n)	Educational or religious facility as provided in Section 5.10.4.
o)	Extraction of earth resources as provided in Section 5.6.6.
p)	Food processing establishment.
q)	Funeral parlor.
r)	Garage, repair.
s)	Group home, as provided in Section 5.11.
t)	Hotel or motel.
u)	Inn or guest house.
v)	Kennel
 
w)	Light Manufacturing.
x)	Multi-use commercial building with uses from this section or 3.4.1.
y)	Museum.
z)	Offices, Business. aa) Offices, Professional. bb) Personal services.
cc) Planned Unit Development, which may be a Planned Residential Development, as provided in
Section 5.12, if no subdivision of land is proposed (see Section 5.12.1). dd) Private club.
ee) Recreation, indoor or outdoor facility or park.
ff)  Research laboratory.
gg) Retail business associated with light manufacturing with a maximum size of 3,000 square feet. hh) Retirement community.
ii)   State- or community-owned and operated institutions and facilities, to the extent allowed by Section 5.10.4.
jj)   Tavern, provided that it is associated with an onsite distillery, brewery, or winery. kk) Agriculture, silviculture and horticulture, as provided in Section 2.4.5.
ll)   Veterinary Clinics

3.4.3	Dimensional Requirements Applicable to Lots in the G District - No Zoning Permit shall be issued for Land Development in the G District unless the lot proposed meets the following dimensional and/or density requirements:

a)	Lot Area - Except as provided under Section 4.6.1, no lot served by municipal or community water and sewer systems shall be less than 1/3 acre. This minimum lot area requirement shall be increased to one (1) acre for any lot not served by municipal or community water and sewer systems. If multiple uses are permitted in one or more buildings on a lot, the lot shall be of sufficient size to allow 1/3 acre per use with municipal or community water and sewer or 1 acre per use without municipal or community water and sewer. In the case of use of a lot for 3 or more dwelling units served by municipal or community water and sewer systems, one-third (1/3) acre of land per dwelling unit shall be required and one (1) acre of land per dwelling unit shall be required for lots not served by municipal or community water and sewer systems.
b)	Lot Dimensions - Each lot must contain a point from which a circle with a radius of twenty-five
(25) feet can be inscribed within the boundary of the lot.
c)	Lot Frontage - No lot having frontage on a public or private road shall have less than seventy- five (75) feet of continuous uninterrupted length of said frontage or the lot must have access to a public or private road with approval by the DRB pursuant to Sections 4.2 and 4.3.
d)	Lot Coverage - The total ground area covered by all structures, parking areas, walkways, driveways and any other impervious surfaces shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the total ground area of the lot.

3.4.4	Dimensional Limitations for Structures on Lots in the G District - No Zoning Permit shall be issued for a structure in the G District unless the structure proposed for the lot meets the following dimensional requirements:


a)	Height - The height of any structure shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet, except as provided in Section 6.6.
b)	Front Yard Setback - All structures shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from the edge of
the Route 2 right-of-way and thirty (30) feet from the edge of all other right-of-ways.
c)	Side Yard Setback - A principal structure shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from each side lot line. An accessory structure shall be set back at least five (5) feet from the side lot line.
d)	Rear Yard Setback - A principal structure shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the rear lot line. An accessory structure shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the rear lot.
 
e)	Maximum Building Size - No building shall have a footprint exceeding 10,000 square feet, with the exception of buildings that are setback more than 200 feet from the edge of the Route 2 right-of-way and 30 feet from the edge of all other right-of-ways. Buildings set back more than 200 feet from the edge of the Route 2 right-of-way and 30 feet from the edge of all other right-of-ways shall not have a footprint exceeding 17,000 square feet.
f)	Residential Mixed Use requirement – In the Gateway Commercial District at least 40% of the gross floor area of new development must be in commercial use.

3.4.5	Other Requirements Applicable to Lots in the G District - No Zoning Permit shall be issued for Land Development in the G District unless the Land Development meets the following requirements:

a)	Parking - Parking shall be located to the side or rear of the building. For lots with no  frontage on Route 2 parking may be located in the front of the building, if appropriately screened from Route 2. For properties with multiple buildings and multiple uses the project shall be reviewed under the PUD standards and flexible parking design and layout maybe considered, however for properties with multiple buildings no parking may be located in front of the building front line that is located closest to Route 2. Parking areas shall be landscaped to minimize the visual impact from neighboring roads and properties. Shared parking with neighboring properties shall be encouraged. Parking shall be otherwise regulated as provided in Section  6.1.
b)	Loading Space Requirements - Off Road or Highway loading requirements shall be regulated as provided in Section 6.1.
c)	Signs - Signs shall be regulated as provided in Section 5.7.
d)	Traffic Impact - No permit or approval shall be issued for a use which generates more than 70 vehicle trip ends during the P.M. peak hour for the first 40,000 square feet of lot area or fraction thereof, plus 1 vehicle trip end for each additional 1,000 square feet of lot area. In making the determination of traffic impact, the Administrative Officer or DRB shall utilize “Trip Generation - Seventh Edition - 2003”, Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE), or its equivalent, or any subsequent and most recent publication thereof, and may use estimates from other sources, including local traffic counts, if the above publication does not contain data for a specific use if a use contains unique characteristics that cause it to differ from national traffic estimates.
e)	Access - Any curb cuts created in addition to the ones already existing as of the date of these Zoning Regulations, shall be no closer than 250 feet to any other existing or new curb cut for Route 2. An access shall otherwise be regulated as provided in Sections 4.1 through 4.4. Existing curb cuts shall be eliminated when possible.
f)	Character of the Neighborhood - In addition to the specific standards listed in Section 5.6.2 for conditional use approval, any use in the Gateway District shall also meet the following standards prior to the issuance of conditional use approval:
i.	A single principal structure must have an entrance or windows facing toward Route 2.
Multiple grouped buildings may have their entrances in whatever direction is appropriate to their access. Within a group, the building closest to Route 2 must have an entrance or windows facing Route 2.
ii.	Principal structures must have a steeply pitched roof (4:12) or greater. The roof pitch requirement may be waived for buildings with footprints that exceed 10,000 square feet and rooftop equipment shall be shielded from view from Route 2.
iii.	There must be landscaping between the building and Route 2 of 50’.
iv.	Structures shall have an appearance of wood or brick.

3.5	Village Commercial District (V/C)

Purpose - The standards of this district are designed to retain and provide areas for the sale of retail or wholesale of those types of goods and services required by the residents of the community. Strip development with multiple curb cuts is discouraged. An attractive, pedestrian friendly, compact area of retail operations is encouraged. Parking and traffic flow shall be considered as part of the site plan review process
 
for any Land Development in this district. Residential uses that are compatible with a village commercial district will be permitted after conditional use approval and site plan review.

3.5.1	Allowable Uses Upon Issuance of Zoning Permit by Administrative Officer - The following uses shall be allowed uses in the V/C District upon issuance of a Zoning Permit by the Administrative Officer. Site Plan Review and approval by the DRB shall also be required. Unless otherwise provided, only one principal use may be approved on any one lot:

a)	Accessory dwelling as provided in Section 5.9.
b)	Accessory uses or structures, except outdoor storage, to the uses in 3.5.1.
c)	Artist/Craft studio.
d)	Day care center.
e)	Inn or guest house.
f)	Museum.
g)	Office, business or professional.
h)	Personal services business.
i)	Religious use as provided in Section 5.10.4
j)	Restaurant, standard.
k)	Retail business.
l)	Theater, indoor.

3.5.2	Allowable Uses Upon Issuance of Conditional Use Approval - The following uses may be allowed in the V/C District after issuance of conditional use approval by the DRB. Unless otherwise provided, only one principal use, with its accessory structures, may be approved on one lot.
a)	Adaptive use as provided in Section 5.6.8.
b)	Bank.
c)	Catering service.
d)	Commercial multi-use building.
e)	Business yard.
f)	Educational facility as provided in Section 5.10.4.
g)	Equipment supply and/or rental.
h)	Funeral parlor.
i)	Garage, vehicle repairs and service.
j)	Group home.
k)	Hotel or motel.
l)	Light manufacturing
m)	Lumber yard / Building supply business.
n)	Planned Unit Development as provided in Section 5.12, if no subdivision of land is proposed (see Section 5.12.1).
o)	Private club.
p)	Recreation, indoor or outdoor, facility or park.
q)	Research laboratory.
r)	Restaurant, fast food or take-out.
s)	Retirement community.
t)	Rooming or boarding house.
u)	State- or community-owned and operated institutions and facilities, to the extent allowed by Section 5.10.4.
v)	Storage, outdoor as an accessory use to any permitted or conditional use.
w)	Tavern.
x)	Veterinary Clinics
x)	Wholesale trade.
y)	Dwelling Units as part of a Planned Unit Development.
z)	Agriculture, silviculture and horticulture as provided in Section 2.4.5.
 
3.5.3	Dimensional Requirement for Lots in the V/C District - No Zoning Permit may be issued for Land Development in the V/C District unless the lot proposed for such Land Development meets the following dimensional requirements:

a)	Lot Area - Except as provided under Section 4.6.1, no lot served by a municipal or community water and sewer system shall be less than one-third (1/3) acre. This minimum lot area requirement shall be increased to one (1) acre for any lot not served by municipal or  community water and sewer systems. The purchase of additional land by the owner of a lot from an adjacent lot owner will be permitted, provided such purchase does not create a lot of less than the minimum area required in the Zoning District on the part of the seller. In the case of a lot for three (3) or more dwelling units served by municipal or community water and sewer systems, one-third (1/3) acre of land per dwelling unit shall be required and one (1) acre of land per dwelling unit shall be required for lots not served by municipal or community water and sewer systems.
b)	Lot Dimensions - Each lot must contain a point from which a circle with a radius of twenty-five
(25) feet can be inscribed within the boundary of the lot.
c)	Lot Frontage - No lot having frontage on a public or private road shall have less than seventy- five (75) feet of continuous uninterrupted length of said frontage or the lot must have access to a public or private road with approval by the DRB pursuant to Sections 4.2 and 4.3.
d)	Lot Coverage - The total ground area covered by all structures, parking areas, walkways, driveway and areas covered by impervious materials shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total ground area of the lot.

3.5.4	Dimensional Limitations for Structures on Lots in the V/C District - No Zoning Permit may be issued for a structure in the V/C District unless the structure proposed for the lot meets the following dimensional requirements:
a)	Building Height - The height of any structure shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet, except as provided in Section 6.6.
b)	Front Yard Setback - All structures shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from the front lot line.
c)	Side Yard Setback - A principal structure shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from each  side lot line. An accessory structure shall be set back at least five (5) feet from the side lot line.
d)	Rear Yard Setback - A principal structure shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the rear lot line. An accessory structure shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the rear lot.
e)	Parking Setbacks – Parking spaces on all properties in the V/C District shall meet the
setback standards for the V/C District, except for properties bordering the Jolina Court Zoning District. On such properties, the setback for parking spaces from property lines that separate the Jolina Court Zoning District from Village Commercial Zoning District is zero (0) feet. However, for all other property lines that do not serve as boundary lines for the Jolina Court Zoning District on properties bordering the Jolina Court Zoning District, parking spaces must meet the setback standards for the V/C District.

3.5.5	Other Requirements Applicable to Lots in the V/C District - No Zoning Permit may be issued for Land Development in the V/C District unless the Land Development meets the following requirements:

a)	Parking Requirements - New land development is exempt from meeting the required number of parking spaces, per Section 6.1.2, for the following parcels: 10 East Main Street (EM0010); 26 Bridge Street (BR0026); 30 Bridge Street (BR0030); 38 Bridge Street (BR0038); 39 Bridge Street (BR0039); 48 Bridge Street (BR0048); 52 Bridge Street (BR0052).
 
With the exception of the number of required parking spaces for those parcels, Section 6.1.2 shall apply to the V/C District. In all other respects. Required parking shall be regulated as provided in Section 6.1 within the V/C district.

b)	Signs - Signs shall be regulated as provided in Section 5.7.
c)	Traffic Impact - No permit or approval shall be issued for a use which generates more than 70 vehicle trip ends during the P.M. peak hour for the first 40,000 square feet of lot area or fraction thereof, plus 1 vehicle trip end for each additional 1,000 square feet of lot area. In making the determination of traffic impact, the Administrative Officer or DRB shall utilize “Trip generation - Seventh Edition - 2003”, Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE), or its equivalent, or any subsequent and most recent publication thereof, and may use estimates from other sources, including local traffic counts, if the above publication does not contain data for a specific use or if a use contains unique characteristics that cause it to differ from national traffic estimates.
d)	Access - Access shall be regulated as provided in Sections 4.1 through 4.4.

3.6	Commercial District (C)

Purpose - The standards of this district are designed to retain and provide areas for the sale at retail or wholesale of those types of goods and services required by the residents of the community. Strip development with multiple curb cuts is discouraged. An attractive, pedestrian friendly, compact area of retail operations is encouraged. Parking and traffic flow shall be considered as part of the site plan review process for any Land Development in this district. Residential uses that are compatible with a commercial district will be permitted after conditional use approval and site plan review.

3.6.1	Allowable Uses Upon Issuance of Zoning Permit by Administrative Officer - The following uses shall be allowed uses in the C District upon issuance of a Zoning Permit by the Administrative Officer. Site Plan Review and approval by the DRB shall also be required. Unless otherwise provided, only one principal use may be approved on any one lot:

a)	Accessory dwelling as provided in Section 5.9.
b)	Accessory uses or structures, except outdoor storage, to the uses in 3.6.1.
c)	Artist/Craft studio.
d)	Day care center.
e)	Inn or guest house.
f)	Museum.
g)	Office, business or professional.
h)	Personal services business.
i)	Religious use as provided in Section 5.10.4.
j)	Restaurant, standard.
k)	Retail business.
l)	Theater, indoor.

3.6.2	Allowable Uses Upon Issuance of Conditional Use Approval - The following uses may be allowed in the C District after issuance of conditional use approval by the DRB. Unless otherwise provided, only one principal use, with its accessory structures, may be approved on one lot:

a)	Adaptive use as provided in Section 5.6.8.
b)	Amusement arcade.
c)	Automobile and/or marine sales.
d)	Automobile service station.
e)	Bank.
f)	Business yard.
g)	Car wash.
h)	Catering service.
 
i)	Commercial multi-use building.
j)	Distribution Center.
k)	Educational facility as provided in Section 5.10.4 .
l)	Equipment supply and/or rental.
m)	Extraction of earth resources as provided in Section 5.6.6.
n)	Funeral parlor.
o)	Garage, vehicle repairs and service.
p)	Group home.
q)	Hotel or motel.
r)	Light manufacturing
s)	Lumber yard / Building supply business.
t)	Planned Unit Development as provided in Section 5.12, if no subdivision of land is proposed (see Section 5.12.1).
u)	Private club.
v)	Recreation, indoor or outdoor, facility or park.
w)	Research laboratory.
x)	Restaurant, fast food or take-out.
y)	Retirement community.
z)	Rooming or boarding house.
aa) State- or community-owned and operated institutions and facilities, to the extent allowed by Section 5.10.4.
bb) Storage, outdoor as an accessory use to any permitted or conditional use. cc) Tavern.
dd) Veterinary Clinics
ee) Warehouse Use. ff)  Wholesale trade.
gg) Agriculture, silviculture and horticulture, as provided in Section 2.4.5.

3.6.3	Dimensional Requirement for Lots in the C District - No Zoning Permit may be issued for Land Development in the C District unless the lot proposed for such Land Development meets the following dimensional requirements:
a)	Lot Area - Except as provided under Section 4.6.1, no lot served by a municipal or community water and sewer system shall be less than one-third (1/3) acre. This minimum lot area requirement shall be increased to one (1) acre for any lot not served by municipal or  community water and sewer systems. The purchase of additional land by the owner of a lot from an adjacent lot owner will be permitted, provided such purchase does not create a lot of less than the minimum area required in the Zoning District on the part of the seller. In the case of a lot for three (3) or more dwelling units served by municipal or community water and sewer systems, one-third (1/3) acre of land per dwelling unit shall be required and one (1) acre of land per dwelling unit shall be required for lots not served by municipal or community water and sewer systems.
b)	Lot Dimensions - Each lot must contain a point from which a circle with a radius of twenty-five
(25) feet can be inscribed within the boundary of the lot.
c)	Lot Frontage - No lot having frontage on a public or private road shall have less than seventy- five (75) feet of continuous uninterrupted length of said frontage or the lot must have access to a public or private road with approval by the DRB pursuant to Sections 4.2 and 4.3.
d)	Lot Coverage - The total ground area covered by all structures, parking areas, walkways, driveway and areas covered by impervious materials shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total ground area of the lot.

3.6.4	Dimensional Limitations for Structures on Lots in the C District - No Zoning Permit may be issued for a structure in the C District unless the structure proposed for the lot meets the following dimensional requirements:
 
a)	Building Height - The height of any structure shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet, except as provided in Section 6.6.
b)	Front Yard Setback - All structures shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from the front lot line.
c)	Side Yard Setback - A principal structure shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from each side lot line. An accessory structure shall be set back at least five (5) feet from the side lot line.
d)	Rear Yard Setback - A principal structure shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the rear lot line. An accessory structure shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the rear lot.

3.6.5	Other Requirements Applicable to Lots in the C District - No Zoning Permit may be issued for Land Development in the C District unless the Land Development meets the following requirements:

a)	Parking Requirements - Parking shall be regulated as provided in Section 6.1.
b)	Loading Space Requirements - Off-Road or Highway loading requirements shall be regulated as provided in Section 6.1.
c)	Signs - Signs shall be regulated as provided in Section 5.7.
d)	Traffic Impact - No permit or approval shall be issued for a use which generates more than 70 vehicle trip ends during the P.M. peak hour for the first 40,000 square feet of lot area or faction thereof, plus 1 vehicle trip end for each additional 1,000 square feet of lot area. In making the determination of traffic impact, the Administrative Officer or DRB shall utilize “Trip generation - Seventh Edition - 2003”, Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE), or its equivalent, or any subsequent and most recent publication thereof, and may use estimates from other sources, including local traffic counts, if the above publication does not contain data for a specific use or if a use contains unique characteristics that cause it to differ from national traffic estimates.
e)	Access - Access shall be regulated as provided in Sections 4.1 through 4.4.

3.7	Industrial / Commercial District (I/C)

Purpose - The purpose of the Industrial / Commercial District is to foster employment opportunities and help diversify the tax base for the Town. The standards of this district are designed to retain and provide areas for the manufacture, warehousing, jobbing, wholesaling and limited retailing of products which by their inherent characteristics are not obnoxious to one another. The standards are further described to minimize adverse impacts on neighboring properties, visual, noise, odors, etc. and on the visual impacts of the site from roads.

3.7.1	Allowable Uses Upon Issuance of a Zoning Permit by Administrative Officer - All of the following uses shall be allowed in the I/C District after issuance of a Zoning Permit by the Administrative Officer and Site Plan and approval by the DRB shall also be required. Only one principal use may be approved on any one lot, with the exception of those lots approved through the PUD/Residential PUD Section.

a)	Accessory dwelling, as provided in Section 5.9.
b)	Accessory uses or structures, except outside storage, to the uses in 3.7.1.
c)	Car wash.
d)	Catering service.
e)	Equipment service and repair business, including retail sales.
f)	Equipment supply and/or rental business, including retail sales.
g)	Food processing establishment.
h)	Office, Business.
i)	Office, Professional.
j)	Personal services.
k)	Storage and distribution center.
l)	Warehousing use.
m)	Wholesale trade use.
 
3.7.2	Allowable Uses Upon Issuance of Conditional Use Approval - The following uses, with accessory structures, may be allowed in the I/C District after issuance of conditional use approval by the DRB.

a)	Adaptive use as provided in Section 5.6.8.
b)	Amusement arcade.
c)	Automobile and/or marine sales and/or service business.
d)	Automobile service station.
e)	Commercial multi-use building
f)	Bank.
g)	Business yard.
h)	Communications, telecommunications, as provided in Section 6.12.
i)	Extraction of earth resources as provided in Section 5.6.6.
j)	Garage, vehicle repairs and service.
k)	Hotel or motel.
l)	Kennel.
m)	Light manufacturing.
n)	Lumber yard or building supply business.
o)	Mobile home sales business.
p)	Outdoor storage as an accessory use to in connection with any conditional or permitted use.
q)	Planned Unit Development as provided in Section 5.12, if no subdivision of land is proposed (see Section 5.12.1).
r)	Private club.
s)	Recreation facility, outdoor or indoor.
t)	Research laboratory.
u)	Restaurant, fast-food or take-out.
v)	Restaurant, standard.
w)	Retail business.
x)	Storage, indoor.
y)	State- or community-owned and operated institutions and facilities, to the extent allowed by Section 5.10.4 .
z)	Tavern. aa) Theater.
bb) Veterinary Clinics
cc) Agriculture, silviculture and horticulture, as provided in Section 2.4.5 .

3.7.3	Dimensional Requirement For Lots in the I/C District - No Zoning Permit may be issued for Land Development in the I/C District unless the lot proposed for such Land Development meets the following dimensional requirements:

a)	Lot Area - Except as provided under Section 4.6.1, no lot shall be less than 1 acre. The purchase of additional land by the owner of a lot from an adjacent lot owner shall be permitted, provided such purchase does not create a lot of less than the minimum area required in the Zoning District on the part of the seller.
b)	Lot Dimensions - Each lot must contain a point from which a circle with a radius of fifty (50) feet can be described within the boundary of the lot.
c)	Lot Frontage - No lot having frontage on a public or private road shall have less than one- hundred (100) feet of continuous uninterrupted length of said frontage or the lot must have access to a public or private road with approval by the DRB pursuant to Sections 4.2 and 4.3.
d)	Lot Coverage - The total ground area covered by all structures, parking areas, walkways, driveways and areas covered by impervious materials shall not exceed sixty percent (60%) of the total ground area of the lot. If it can be demonstrated that all storm water will be retained on the lot, coverage may be increased to a maximum of 80%.
 
3.7.4	Dimensional Limitations for Structures on Lots in the I/C District - No Zoning Permit may be issued for a structure in the I/C District unless the structure proposed for the lot meets the following dimensional requirements:

a)	Building Height - The height of any structure shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet, except as provided in Section 6.6
b)	Front Yard Setback - All structures shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from the edge of public or private Road or Highway right of way contiguous to the lot.
c)	Side Yard Setback - A principal structure shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the side lot line unless the side walls of such principal structure are of masonry construction and contain no opening in which event the principal structure need not be set back from the side lot lines. An accessory structure shall be set back from the side lot line at least ten (10) feet.
d)	Rear Yard Setback - A principal structure shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the rear lot line. An accessory structure shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the rear lot line.

3.7.5	Other Requirements Applicable to Lots in the I/C District - No Zoning Permit may be issued for Land Development in the I/C District unless the Land Development meets the following requirements:
a)	Parking Requirements - Parking Requirements shall be regulated as provided in Section 6.1.
b)	Loading Requirements - Off-Road or Highway loading requirements shall be regulated as provided in Section 6.1.
c)	Signs -Signs shall be regulated as provided in Section 5.7.
d)	Traffic Impact - No permit or approval shall be issued for a use which generates more than 70 vehicle trips ends during the P.M. peak hour for the first 40,000 square feet of lot area or fraction thereof, plus 1 vehicle trip end for each additional 1,000 square feet of lot area. In making the determination of traffic impact, the Administrative Officer or DRB shall utilize “Trip Generation - Seventh Edition - 2003”, Institute of Traffic Engineers, or its equivalent, or any subsequent and most recent publication thereof, and may use estimates from other sources, including local traffic counts, if the above publication does not contain data for a specific use or if a use contains unique characteristics that cause it to differ from national traffic estimates.
e)	Access - Access shall be regulated as provided in Sections 4.1 through 4.4

3.8	Mobile Home Park District (MHP)

Purpose - The purpose of the Mobile Home Park District is to designate an area in town which supports an  intense development of land for residential purposes while recognizing the need to create open spaces, efficient traffic patterns and comfortable spacing between individual homes. The standards are further described to minimize adverse impacts on neighboring properties, visual, noise, odors, etc. and on the visual impacts of the site from roads.

3.8.1	Allowable Uses on Issuance of Zoning Permit by Administrative Officer - The following uses are allowed uses in the MHP District after issuance of a Zoning Permit by the Administrative Officer. Unless otherwise provided, only one principal use may be approved on one lot:
a)	Accessory dwelling as provided in Section 5.9.
b)	Accessory uses and structures to the uses in 3.8.1.
c)	Child care home, as provided in Section 5.11.
d)	Group home, as provided in Section 5.11.
e)	Home occupation, as provided in Section 5.11.
f)	One single-family dwelling unit.
g)	One two-family dwelling unit.
h)	Agriculture, silviculture and horticulture, as provided in Section 2.4.5 , including one single or two family dwelling.
 

3.8.2	Allowable Uses Upon Issuance of Conditional Use Approval - The following uses may be allowed in the MHP District after issuance of conditional use approval by the DRB. Unless otherwise provided, only one principal use, with its accessory structures, may be approved on one lot:

a)	Day care center.
b)	One mobile home park on a lot.
c)	Recreation, outdoor facility or park.

3.8.3	Dimensional Requirement For Lots in the MHP District - No Zoning Permit may be issued for Land Development in the MHP District unless the lot proposed for such Land Development meets the following dimensional requirements:

a)	Lot Area - Except as provided under Section 4.6.1, a lot which is not used for a mobile home park shall not be less than one (1) acre. A lot which is used for a MHP shall contain not less than ten (10) acres. The purchase of additional land by the owner of such lot from an adjacent lot owner shall be permitted, provided such purchase does not create a lot of less than the minimum lot area required in the Zoning District on the part of the seller. In the case of use of a lot for a Mobile Home Park, one-quarter acre (1/4) acre of land per dwelling unit in the Mobile Home Park shall be required.
b)	Lot Dimensions - Each lot must contain a point from which a circle with a radius of fifty (50) feet can be described within the boundary of the lot.
c)	Frontage Required - No lot shall be created nor developed unless the lot has frontage for a continuous uninterrupted length of not less than one hundred (100) feet or the lot must have access to a public road or a private right of way approved by the DRB pursuant to Sections 4.2 - 4.3.
d)	Lot Coverage - For a lot used for a Mobile Home Park, the total ground area covered by all structures, parking areas, walkways, driveways, and areas covered by impervious materials shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the total ground area of the lot. For a lot not used as a mobile home park, the lot coverage shall not exceed 30%.

3.8.4	Dimensional Limitations for Structures on Lots in the MHP District - No Zoning Permit may be issued for a structure in the MHP District unless the structure proposed for the lot meets the following dimensional requirements:

a)	Height - The height of any structure shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet, except as provided in Section 6.6.
b)	Front Yard Setback - All structures on a lot which is not used for a Mobile Home Park shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from each front lot line, or fifty-five (55) feet from the  center line of each public or private Road or Highway right of way contiguous to the lot, whichever is greater. All structures on a lot used for a Mobile Home Park shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet from each front lot line, or one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from the center line of each public or private Road or Highway right of way contiguous to the lot, whichever is greater.
c)	Side Yard Setback - A principal structure on a lot which is not used for a Mobile Home Park shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from each side lot line. An accessory structure shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the side lot line. All structures on a lot used for a Mobile Home Park shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from each side lot line. An accessory structure shall be set back at least twenty-five (25) feet from the side lot line.
d)	Rear Yard Setback - A principal structure on a lot which is not used for a Mobile Home Park shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from each rear lot line. An accessory structure shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the rear lot line. All structures on a lot used for a
 
Mobile Home Park shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from each rear lot line. An accessory structure shall be set back at least twenty-five (25) feet from the rear lot line.

3.8.5	Other Requirements Applicable to Lots in the MHP District - No Zoning Permit may be issued for any Land Development in the MHP District unless the Land Development meets the following requirements:

a)	Parking Requirements - Parking requirements shall be regulated as provided in Section 6.1.
b)	Signs - Signs shall be regulated as provided in Section 5.7.
c)	Access - Access shall be regulated as provided in Section 4.1 through 4.4.
d)	State Approval of Mobile Home Parks - No Zoning Permit may be issued for Land Development within a mobile home park unless satisfactory evidence is produced to the DRB that all applicable state laws and regulations relating to Land Development have been met.

3.8.6	Replacement of Mobile Homes - In accordance with the Act (§4412), no standards under these Zoning Regulations shall have the effect of prohibiting the replacement of a mobile home on an existing site within a mobile home park that is legally in existence as of the Effective Date of these Zoning Regulations. In the event that a mobile home park is determined to be nonconforming under these Zoning Regulations, the determination shall apply to the parcel as a whole, and not to individual mobile home  sites within the park. An individual mobile home site that is vacated shall not be considered a discontinuance or abandonment of a nonconforming use or structure.

3.9	Jolina Court District (JC)

Purpose: The purpose is to support employment, light industry, commercial enterprises, community gathering spaces, dense and affordable housing, and other compatible uses that bring value to the community and maintain Richmond’s unique sense of place. It will also support the traditional village mixed use patterns with street level commercial uses and upper floor residential uses. There are 3 primary goals for this district:

Help improve the economic vitality of Richmond by attracting desirable new businesses to the site, creating jobs, and increasing municipal water and wastewater utility use.
Attract residents and visitors to our village center for community and commercial activities. Increase the housing density, affordability, and diversity in order to support a vibrant and diverse
population of Richmond residents.

Any development in this district shall enhance the overall village area and shall be compatible with the
surrounding mix of residential, non‐residential, and municipal uses. Any development proposal shall fit into
the vision for Richmond as described in the Richmond Town Plan.

3.9.1	Allowable Uses Upon Issuance of Zoning Permit and Site Plan Approval - The following uses shall be allowed in the Jolina Court District upon issuance of a Zoning Permit by the Administrative Officer. Site Plan Approval shall be required as in Section 5.5.1. More than one use per lot is allowed in this district.
a)	Artists/Crafts studio
b)	Bank
c)	Bed and Breakfast
d)	Home Occupation as in Section 5.11
e)	Fitness facility
f)	Hotel
g)	Inn or guesthouse
h)	Laundromat
i)	Office, Professional
j)	Office, Medical
k)	Personal Services
 
l)	Retail business

3.9.2	Allowable Uses Upon Issuance of Conditional Use Approval - The following uses shall be allowed in the Jolina Court District upon issuance of conditional use approval by the DRB. More than one use per lot is allowed in this district.

a)	Accessory structure
b)	Brewery
c)	Catering Service
d)	Center Based Child Care Facility
e)	Commercial Multi-Use
f)	Educational Facility as provided in Section 5.10.4
g)	Food Processing Establishment
h)	Funeral Parlor
i)	Light Manufacturing
j)	Health Care Services
k)	Hospital
l)	Pharmacy
m)	Planned Unit Development as provided in Section 5.12, if no subdivision of land is proposed (see Section 5.12.1).
n)	Residential Dwelling Units as part of a Mixed Use Planned Unit Development.
o)	Pub
p)	Recreational facility
q)	Research laboratory
r)	Restaurant
s)	Religious use as provided in Section 5.10.4
t)	State- or community-owned and operated institutions and facilities, as provided in Section 5.10.4
u)	Tavern
v)	Theater
w)	Veterinary Clinics
x)	Wholesale trade

3.9.3	Residential Density and Requirements
a)	Each residential dwelling unit shall require 1/15 acre of developable land located on the same lot as the unit. This equals a residential density of 15 units per developable acre.

Developable land excludes those lands that are outlined in section 2.5.2. The maximum number of units that may be permitted shall be calculated by multiplying the residential density by the total developable acreage of the lot. When this calculation results in a number with a fractional component, the fraction will be rounded according to conventional rounding rules as follows, in which X is a whole number:

X.0 – X.49 units shall be rounded DOWN to X units
X.5 – X.99 units shall be rounded UP to X+1 units

Examples: 15 units/acre x 1.22 developable acres = 18.30 units rounds down to 18 units 15 units/acre x 2.97 developable acres = 44.55 units rounds up to 45 units

b)	Residential dwelling units may only be approved as part of a mixed-use Planned Unit Development. All residential dwelling units are required to meet Vermont Fire and Building Safety Code

3.9.4	Dimensional Requirement for Lots in the JC District-No Zoning Permit may be issued for Land Development in the J/C District unless the lot proposed for such Land Development meets the following dimensional requirements:
 
a)	Lot Area - No lot shall be less than one-fourth (1/4) or 0.25 acre. The purchase of additional land by the owner of a lot from an adjacent lot owner will be permitted, provided such purchase does not create a lot of less than the minimum area required in the Zoning District on the part of the seller.
b)	Lot Dimensions - Each lot must contain a point from which a circle with a radius of twenty- five (25) feet can be inscribed within the boundary of the lot.
c)	Lot Frontage - No lot having frontage on a public or private road shall have less than seventy-five (75) feet of continuous uninterrupted length of said frontage or the lot must have access to a public or private road with approval by the DRB pursuant to Sections 4.2 and 4.3.
d)	Lot Coverage - The total ground area covered by all structures, parking areas, walkways, driveway and areas covered by impervious materials shall not exceed eighty percent (80%) of the total ground area of the lot.

3.9.5	Dimensional Limitations for Structures on Lots in the JC District
a)	Height of Buildings and Structures - shall be as in Section 4.12 of these regulations.
b)	Setbacks for the Periphery of the Zoning District - Refer to Appendix D for the map and text of the setback requirements for periphery of the zoning district. If a lot line demarcating the periphery of the zoning district conflicts or overlaps with any lot lines created after May 12, 2020, principal and accessory structures must follow the setback requirements for the periphery of the zoning district with respect to the lot line that also serves as a boundary line for the Jolina Court Zoning District.
c)	Setbacks within the Zoning District - The following regulations apply to structures with respect to lot lines created after (date regulations are adopted) and are wholly within the zoning district:
d)	Front-yard setback - A principal structure shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the front lot line. An accessory structure shall be set back at least five (5) feet from the front lot line.
e)	Side-yard setback - A principal structure shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from each side lot line. An accessory structure shall be set back at least five (5) feet from each side lot line
f)	Rear-yard setback - A principal structure shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the rear lot line. An accessory structure shall be set back at least five (5) feet from the rear lot line. For Planned Unit Developments, the setback requirements for lot lines within the PUD may be waived by the DRB if the design and layout of the PUD conforms with the Town Plan.
g)	Parking Setbacks – Parking spaces on all properties in the Jolina Court Zoning District shall meet the setback standards for the Jolina Court Zoning District, except for properties bordering the Village Commerical Zoning District. On such properties, the setback for parking spaces from property lines that separate the Jolina Court Zoning District from Village Commercial Zoning District is zero (0) feet. However, for all other property lines that do not serve as boundary lines for the Jolina Court Zoning District on properties bordering the Village Commercial Zoning District, parking spaces must meet the setback standards for the Jolina Court Zoning District.
h)	Footprints of Principal Structures - No principal structure shall have a footprint area that
exceeds 10,000 square feet.

3.9.6	Other Requirements Applicable to Lots in the JC District- No Zoning Permit may be issued for Land Development in the J/C District unless the Land Development meets the following requirements:
a)	Parking Requirements - Parking Supply-In this district, the residential parking requirement shall be based on the number of bedrooms per dwelling unit. The spaces required shall only serve to calculate overall supply and shall not be assigned to specific dwellings.
Bedrooms	Efficiency (0)	1
Bedroom	2
Bedroom	3
Bedroom	4
Bedroom
 


Spaces Required	1	1.5	2	2.5	3


Spaces shall increase by 0.5 spaces per additional bedroom.

All other parking supply requirements shall follow the requirements as set forth in section 6.1. Bicycle parking racks shall be required within the parking areas, and lots shall be required to provide safe and convenient bicycle access as per section 6.1.6

b)	Loading Space Requirements – Off-Road or Highway loading requirements shall be regulated as provided in Section 6.1.
c)	Signs – Signs shall be regulated as provided in Section 5.7.
d)	Traffic Impact – The purpose of this requirement is to foster the general welfare of the public through the minimization of traffic congestion, air pollution, and the risk of motor vehicle and pedestrian accidents.
i)	A transportation impact study shall be required for uses which generate more than 70
vehicle trip ends on adjacent roads during the P.M. peak hour for the first 40,000 square feet of land development area or fraction thereof, plus 1 vehicle trip end for each additional 1,000 square feet of land development area. In making the determination of traffic impact, the Administrative Officer or DRB shall utilize “Trip generation – Tenth Edition”, Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE), or its equivalent, or any subsequent and most recent publication thereof, and may use estimates from other sources, including local traffic counts, if the above publication does not contain data for a specific use or if a use contains unique characteristics that cause it to differ from national traffic estimates.
ii)	For establishments that generate more than 70 vehicle trip ends during the P.M. peak hour, the Development Review Board shall review the level of service of adjacent roads. Based on its review as well as consultation with the Road Foreman, the DRB may put forth permit conditions to mitigate adverse traffic impacts. Permit conditions may include:
a.	Site improvements to improve access management, such as the creation of
secondary access points, the reduction of the width of curb cuts, or the like; b.Improvements to internal circulation, including the creation of narrower roadway
widths, pedestrian pathways, and the like;
c.Improvements with connections with adjacent properties, such as, but not limited to, the creation of additional vehicle or pedestrian access points, the installation of signage and traffic lights, and adjustments to intersections to reduce pedestrian crossing distances and to slow traffic.
e)	Access – Access shall be regulated as provided in Sections 4.1 through 4.4.
f)	Sidewalks- Sidewalks that connect all buildings on Jolina Court with the sidewalks and pedestrian crossings on Bridge Street shall be required. They may be connected individually or in series. The purpose of this is to ensure walkability of any new development and ensure connection to the downtown area.
g)	Compatibility- The purpose of this requirement is to allow the Development Review Board to review and approve the visual aspects of new construction, or new or remodeled exteriors. This ensures public ability to review the visual rendering and provide input.  A visual rendering of any new construction or remodeled exterior shall be required as part of a site plan and/or conditional use application. Any changes to the façade, size, or scale of new construction or a remodeled exterior shall require a new visual rendering that portrays the proposed changes and shall require an amendment to the Development Review Board’s original site plan and/or conditional use approval which contains the most recent iteration of the visual rendering. Publicly displayed visual
 
renderings must be in accordance with section 5.3.3 (b). The following shall be considered when reviewing the application:
i)	Compatibility of size, scale, color, materials, and character of the district, and construction utilizing materials similar or the same to the existing buildings of the district, shall be required for all new construction and all new or remodeled exterior facades. Applicants shall be required to demonstrate compatibility through examples, research, architectural consultation, or other means. This compatibility requirement shall not prohibit artistic expression, ability to landscape, commercial viability, creativity, or individuality.
ii)	Design features that provide all structures with an attractive and human-scale appearance when viewed from a public or private road or by neighboring properties shall be required. These features shall include the following:
a.	Building façades of 50 feet or more shall be broken down into a series of smaller facades that incorporate changes in color, texture or materials; architectural projections or recesses; varying setbacks or roof treatments, or other structural or decorative variations.
b.	Primary building facades of any length shall include windows and doors.
c.	All sides of buildings must have windows
d.	Accessory structures shall also satisfy compatibility criteria as described above.
e.	Landscaping, screening and green space shall be required to achieve the following goals:
i.	To provide screening of development to increase privacy, reduce noise and
glare, contribute to the attractiveness and scenic qualities of the property, and to otherwise lessen the visual impact of the development on neighboring properties.
ii.	To provide green space amenities for the occupants of the development
iii.	Provisions for the care and maintenance of plantings, including the removal and replacement of dead or diseased shrubs or trees.
h)	Fire Protection- Any building using engineered lumber shall have the appropriate placard as
deemed necessary by ISO standards. This placard shall be placed at the primary ingress/egress of the main floor of said building.
i)	Environmental Concerns – The development should prioritize the protection of wetlands, riparian areas and surface waters to maintain the health and function of those areas and their ecosystem services. These ecosystem services include, but are not limited to, protection of water quality; stormwater management; floodwater storage; limitation of soil erosion; stream channel stabilization; preservation of existing plant and animal communities, including identified rare and sensitive specie; preservation of habitat connectivity, and the maintenance of Richmond's rural character and scenic beauty. For specific standards regarding land development within the Floodway and the Special Flood Hazard Area, see Section 6.8.
j)	Additional Possible Conditions - The following site standards also may be required as a condition of Development Review Board approval

●	Greater setback or screening requirements along the perimeter of the property
●	Adequate pedestrian facilities
●	Demonstration of the ability to properly develop, operate, and maintain development roads, utilities, driveways, parking, sidewalks, landscaping, and other conditions or standards imposed

3.10	Village Downtown District (VD)
 
Area: the following parcels are included in this district:PS0023, BR0052, BR0048, BR0039, BR0038, BR0030, BR0027, BR0026, WM0013, EM0010, EM0013, WM0004, WM0035, DS0022, PS0014, BR0072

Purpose: The purpose of the Village Downtown Mixed-Use District is to provide a district that encompasses the existing village core area and supports employment, light industry, commercial enterprises, community gathering spaces, dense and affordable housing, and other compatible uses that bring value to the community and maintain Richmond’s unique sense of place. It will also support the traditional village  mixed use patterns with street/ground level commercial uses and upper floor residential uses. There are 3 primary goals for this district:
1.	Help improve the economic vitality of Richmond by attracting desirable new businesses to the site,
creating jobs, and increasing municipal water and wastewater utility use.

2.	Attract residents and visitors to our village center for community and commercial activities.

3.	Increase the housing density, affordability, and diversity in order to support a vibrant and diverse population of Richmond residents.

Any development in this district shall enhance the overall village area and shall be compatible with the
surrounding mix of residential, non‐residential, and municipal uses. Any development proposal shall fit into the
vision for Richmond as described in the Richmond Town Plan.

3.10.1	Allowable Uses Upon Issuance of Zoning Permit by Administrative Officer- The following uses shall be allowed uses in the Village Downtown District upon issuance of a Zoning Permit by the Administrative Officer. Site Plan Review by the DRB shall also be required. More than one principal use per lot is allowed in this district.
a)	Artists/Crafts studio
b)	Bank
c)	Bed and Breakfast
d)	Hotel
e)	Inn or guest house
f)	Laundromat
g)	Office, Medical
h)	Office, Professional
i)	Personal Services
j)	Retail business

3.10.2	Allowable Uses Upon Issuance of Conditional Use Approval-The following uses may be allowed in the Village Downtown District after issuance of conditional use approval by the DRB. More than one principal use per lot is allowed in this district.
a)	Brewery
b)	Catering Service
c)	Center-based Child Care Facility
d)	Commercial Multi-Use Building
e)	Educational Facility as provided in Section 5.10.4
f)	Equipment Rental or Supply
g)	Food Processing Establishment
h)	Funeral Parlor
i)	Group Home
j)	Health Care Services
k)	Hospital
l)	Research Laboratory
m)	Light Manufacturing
n)	Museum
o)	Planned Unit Development
as provided in Section 5.12, if no subdivision of land is proposed (see Section 5.12.1).
 
Residential Dwelling Units as part of a Mixed Use Planned Unit Development No residential-only Planned Unit Development
p)	Pharmacy
q)	Private Club
r)	Pub
s)	Recreational facility
t)	Religious use as provided in Section 5.10.4
u)	Restaurant
v)	Retirement Community
w)	State- or community-owned and operated institutions and facilities as provided in Section 5.10.4
x)	Tavern
y)	Theater
z)	Veterinary Clinics aa) Wholesale trade

3.10.3	Residential Density and Requirements

a)	Each residential dwelling unit shall require 1/24 acre of developable land located on the same lot as the unit subject to the rounding rule below. This equals a residential density of approximately 24 units per acre. Developable land excludes those lands that are outlined in section 2.5.2. The maximum number of units that may be permitted shall be calculated by multiplying the residential density by the total developable acreage of the lot. When this calculation results in a number of units with a fractional component, the fraction will be rounded according to conventional rounding rules as follows, where X is a whole number:
X.0 – X.49 units shall be rounded DOWN to X units.
X.50 – X.99 units shall be rounded UP to X+1 units.

Examples: 24 units/acre x 0.22 developable acres = 5.28 units rounds DOWN to 5 units.
24 units/acre x 0.16 developable acres = 3.84 units rounds UP to 4 units. If the number of permissible units is less than one (1) it shall be rounded UP to 1 unit.
Example: 24 units/acre x 0.02 developable acres = 0.48 units rounds UP to 1 unit.

b)	Residential dwelling units shall be restricted to the second story/floor and above of any building and shall not be allowed on the street/ground level. These units may be approved as part of a mixed-use Planned Unit Development.

3.10.4	Dimensional Requirement for Lots in the VD District-No Zoning Permit may be issued for Land Development in the VD District unless the lot proposed for such Land Development meets the following dimensional requirements:

a)	Lot Area- No lot shall be less than one-eighth(1/8) or 0.125 acre The purchase of additional land by the owner of a lot from an adjacent lot owner will be permitted, provided such purchase does not create a lot of less than the minimum area required in the Zoning District on the part of the seller.
b)	Lot Dimension - Each lot must contain a point from which a circle with a radius of twenty-five (25)
feet can be inscribed within the boundary of the lot.
c)	Lot Frontage- A lot must have 50 feet of continuous frontage on a public or private road, or have access to a public or private road by a permanent easement or right-of-way approved by the DRB as regulated by Sections 4.2 and 4.3.
d)	Lot Coverage- The total ground area covered by all structures, parking areas, walkways, driveways and areas covered by impervious materials shall not exceed eighty percent (80%) of the total ground area of the lot.

3.10.5	Dimensional Limitations for Structures on Lots in the VD District
a)	Height- shall be as in Section 4.12 of these regulations.
 
b)	Setback- All structures shall have zero (0) feet setbacks, except for a five (5) feet setback for all structures on district boundaries. All development is required to install and maintain a sidewalk to the public works standards on any and all public road frontage. Placement of the sidewalk and curb cuts or accesses to the property are subject to approval of the Highway Foreman.

3.10.6	Other Requirements Applicable to Lots in the VD District- No Zoning Permit may be issued for Land Development in the VD District unless the Land Development meets the following requirements:

a)	Parking Requirements-
i)	In this district, the residential parking requirement shall be based on the number of bedrooms per dwelling unit. The spaces required shall only serve to calculate overall supply, and shall not be assigned to specific dwellings.


Bedrooms	Efficiency (0)	1 Bedroom	2 Bedroom	3 Bedroom	4 Bedroom
Spaces Required	1	1.5	2	2.5	3

Spaces shall increase by 0.5 spaces per additional bedroom.

ii)	All other parking supply requirements shall follow the requirements as set forth in section 6.1.
iii)	Exempted Lots - BR0052, BR0048, BR0038, BR0030, BR0026, BR0039, EM0010 are exempt
from standard parking requirements. However, they are required to provide a descriptive plan for where they intend to have tenants and patrons park, whether that be providing a copy of a private parking agreement between landowners or use of public parking. Use of public parking requires Selectboard and road foreman approval in the form of a public parking permit.
b)	Loading - Off-Road or Highway loading requirements shall be regulated as provided in Section 6.1
c)	Signs - Signs shall be regulated as provided in Section 5.7.
d)	Traffic Impact - The purpose of this requirement is to foster the general welfare of the public through the minimization of traffic congestion, air pollution, and the risk of motor vehicle and pedestrian accidents.
i)	A transportation impact study shall be required for uses which generate more than 70 vehicle trip ends on adjacent roads during the P.M. peak hour for the first 40,000 square feet of land development area or fraction thereof, plus 1 vehicle trip end for each additional 1,000 square feet of land development area. In making the determination of traffic impact, the Administrative Officer or DRB shall utilize “Trip generation – Tenth Edition”, Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE), or its equivalent, or any subsequent and most recent publication thereof, and may use estimates from other sources, including local traffic counts, if the above publication does not contain data for a specific use or if a use contains unique characteristics that cause it to differ from national traffic estimates.
ii)	For establishments that generate more than 70 vehicle trip ends during the P.M. peak hour, the Development Review Board shall review the level of service of adjacent roads. Based on its review as well as consultation with the Road Foreman, the DRB may put forth permit conditions to mitigate adverse traffic impacts. Permit conditions may include:
a.	Site improvements to improve access management, such as the creation of secondary
access points, the reduction of the width of curb cuts, or the like;
b.	Improvements to internal circulation, including the creation of narrower roadway widths, pedestrian pathways, and the like;
c.	Improvements with connections with adjacent properties, such as, but not limited to, the creation of additional vehicle or pedestrian access points, the installation of signage and
 
traffic lights, and adjustments to intersections to reduce pedestrian crossing distances and to slow traffic.
e)	Access - Access shall be regulated as provided in Sections 4.1 through 4.4.
f)	Compatibility- The purpose of this requirement is to allow the Development Review Board to review and approve the visual aspects of new construction or new or remodeled exteriors. The goal of this requirement is to ensure public ability to review the visual rendering, and the opportunity to provide input. A visual rendering of any new construction or remodeled exterior shall be required as part of a site plan and/or conditional use application. Any changes to the facade, size, or scale of new construction or a remodeled exterior shall require a new visual rendering that portrays the proposed changes and shall require an amendment to the Development Review Board’s original site plan and/or conditional use approval which contains the most recent iteration of the visual rendering. The following shall be considered when reviewing the application:

●	Compatibility of size, scale, color, materials, and character of the district, and construction utilizing materials similar or the same to the existing buildings of the district, is required for all new construction and all new or remodeled exterior facades.
●	Applicants shall be required to demonstrate compatibility through examples, research, architectural consultation, or other means.
●	This compatibility requirement shall not prohibit artistic expression, ability to landscape,
commercial viability, creativity, or individuality.
g)	Residential Use - Residential dwelling units shall be restricted to the second story/floor or higher of any building, and shall only be approved and permitted via Planned Unit Development.
g)	Additional Possible Conditions - The following site standards also may be required as a condition of Development Review Board approval

●	Greater setback or screening requirements along the perimeter of the property
●	Adequate pedestrian circulation
●	Demonstration of the ability to properly develop, operate, and maintain development roads, utilities, driveways, parking, sidewalks, landscaping, and other conditions or standards impose






4.	REGULATIONS APPLYING TO ALL LOTS

4.1	Compliance with Public Works Specifications
All vehicular accesses shall comply with the 2000 Public Works Specifications, or the most recent version of Public Works Specifications at the time of application.

4.2	Required Frontage on, or Access to, Roads or Public Waters
In accordance with the Act [§4412(3)], Land Development may be permitted on lots which do not have frontage either on a public road or public waters in conformance with Section 4.3, provided that access through a permanent easement or right-of-way has been approved by the DRB.

4.3	Approval for Interior Lots with No Frontage
Land Development proposed for any lot with no frontage on a public road or public water shall provide access to such a road by a permanent easement or right-of-way. The following procedures will be followed for obtaining access to and approval for such lots:

4.3.1	Review Process - A new or relocated access to any lot without frontage on a public road or public waters shall require DRB approval, under the standards in Section 6.2.
 
4.3.2	Required Information - Applications shall include a plan drawn to scale showing boundaries of all properties crossed by and to be served by the proposed private easement or right-of-way, dimensions and grades of the vehicular access, the point of access onto a public road, and any other information the DRB may require to assure adequate emergency access to all lots and dwelling units.

4.3.3	Easement Dimensions - An easement or right-of-way shall be at least thirty (30) feet in width if serving less than four (4) lots. Easements or rights-of-way serving four or more lots shall be at least sixty (60) feet in width and meet the standards in Section 6.2.1 and the current Public Works Specifications.

4.4	Curb Cuts
No more than one curb cut shall be allowed onto a public or private Road or Highway right of way affording access to a lot. The Administrative Officer or DRB may impose further reasonable conditions regarding curb cuts including consolidation of access points to public or private Road or Highway rights of way, in the interests of minimizing to the greatest degree possible, a multiplicity of curb cuts. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the DRB, in a conditional use or appeal proceeding, may increase the number of curb cuts, where only one curb cut would result in adverse effects on traffic circulation within the site or on traffic on Roads and Highways in the vicinity.

4.5	Multiple Use of Lots
There shall be only one Principal Structure on a lot and there shall only be one use on a lot, unless the lot is part of a Residential PUD or PUD as specified in Section 5.12.

4.6	Nonconforming Lots

4.6.1	Existing Small Lots - In accordance with the Act [§4412(2)], any lot in individual and separate and non-affiliated ownership from surrounding properties, that is legally in existence on the Effective Date of any Richmond Bylaw may be developed for the purposes permitted in the Zoning District in which the lot is located, even though the lot does not conform to minimum lot area requirements of the Zoning District provided such lot is not less than one-eighth (1/8) acre in area and does not have a width or depth dimension of less than 40 feet. Notwithstanding this exception to minimum lot area requirements, no Zoning Permit shall be issued for Land Development on an existing small lot unless such Land Development complies with all other provisions of these Zoning Regulations.

4.6.2	Lot Merger - If an existing small lot subsequently comes under common ownership with one or more contiguous lots, the nonconforming lot shall be deemed merged with the contiguous lot.

However, in accordance with the Act, a nonconforming lot shall not be deemed merged and may be separately conveyed if all of the following apply:
a.	The lots are conveyed in their preexisting, nonconforming configuration.
b.	On the Effective Date of these Zoning Regulations, each Lot was developed with a water supply and wastewater disposal system.
c.	At the time of transfer, each water supply and wastewater disposal system is functioning in an acceptable manner.
d.	If the Lot is not served by municipal water and sewer, the deeds of conveyance create appropriate easements on both lots for replacement of one or more wastewater systems, potable water systems, or both, in case there is a failed system or failed supply as defined by 10 V.S.A. Chapter 64.

4.7	Nonconforming Structures
The following shall apply to all nonconforming structures, except for those within the Flood Hazard Overlay District, which also must comply with the provisions of Section 2.*** of these regulations:
a.	May undergo normal repair and maintenance without a permit if such action does not increase the structure’s degree of nonconformity
b.	May be restored ore reconstructed after damage to its prior condition from any cause provided that the reconstruction does not increase the degree of nonconformity that existed prior to the damage, and provided that a zoning permit is obtained within 12 months of the date the damage occurred.
 
A Nonconforming structure may be replaced or restored after damage or destruction by fire or other casualty, and expansion may be permitted as long as the noncompliance of any aspect of the structure is not increased;  provided, however, that such replacement or restoration shall be substantially complete within 365 days of the date of the damage or destruction. The DRB may permit such extensions of the 365-day time period as may be equitable, if the lot owner is prevented from commencing or substantially completing construction due to circumstances beyond the lot owner’s control. A damaged or destroyed Nonconforming structure which is not substantially replaced or restored in compliance with this section shall not thereafter be used and shall be removed.


4.8	Setback Modifications
Purpose - Richmond contains a large number of buildings that were built prior to the enactment of
Richmond’s Zoning Regulations and do not conform to setback and/or lot coverage requirements. Current zoning may prohibit even small increases in these buildings due to the restrictions on setbacks and lot coverage. Small increases in the size of these buildings may, in appropriate cases, be beneficial to landowners without adversely affecting neighbors or the interests protected by Richmond’s Zoning Regulations. It is the purpose of this section to allow for such increases subject to conditional use review under Section 5.6, as needed to authorize the modification or waiver of district front, side and rear yard setback and lot coverage requirements in accordance with the Act [§4414(8)].

4.8.1	Applicability - The DRB may issue conditional use approval for the expansion of any nonconforming structure substantially completed prior to April 1, 1969 (an “existing building”). If lawful additions were made to any existing building after April 1, 1969, the term “existing building” shall include the original building and such additions. The conditional use approval may allow expansion of an existing building to occur no closer than five (5) feet to any lot line or edge of a public or private right of way and increases in lot coverage as a result of the expansion by no more than 10% of the total ground area of the lot. (For example, if the lot is 8,000 square feet, conditional use approval could allow an increase of 800 square feet in lot coverage.)

4.8.2	Selectboard Notification - The Administrative Officer shall notify the Selectboard of applications to modify setbacks that are adjacent to land owned by the Town and Town rights-of-way whether held as a right-of-way or fee title, at the same time such application is referred to the DRB.
4.8.3	Review Criteria - Prior to issuing conditional use approval for the waiver or modification of setback and coverage requirements, the DRB must find that the proposed expansion:
a)	is in compliance with conditional use criteria of these Zoning Regulations, including the general standards, specific standards and performance standards outlined under Section 5.6, and with state law, and
b)	the structure must be found to be otherwise in compliance with these Zoning Regulations.

4.8.4	Conditions of Approval - The DRB may require design modifications, screening or other conditions to mitigate Undue Adverse Effects to adjoining properties or public rights-of-way.
4.9	Nonconforming Uses
A Nonconforming Use may continue to exist, subject to the following:

A Nonconforming Use shall not be changed to other than a permitted use. Any Nonconforming Use that ceases for 365 consecutive days shall not be permitted to resume, and intent to abandon the use shall be conclusively presumed for such non-use unless it qualifies under the “Adaptive Use” section (5.6.8) of these Zoning Regulations. If it can be shown that the usage has traditionally been intermittent, the historical rate will be used to assess abandonment and continued use.

Any increase or expansion of a Nonconforming Use may occur only after DRB approval. The DRB may approve increases in nonconforming uses that involve an increase of 25% or less in physical characteristics such as, but not limited to, square footage or traffic flow, after Conditional Use Review.

4.10	Noise
It shall be a requirement for any approval under these Zoning Regulations to comply with the following stated limits:
 
4.10.1	Residential Noise. Noise shall not exceed the following levels of intensity at the property line in the Agricultural/Residential, High Density Residential, Residential/Commercial and Mobile Home Park Districts:

TIME PERIOD	One hour Average dBA	Instantaneous Maximum dBA
7:00 AM to 11:00 PM	70	80
11:00 PM to 7:00 AM	50	60


4.10.2	Commercial Noise. Noise shall not exceed the following levels of intensity at the property line in the Gateway Commercial, Village Commercial, Commercial, Jolina Court and Industrial/Commercial Districts:


TIME PERIOD	One hour Average dBA	Instantaneous Maximum dBA
7:00 AM to 11:00 PM	80	90
11:00 PM to 7:00 AM	60	70


4.10.3	Terms.  For purposes of this regulation, the following terms shall be defined as stated below:

a)	Decibel - a unit measure of sound level;
b)	Sound level - in decibels measured by a sound level meter, using “A” frequency weighting (expressed in dBA);
c)	Average dBA - a sound level during a given period of time (e.g., one hour) found by the general rule of combination of sound levels. Also called equivalent sound level.

4.10.4	Exemptions. Noises associated with standard agricultural operations and usual and customary residential activities shall be exempt from this standard.

4.11	Exterior Lighting

4.11.1	General Guidelines - The Town of Richmond exterior lighting policy is designed to reduce the use of inappropriate and poorly designed or installed exterior lighting which causes unsafe and unpleasant viewing conditions. On the other hand, it is also recognized that some exterior lighting is appropriate and necessary. All Richmond property owners or Applicants are encouraged to utilize the following general guidelines when designing and installing or replacing existing exterior lighting fixtures:

•	use the minimum light level needed for the task

•	avoid competitive lighting, in which one source of lighting is increased in illumination to “outshine” a neighboring source

•	light areas evenly and uniformly for better visibility

•	consider the color of the light and limit the use of lighting that provides unnatural color.

•	Lighting should not shine onto adjacent properties or above the horizontal plane, at the elevation of the light fixture.

4.11.2	General Requirements - It shall be a requirement for any municipal approval in all zoning districts, to mitigate Undue Adverse Effects and conserve energy, that the following requirements are met:
a)	Site Plan.  Submit a Site Plan proposal that includes all proposed exterior light fixtures:
 
i.	Specifications for all proposed lighting fixtures including photometric data designation as IESNA (the Illumination Engineers Society of North America) “cut-off” fixtures, Color Rendering Index (CRI) of all lamps (bulbs), and other descriptive information on the fixtures such as height and location, and;
ii.	Analyses and iso-illuminance diagrams showing that the proposed installation conforms to the lighting standards in this Section.
b)	Illumination.  Whenever building elevations are submitted, show exterior fixtures and the portions of the walls to be illuminated.
c)	Sensors.  Lighting installations should include timers, dimmers, and/or sensors to reduce the overall energy consumption and eliminate unneeded lighting.
d)	Underground.  Electrical service to exterior lighting fixtures shall be underground unless the fixtures are mounted directly on utility poles.
e)	Height.  The mounting height of a lighting fixture shall be defined as the vertical distance from the grade elevation directly below the fixture to the bottom of the lighting fixture.
f)	Exemptions.  Lighting associated with normal and customary residential activities and holiday lighting, displayed within 45 days of the State recognized date of the holiday, shall be exempt from this standard.

4.11.3	Parking Lot & Security Lighting
a)	Parking Lots - Parking lot lighting shall be designed to provide the minimum lighting necessary to ensure adequate vision and comfort in parking areas, and to not cause glare or direct illumination on adjacent properties or Roads or Highways.
i.	All lighting fixtures serving parking lots shall be cut-off fixtures as defined by (IESNA).
ii.	Alternatives: If a proposal contains a particular “period” or architectural style, an alternative (other than required by this section) primary or supplemental lighting design or fixture may be approved if the following apply:
1.	One, the maximum initial lumens generated by each fixture shall not exceed 2,000 (equivalent to a 150 watt incandescent bulb), when such fixtures are not “cut-off” fixtures as defined by the IESNA, and;
2.	Two, the mounting heights of such fixtures shall not exceed fifteen (15) ft.
b)	Security Lighting - The purpose of and need for security lighting, i.e., lighting for safety of persons and property, is allowed when part of an overall lighting plan.
i.	All security lighting fixtures shall be shielded and aimed so that illumination is directed only to the designated area and does not cast direct illumination on other areas. In no case shall any lighting be directed above a horizontal plane through the lighting fixture.
c)	Security and Parking Area lighting standards in the various districts are as shown in the following table:


LIGHTING	A/R, HDR, and MHP	R/C, G, V/C,
JC, VD, and C	I/C
Mounting Height (Max.) ***	20’	20’	25’
Minimum Illumination Level	no less than
0.2 foot candles (fc)	no less than
0.2 fc	no less than
0.3 fc
Uniformity Ratio *	4:1	4:1	4:1
Average Illumination Level on Vertical Surface	no more than
0.3 fc	no more than
0.5 fc	no more than
0.3 fc
Minimum CRI **	70	70	60

* Uniformity ratio is the ratio of average illumination to minimum illumination
** CRI = Color Rendering Index.
*** Mounting height is the vertical distance between the surface being illuminated and the bottom of the lighting fixture.
 
4.11.4	Illuminated Signs.  Illuminated signs shall meet the requirements set forth in the Signs section (5.7) of these Zoning Regulations.


4.11.5	Roads or Highways Lighting.  Roads or Highways lighting shall meet the standards set forth in the Town’s Public Works Specifications.

4.11.6	Lighting of Gasoline Station Aprons and Canopies.	Lighting levels on gasoline station aprons and under canopies shall be adequate to facilitate the activities taking place in such locations. Lighting of such areas shall not be used to attract attention to the businesses. Signs allowed under the appropriate section of these Zoning Regulations shall be used for that purpose.
a)	Areas on the apron away from the gasoline pump islands, used for parking or vehicle storage, shall be illuminated in accordance with the requirements for parking areas set forth elsewhere in this Section.
b)	Areas around the pump islands and under canopies shall be illuminated so that the minimum horizontal illuminance is at least 1.0 foot-candle and no more than 2.0 foot-candles. The uniformity ratio (ratio of average to minimum illuminance) shall not exceed 4:1.
c)	Light fixtures mounted on canopies shall be recessed so that the lens cover is flush with the bottom surface (ceiling) of the canopy.
d)	As an alternative (or supplement) to recessed lights, indirect lighting may be used where light is reflected down from the bottom of the canopy. In this case light fixtures must be shielded so that direct illumination is focused exclusively on the underside of the canopy.
e)	Lights shall not be mounted on the top or sides of the canopy, and the sides (fascias) of the canopy shall not be illuminated.

4.11.7	Lighting of Building Facades and Roofs.  With the exception of structures having exceptional symbolic (i.e. churches and/or public buildings) or historic significance in the community, exterior building facades shall not be illuminated. When buildings having symbolic or historic significance are to be illuminated, a design for the illumination shall be approved by the DRB, after public hearing, and the following provisions shall be met:
a)	The maximum illumination on any vertical surface or angular roof surface shall not exceed 2.5 footcandles.
b)	Lighting fixtures shall be carefully located, aimed and shielded so that light is directed only onto the building facade. Lighting fixtures shall not be directed towards adjacent Roads and Highways.
c)	Lighting fixtures mounted on the building and designed to “wash” the facade with light are to be preferred.
d)	To the extent practicable, lighting fixtures shall be directed downward (i.e. below the horizontal) rather than upward.

4.12	Height of Buildings and Structures

4.12.1	The height of a building shall not exceed 35 feet. In buildings with steeply pitched roofs in which there is no occupancy above 35 feet, the building height may not exceed 45 feet.

4.12.2	Structures on the roof of a building such as spires, chimneys, cupolas, rooftop solar collectors, domes and belfries may extend up to 45 feet from the average finished grade. Rooftop antennae may extend to 47 feet. [24 V.S.A. §4412 (6 and 8A)]

4.12.3	All single-family and two-family dwelling uses must include an egress window with a lower sill or threshold that does not exceed 32 feet from adjacent finished grade, and meet all applicable municipal and state fire safety codes.
 
4.12.4	All single-family and two-family dwelling uses shall have at least one point where the threshold of the roof is no higher than 32 feet from the adjacent finished grade to allow for ladder access to the roof by fire and rescue personnel.

4.12.5	For all Conditional Use and Site Plan Review applications, applicants must consult with the Richmond Fire Department prior to applying. All Conditional Use and Site Plan Review applications must include a letter of recommendations from the Richmond Fire Department. The DRB shall take into consideration the recommendations the Richmond Fire Department in its review. Permit conditions may include recommendations from the Richmond Fire Department, so long as the recommendations promote the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Richmond.

4.12.6	Farm accessory buildings are exempt from the 35-foot height restriction, providing there is no habitation above 35 feet.

4.12.7	The height of wireless telecommunication facilities other than rooftop antennae shall be governed by section 6.12 of these regulations and 24 VSA S. 4412 (8B and C).




5.	PERMITS AND APPROVALS

5.1	Applicability

No Land Development may be commenced in the Town of Richmond without a Zoning Permit issued by the Administrative Officer. No Zoning Permit may be issued by the Administrative Officer except in conformance with the Act (§§4448, 4449) and these Zoning Regulations. Also, no Zoning Permit shall be issued by the Administrative Officer for any use or structure that requires approval of the DRB or Selectboard until such approval has been obtained. A State of Vermont Wastewater System and Potable Water Supply Permit or demonstration of exemption must be presented by the Applicant before a Certificate of Occupancy will be issued. These Zoning Regulations shall not repeal, annul, or in any way impair any Zoning Permit which was previously issued and utilized for any completed project.

5.2	Application Process, Decisions and Appeals

5.2.1	Application, Fees, Reimbursement for Technical Review -
a)	Complete Application - Applications submitted for review will be deemed complete by the Administrative Officer when all required material has been submitted and the permit fee has been paid. After the application is deemed complete, the Administrative Officer shall immediately refer it to the appropriate officer or the DRB for review, in accordance with the Act (§§4448, 4460).
b)	Fees, Reimbursements for Technical Review - Accompanying each application shall be the required fee or fees as established by the Richmond Selectboard in accordance with the Act (§4440), payable to the municipality. Under no conditions shall such sum or any part thereof be refunded unless provided for under a separate section of these Zoning Regulations or other town ordinance. Any fee may be amended from time to time by the Selectboard and shall be posted in the Town Clerk’s Office. The Administrative Officer or DRB may require an Applicant to pay for the reasonable costs of an independent technical review, by a consultant employed by such person or body, of an application, or portions therefore, subject to any procedures and standards established by the Richmond Selectboard, and the following:
i.	Administrative Officer: Upon receipt of an application, the Administrative Officer may arrange for independent technical review of the application or portions thereof.
ii.	DRB: The DRB, at any public hearing required under these Zoning Regulations in connection with an application, may vote to have an independent technical review of an application, to
 
the extent specified by the DRB in its vote. iii. In the event a written report is obtained from the technical consultant, the Applicant shall forthwith be supplied with a copy.
iii.	The Applicant shall pay for the reasonable costs of an independent technical review authorized under this subsection 5.2.1(b), within thirty (30) days of invoice for the cost thereof.
iv.	In the event the Town, Administrative Officer, or DRB is required to bring legal action to collect the amount specified in the invoice, the Applicant shall be responsible for the Administrative Officer’s, or DRB’s reasonable attorney’s fees, and other costs of collection.
v.	Notwithstanding anything in Section 5.3.5 , a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued to the Applicant, its successors and assigns, for the Land Development proposed in the application, or any part, until the invoice issued under subsection 5.2.1(b) is paid in full.
c)	Forms – An application for a Zoning Permit shall be filed with the Administrative Officer on form(s) provided for those purposes.

Application for Zoning Permit - The Administrative Officer shall require that every application for a Zoning Permit be accompanied by one (1) or more copies of a site plan showing the following in sufficient detail to enable the Administrative Officer to ascertain whether the proposal is in conformance with these Zoning Regulations.
i.	The actual shape, proportion and dimensions of the lot to be built upon and satisfactory evidence that actual corners of the lot are known and are established on the ground.
ii.	The shape, size and location of all buildings or other structures already existing on the lot.
iii.	The existing and intended uses and areas of use of the lot and all buildings and other structures.
iv.	The dimensions of all yards and such other information concerning the parcel or adjoining parcels as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of these Zoning Regulations are being observed regarding yards, areas, off-Roads or Highways parking and other such requirements or standards.
v.	Any other information as may be required by the Administrative Officer.
vi.	The location of the house, septic area, driveway and well, when specified in the subdivision approval, must be flagged and inspected as part of the permit application. vii. For an application in which any portion of the parcel is within the Flood Hazard Overlay District, the following additional information must be provided, per Section 6.8.
vii.	A site plan that depicts the proposed development, all water bodies, FEMA Special Flood Hazard Areas, floodways, Fluvial Erosion Hazard Zone, Base Flood Elevation information, the shortest horizontal distance from the proposed development to the top of bank of any stream, any existing and proposed drainage, any proposed fill, and pre and post development grades, and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor, as referenced to the same vertical datum as the elevation on the current Flood Insurance Rate Maps;
viii.	A Vermont Agency of Natural Resources Project Review Sheet for the proposal. The Project Review Sheet shall identify all State and Federal agencies from which permit approval is required for the proposal, and shall be filed as a required attachment to the Town of Richmond permit application. The identified permits, or letters indicating that such permits are not required, shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.

d)	State Permits -  All required state permits shall be a part of and made a condition of each local permit. Unless otherwise required, state permits may be obtained after local permits. In no case shall a project or use commence without all necessary state and local permits.

5.2.2	Decision on Application by the Administrative Officer - The Administrative Officer shall act on a permit application in accordance with the following. If the Administrative Officer fails to act on a complete application within 30 days, a permit shall be deemed approved and shall be issued by the Administrative Officer on the 31st day, provided, however, that for a “deemed approval” to be effective the Applicant must seek DRB affirmation of the applicability of this remedy by direct appeal to the DRB
 
of the Administrative Officer’s decision or lack thereof, and if denied by the DRB by direct appeal to the Environmental Court.
a)	A Zoning Permit may be issued by the Administrative Officer, if, in the opinion of the Administrative Officer, no review by the DRB is required and the proposed Land Development as set forth in the application is in conformity with the provisions of these Zoning Regulations and all other ordinances of the municipality.
b)	If, in the opinion of the Administrative Officer, the proposal set forth in such application is incomplete, the Administrative Officer shall issue a written determination and return the application with any fees to the Applicant with a list of those items needed to complete the application.
c)	If such application is complete and can be reviewed by the Administrative Officer and is found to be not in conformance with the provision of these Zoning Regulations and all other ordinances, the Administrative Officer shall deny the application. If an application for a permit is denied, the Administrative Officer shall state in writing on the application the reason for such denial.
d)	If an application needs to be reviewed by the DRB and the Administrative Officer deems the application complete, the Administrative Officer shall promptly refer the application to the DRB, in writing with the date of referral noted,
e)	If the application is for proposed Land Development located within the Flood Hazard Overlay District, the Administrative Officer shall promptly refer the completed application to the Agency of Natural Resources in accordance with Section 6.8.12.
f)	There is no refund of the application fee once a decision has been made or hearing warned by the Town.

5.2.3	Appeals - Any act of the Administrative Officer under this section, including the approval or denial of   a Zoning Permit, or the issuance of a written determination, may be appealed to the DRB as provided in Section 8.4. Any Zoning Permit issued by the Administrative Officer shall include a statement of the time within which an appeal may be taken.

5.3	Process after Permit is Issued

5.3.1	Procedure after Issuance -
a)	Within 3 working days following the issuance of a Zoning Permit by the Administrative Officer, the Administrative Officer shall post a copy of the permit in the Town Clerk’s Office. The permit shall remain posted until 15 days from the date of issuance and shall be available for public review during the regular business hours of the Town Clerk’s Office.
b)	Each permit issued under this section shall require posting of a notice of permit on a form provided by the Town, to be displayed in a prominent site on the lot upon which the Land Development is occurring, within view from the nearest public right-of-way, and shall remain posted until all work is complete.
c)	The Administrative Officer shall have the right to inspect the work during the effective period of the permit, from permit issuance until a Certificate of Occupancy is issued. Such inspections shall be done at reasonable times during the normal workday.
d)	The Zoning Permit shall be delivered by the Administrative Officer to the Town Clerk for recording in the land records of the Town in accordance with Section 8.5. The Administrative Officer shall deliver a copy of the permit to the Listers once it has been recorded by the Town Clerk

5.3.2	Effective and Expiration Dates -
a)	A Zoning Permit which the Administrative Officer is empowered to issue shall not take effect until 15 days after issuance by the Administrative Officer or, in the event that a notice of appeal is properly filed in accordance with Section 8.4, such permit shall not take effect until final adjudication of the appeal, as provided in §4449 of the Act...
b)	A Zoning Permit shall expire 24 months after the effective date, provided, however, that a Zoning Permit shall not expire if the Administrative Officer determines that, viewed as a whole, the work, time and expenditures invested in the project for which the Zoning Permit was issued demonstrate a good faith intent to presently commence upon the permitted use. The Administrative Officer may
 
extend the permit for good cause for an additional 12 months, provided the request is made prior to the expiration date. Projects phased over several years by the permitting authority of the Town of Richmond shall have separate expiration dates attached to each phase, and the provisions of this subparagraph (b) as to whether expiration has occurred shall apply to each separate expiration date.

5.3.3	Misrepresentations –
a)	Any zoning permit issued based upon material inaccuracies or misrepresentations in an application or in any supporting documents to an application shall be null and void and shall not be construed as waiving any provision of these zoning regulations.
b)	Any visual rendering of a permitted project that is displayed publicly shall be the same visual
rendering that has been presented to and approved by the DRB or the Administrative Officer.

5.3.4	Amendments to Permits Already Issued by the Administrative Officer - Amendments to the conditions of any permit already issued by the Town of Richmond may be made only by making application to the Administrative Officer for a new permit. Such application for a new permit shall be limited in scope to the changes from the permit already issued. Review of the amendment application by the DRB shall be required if the original permit was approved by the DRB.

5.3.5	Certificates of Occupancy –
A person shall not use or permit the use or occupancy of any land or structure, or part thereof created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered in its use or structure until a Certificate of Occupancy is issued therefore by the Administrative Officer, stating that the proposed use of the structure or land conforms to the requirements of these Zoning Regulations and the conditions of approval, in accordance with the Act (§4449), and that all violations of town land use permits, Bylaws and regulations have been cured as to the property involved and all related fines paid.

a)	Notwithstanding the preceding, a Certificate of Occupancy shall not be required for a one story building, without a basement or cellar, which:
i.	does not have more than six hundred (600) square feet of Gross Floor Area, and
ii.	is an Accessory Structure to a Dwelling, or a temporary building used in connection with a work site while work is ongoing (other than an accessory dwelling under Section 5.9), and
iii.	does not contain any water facilities or sewage facilities.
b)	Certificates of Occupancy shall be delivered by the Administrative Officer to the Town Clerk for recording in the land records of the Town in accordance with Section 8.5.

5.4	Subdivision Review

The division of a lot into two or more lots shall require subdivision approval under the Town of Richmond Subdivision Regulations, except for the following which shall require a Zoning Permit issued by the Administrative Officer:
a)	those lots created under Section 2.6, Administratively Created Lots, of these Zoning Regulations; and
b)	boundary line adjustments between two adjoining landowners, which do not create a new lot, but which shall require approval under Section 5.8, Boundary Adjustments, of these Zoning Regulations.

5.5	Site Plan Review

5.5.1	Applicability - Site Plan review by the DRB shall be required for Land Development that does not require Conditional Use Review (Section 5.6), except for the following uses, in accordance with the Act (§4416):
a)	Accepted agricultural and silvicultural practices (including Farm Structures).
 
b)	Single and two-family dwellings and their related accessory structures.
c)	Home occupations.
d)	Group homes.
e)	Child Care Homes serving a maximum of six children full-time and four children part-time.
f)	Land Development requiring Public Service Board (Section 248) approval.

The table at the beginning of Section 3 provides a summary of uses requiring Site Plan review.

5.5.2	Application Requirements for Site Plan Review -
a)	Name and address of owner(s) of the parcel.
b)	Names and addresses of all abutters, including those across contiguous Road(s) or Highway(s).
c)	Unless waived by the DRB for good cause, a site plan shall be prepared by a registered surveyor, professional planner, engineer, architect, or landscape planner. In all events, the site plan shall be drawn to scale, and submitted with written supporting data, showing the following:
i.	Existing features: contours, structures, utility easements, rights-of-way, deed restrictions, significant landscape features, Roads or Highways, surveyed boundaries, dimensions, total lot size;
ii.	Proposed Land Development: land use areas, structures, driveways, curb cuts, parking and loading areas, traffic circulation, pedestrian walkways, outside display areas, signs, site grading, landscaping, plantings and screening, setbacks and buffer strips, outside lighting, equipment and waste storage areas and sewage disposal areas.
d)	Information as to the time period or phasing for completion of the project.
e)	The DRB may also require the following submittals:
i.	Security as provided in Section 8.2.5.
ii.	Formal traffic study if a substantial alteration in public traffic flow is anticipated or a largescale parking area is planned. This may include analyses of traffic volumes, average daily trips, turning movements, patterns of ingress and egress, levels of service on roadways and at intersections, and modes of traffic control.

5.5.3	Conditions of Approval for Site Plan Review - The DRB may impose conditions and safeguards upon the approval of a site plan with respect to features authorized by the Act (§4416), as amended. Maps, data, studies, and other information will be requested as needed by the DRB for site plan review. Conditions of approval for site plan review include, but are not limited to, the following:
a)	Traffic - Conditions and safeguards with respect to adequacy of parking, traffic access, and circulation for pedestrians and vehicles, including, but not limited to:
i.	Lanes - Installation of speed change lanes or frontage roads.
ii.	Curb Cuts - Limitations on access driveways, or requirement that these be shared with adjacent properties to reduce curb cuts and provide for safe ingress and egress.
iii.	Pedestrians - Provision for pedestrian traffic, with sidewalks and other walkways clearly separated from vehicular traffic and with appropriately designed road-crossing areas.
iv.	Roads - Roads within the site connecting to roads outside the site that will bear substantial traffic loads being constructed to the Public Works Specifications.
v.	Parking - Parking must be located to the rear of buildings, or at the side well-screened from view.
vi.	Trails - Trails for non-motorized transportation.
vii.	Lighting - Provision for lighting adequate to promote traffic and pedestrian safety, while minimizing negative impact on neighboring residences.
b)	Landscaping and Screening - Conditions and safeguards with respect to landscaping and screening, including, but not limited to:
i.	Provision for landscaping that will preserve the character of the existing neighborhood.
This may include curbside shade trees.
 
ii.	Provision of a buffer zone that shall include vegetative screening to conceal outdoor storage or display areas, parking lots, or loading areas, or other outdoor commercial or industrial uses from neighboring residences.
iii.	Requirements that vegetation be indigenous to the area, sight-impervious, large enough to do well, and planted intervals in keeping with other neighborhood foliage.
iv.	Retention of currently existing site vegetation.
v.	Interim fencing being required while vegetation is growing to appropriate size.
vi.	Provision for the care and maintenance of plantings, including removal of dead or diseased trees or shrubs.
vii.	Minimum Landscaping Costs. The minimum direct landscaping cost shall be at least equal to the total project construction cost multiplied by a certain percentage per the below schedule:
Construction Cost	Percentage
$0 -$250,000	3%
Next $250,000	2%
Excess over $500,000	1%


In evaluating landscaping requirements, the DRB may grant some credit for existing trees, existing site features or for alternative improvements, other than tree planting, as long as the objectives of this section are met.

viii.	Front Yards. In the case of non-residential uses, the required front yard shall be suitably landscaped and maintained in good appearance.
ix.	Buffer Strips. DRB may also require additional landscaping above and beyond the formula for the purpose of adding a buffer strip along I-89 to properly screen development from the highway.
x.	Additional Screening. The DRB may require additional plantings or attractive solid fencing, above the normal landscaping requirement, whenever it determines a particular site warrants such additional landscaping, such as to adequately screen two adjacent dissimilar uses from each other, or to improve the appearance of a property which is covered excessively with pavement or structures or is otherwise insufficiently landscaped. All outdoor lighting or parking from public or commercial uses shall be screened from the view of the ground floor of adjacent residential buildings. Auto service stations shall be screened in the same manner from all abutting properties. Recreational vehicle parking areas shall be screened with evergreen trees and shrubs and such landscaping plan shall be part of the application.
xi.	Exterior Lighting. Exterior lighting shall meet the requirements of Section 4.11 of these Zoning Regulations.
xii.	Site Restoration. The DRB may require any necessary grading or seeding to restore the condition of any portion of a site that is disturbed during construction.
c)	Renewable Energy Resources - Conditions and safeguards for the protection and the utilization of renewable energy resources.
d)	Signs – Size, location, and design.

5.5.4	ite Plan Review Process – The Site Plan Review process shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements contained in Section 8.2.

5.5.5	Site Plan Amendments - The Administrative Officer shall determine if proposed changes to an approved site plan are minor or major.
a)	Minor Amendments—those which do not involve changes to approved curb cuts, internal traffic or pedestrian circulation patterns, landscaping or screening, may be approved by the Administrative Officer.
b)	Major Amendments—All amendments other than Minor Amendments shall require the submittal of a revised site plan to the DRB for review.
 
5.6	Conditional Use Review

A use requiring conditional use approval by the DRB shall comply with the following general standards and specific standards, and all other applicable standards and requirements of these Zoning Regulations.

5.6.1	General Standards - A proposed use shall not result in an undue adverse effect upon:
a)	The capacity of existing or planned community facilities;
b)	The character of the area affected, as defined by the purpose or purposes of the zoning district in which the project is located and with specifically stated policies and standards of the Richmond Town Plan;
c)	Traffic on roads and highways in the vicinity;
d)	Bylaws and ordinances then in effect; and,
e)	The utilization of renewable energy sources.

5.6.2	Specific Standards - Conditional uses shall comply with the following specific standards:
a)	Obnoxious or excessive noise, smoke, vibration, dust, glare, odors, electrical interference or heat that is detectable at the boundaries of the lot shall not be generated.
b)	There shall be no outside displays except those that are brought indoors at the end of the business hours and are the actual product of the business.
c)	Outside storage of goods, parts, supplies, vehicles machinery and other personal property shall be appropriate to the neighborhood and shall not impair safety.
d)	Applicable state permits for water supply and sewage disposal shall have been obtained, and any other applicable state permits, before the use commences.
e)	The development is proposed over a reasonable time period in order that the general and specific standards for conditional uses may be met.
f)	In determining the appropriateness of the use in the Zoning District, the DRB shall consider the scale of the proposal in relation to the scale of existing uses and structures.
g)	No fire, explosive, or safety hazard shall be permitted that, in the judgment of the DRB, after consideration of the advice of Richmond fire fighting officials, significantly endangers other property owners or emergency personnel.
h)	The development shall not result in an Undue Adverse Effect on state- or community-owned and operated institutions and facilities.
i)	Existing water supplies and the quality of ground and surface water resources shall not be adversely affected.
j)	The proposed Land Development shall not have an undue adverse effect on an Historic Site or rare or irreplaceable natural areas. Proposed structures should take advantage of existing slopes and vegetation to provide screening for the project.
k)	Any other standards, such as natural landscape and “character of the neighborhood” standards, as indicated for specific districts shall also be applied.

The DRB may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of these Zoning Regulations and 24 V.S.A. Chapter 117.

5.6.3	Performance Standards - In addition to the specific standards listed under Section 5.6.2 for conditional use approval, all conditional uses shall also meet the following performance standards prior to issuance of conditional use approval:
a)	Sounds resulting from the activity shall meet the requirements of Section 4.10, Noise, of these Zoning Regulations.
b)	Exterior lighting of any kind shall meet the requirements of Section 4.11, Exterior Lighting, of these Zoning Regulations.
c)	No vibration resulting from the activities shall be measurable at the lot lines.
d)	No odors resulting from the activities shall be discernible at the lot lines.
e)	Smoke emissions shall not exceed number two (2) on the Ringelman Chart.
 
f)	No dust, dirt or fly-ash shall exceed two-tenth (0.2) grain per cubic foot of flue gas at a stack temperature of five hundred (500) degrees Fahrenheit.
g)	No noxious gases resulting from the activity shall be discernible at the lot lines.
h)	Industrial wastes shall be so stored and removed from the lot in manners as to not be reasonably objectionable to adjacent lots or create a public nuisance, or pollute the environment. These shall be stored within a structure.
i)	All uses shall comply with all Federal and State laws and regulations for the use, storage, hauling and disposal of hazardous materials and wastes.
j)	No heat shall be discernible at the lot lines.

5.6.4	Site Plan Review Standards - In order to expedite the review process, conditional uses are not subject to separate site plan review under Section 5.5, however, all conditional uses shall also meet site plan review standards and conditions as set forth under Section 5.5.3 prior to the issuance of  conditional use approval.

5.6.5	Conditional Use Review Process - The DRB shall hold a public hearing on the application, warned  in accordance with Section 8.2.3, and shall provide opportunity for any person wishing to achieve status as an Interested Person to demonstrate that they meet the definition of an Interested Person under the Act (24 V.S.A. §4465) and these Zoning Regulations for purposes of participation and appeal. The DRB shall act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application and issue a decision as provided  in Section 8.2.5.

5.6.6	Extraction of Earth Resources -
a)	Applicability - In the A/R, HDR, R/C, G, C and I/C Zoning Districts, the removal of loam, gravel, stone, sand, fill, sod or any other earth resource, with the exceptions listed in Section 5.6.6 (e) below, shall be a conditional use to be reviewed and approved by the DRB.
b)	Removal or filling of earth resources; (i) within 50 feet of wetlands or a publicly owned body of water or a navigable watercourse, or (ii) within a buffer zone under Section 5.6.6 (c)(iv) below, shall not be permitted.
c)	Submittal Requirements –
i.	Names and addresses of all abutters, including those across any contiguous public or private Road(s) or Highway(s).
ii.	A current site plan showing existing grades; depth to water table in proposed area of excavation; off-site drainage patterns and existing easements crossing the lot.
iii.	A restoration plan showing proposed finished grades; cover vegetation and trees to be planted.
iv.	A management plan that includes: provisions for drainage; erosion and dust control methods; traffic and noise control; protection of surface water including a 25 ft. to 100 ft. buffer zone between operation and streams, and a 25 ft. to 100 ft. buffer zone between the operation and any neighboring lot line. The exact width of the buffer zone required will be determined by the proximity to neighbors and any other factors the DRB considers relevant.
d)	Conditions of Approval - The DRB may impose any of, but not limited to, the following conditions:
i.	Per Section 8.2.5, security to assure proper restoration of the site.
ii.	Limitation of hours of operation if an abutting residential neighborhood shall be substantially negatively affected by noise, dust, or vibration.
iii.	Noise limitations as defined in Section 4.10, Noise.
iv.	Limitations on size of trucks, number of trips/day.
v.	A traffic study by a qualified traffic expert if substantial concern exists regarding traffic.
vi.	Requirement for loads to be covered.
vii.	Limitation of duration of permit or requirement for future review by the DRB.
viii.	Isolation distances from sources of drinking water.
ix.	Lighting requirements or limitations as established in Section 4.11, Exterior Lighting, of these Zoning Regulations.
e)	Protections –
 
i.	Existing pits in operation on the Effective Date of these Zoning Regulations may continue in operation at their current levels of operation as of the Effective Date of these Zoning Regulations. No increase over such current levels shall occur without issuance of conditional use approval by the DRB.
ii.	Equipment incidental to the operation of a gravel pit or other earth resource extraction operation, and used only to crush, sort, or otherwise process materials removed from the lot where the equipment is located, shall be allowed, provided that installation and use of such equipment meets all applicable general and specific conditional use standards and other applicable standards and requirements of these Zoning Regulations and all conditions imposed by the DRB.
f)	Exceptions - This section shall not apply to the removal of earth resources incidental to the construction of a building or its access on the same lot, normal agricultural or forestry operations, public road construction, or the operation of a cemetery, to the extent reasonably necessary for such purpose.

5.6.7	Cottage Industries that are not Home Occupations -
This section applies to Cottage Industries that are not Home Occupations (Section 5.11, and defined in Section 7), since Home Occupations do not require conditional use review.
a)	Conditional use - Cottage Industries may be allowed in the A/R, HDR, R/C and G Districts after conditional use approval by the DRB using the following criteria in c) and d) below for review in addition to those in 5.6, Conditional Use Review and all other zoning requirements.
b)	Renewal - A new conditional use approval shall be required before a Cottage Industry is expanded or modified.
c)	Requirements - All Cottage Industries shall comply with the following provisions in addition to the conditional use provisions in Section 5.6:
i.	All activities of a Cottage Industry must be located on the same Lot for which the permit is granted. Any Cottage Industry activity on a separate lot shall be considered as a separate Cottage Industry activity and must receive a permit.
ii.	The business use is clearly secondary to the agricultural or residential use of the lot and the business owner shall reside on the lot.
iii.	The business use shall not necessitate any change in the outside appearance of the structures related to the cottage industry on the lot other than the addition of one non- illuminated sign that meets the requirements of Section 5.7, Signs, of these Zoning Regulations.
iv.	The residents of the dwelling unit on the lot plus no more than three full-time equivalent employees may be employed.
v.	The business use shall not generate more than twice the number of average daily trips that would be generated by the dwelling according to “Trip Generation - Seventh Edition - 2003” Institute of Traffic Engineers, or its equivalent, or any subsequent and most recent publication thereof.
vi.	No more than 6 additional parking spaces shall be created. All parking must be adequately screened and located on the lot and must be in compliance with the parking requirements in Section 6.1. On-premise parking shall be sufficient for all employees and residents.
vii.	There shall be no storage of hazardous waste or materials, and fuel storage shall be limited to that needed for the operation of the vehicles of the business.
viii.	The property shall be landscaped and the business use screened, in such a manner that the Cottage Industry shall be visually compatible with the neighboring lots and uses. In addition, any outside storage of materials, including building or construction materials, unregistered vehicles or heavy equipment, firewood or lumber for sale, must be completely screened yearround from the road and from neighboring lots.
ix.	The Cottage Industry shall be provided with a vegetated (grass, trees, etc.) buffer zone between the structure housing the business and any lot line.
x.	There shall be no safety hazards to neighborhood children, including those children boarding or disembarking from the school bus.
 
xi.	Sound shall not exceed the limits of Section 4.10, Noise of these Zoning Regulations.
xii.	Smoke, vibrations, dust, odors, heat and glare produced by the business shall not be excessive.
xiii.	Delivery truck traffic may be limited to 2 trucks per day, if it is deemed that such traffic shall adversely affect the character of the neighborhood.
d)	Character of the Neighborhood - Suburban neighborhoods with closely spaced residences, with few pre-existing business uses, are less suitable locations for cottage industries than rural  residential neighborhoods, which have more widely-spaced, larger lots that traditionally have been used for such home-based businesses such as farming and forestry. The DRB may determine that  a neighborhood or location is unsuitable for a cottage industry and may prohibit such industry on the basis of having an undue adverse effect on the character of the neighborhood.

5.6.8	Adaptive Use of Existing Structures -
Purpose - The purpose of this section is to enable the continued viability of certain old structures in the Town of Richmond which have outlived their original function by allowing additional uses within the current dimensions of such structures, subject to conditional use review and approval. Structures which shall be considered appropriate for adaptive use include any structure which: (i) has historical or architectural significance to the Town, and (ii) has a minimum of 4,000 square feet, and (iii) is no less than fifty (50) years old.
a)	Additional Uses - Structures determined to be appropriate for adaptive use may be put to the following additional uses, or combination of uses, in any Zoning District provided conditional use approval is obtained from the DRB:
i.	Two-family or multi-family dwelling. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit of the Zoning District in which the building is situated shall apply; if the building is in a Zoning District where two-family or multi-family dwellings are not normally allowed, the HDR minimum lot area per dwelling unit requirements shall apply.
ii.	Uses which involve historic materials or relate to the attraction provided by an historic atmosphere, such as museums, local arts and crafts shops, antique shops, woodworking, furniture repair, or restaurants.
iii.	Enterprises whose principal use is the sale of agricultural products, such as greenhouses, orchards, nurseries, food co-ops, or farm products stores.
iv.	Enterprises whose principal use is the sale of products produced in Vermont.
v.	Professional offices.
vi.	Community resources such as banks, churches, schools, or libraries. vii. Storage uses such as for boats or furniture.

The foregoing list is meant to suggest appropriate uses not otherwise allowed and is not intended to be all inclusive. Nevertheless, uses such as bowling alleys, drive-in theaters, bars, motels, gas stations, fuel or chemical storage and distribution, heavy industry or heavy manufacturing and other similar uses shall be considered incompatible with the structures in question.

b)	Additional Requirements - The DRB may grant conditional use approval for prospective uses of structures in order that owners may renovate for approval for specific businesses or tenants. Evidence shall be provided that the project is in accordance with the guidelines set forth in The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings (Revised 1983) (36CFR67) in terms of the rehabilitation of the building and its site.

5.7	Signs

Purpose - It is the purpose of this section to limit the use of signs to those purposes which serve the public interest. No sign, billboard or exterior graphic display shall be permitted except as provided in this section.

5.7.1	Signs Which Do Not Require a Permit - The following signs are allowed in any district without a Zoning Permit. No other signs shall be permitted unless a Zoning Permit is issued by the Administrative
 
Officer. Any sign installed or maintained pursuant to this Section shall be located outside the boundaries of all public Road or Highway rights-of-way, except as provided in d) and f), below.

a)	One free-standing, on-premise, non-illuminated sign on a lot, which sign shall not exceed four square feet per face and shall be limited to identifying a private residence or a home occupation. The sign or supports shall not exceed six (6) feet in height above the surface of the ground.
b)	One free-standing, on-premise, non-illuminated sign on a lot, which sign shall not exceed two square feet per face and shall be limited to the direction, instruction or convenience of the public
(i.e. signs identifying restrooms, freight entrances, posted areas, danger areas, etc.).
c)	One non-illuminated sign on a lot, which sign shall not exceed six square feet per face and shall be limited to the advertising of agricultural products grown on-premise.
d)	Non-illuminated signs to be maintained for not more than two weeks, that identify fairs, expositions, auctions, campaign drives unrelated to elections, or other events of a civic, philanthropic or religious nature. For any sign to be located within public Road or Highway rights-of-way including public sidewalks, either the VT Agency of Transportation or the Richmond Selectboard must issue written approval, with any attached conditions, prior to placement of the sign.
e)	Signs for the direction of the public on privately owned or non-profit recreation land. These signs will not exceed two (2) square feet per face.
f)	One non-illuminated sign per lot or storefront on a public right-of-way with a maximum of 6 square feet per face supported by 4 posts, hinged at one end to form a “sandwich board” sign. The posts shall not count toward total square footage and the sign shall be removed when the business or activity is not in operation. If the sign is located within a State or municipal right-of-way, including public sidewalks, either the VT Agency of Transportation or the Richmond Selectboard must issue written approval, with any attached conditions, prior to placement of the sign.
g)	Non-illuminated political signs, including election campaign signs.

5.7.2	General Restrictions on all Permitted Signs - All signs other than those specified above in Section 5.7.1 shall require a Zoning Permit from the Administrative Officer. Permitted signs shall conform to the requirements listed in this section:
a)	No sign shall prevent a clear and unobstructed view of official signs or vehicular traffic.
b)	Indirectly lighted signs may be lighted with constant lighting provided the lighting shall not be directed at neighboring properties or public ways and that the intensity shall not adversely affect the neighborhood or Roads and Highways, especially the drivers of vehicles. The light source shall not be visible from adjacent properties or roads, and the average level of illumination on the sign shall not exceed 3.0 foot-candles and the uniformity ratio shall not exceed 2:1.
c)	No sign shall be illuminated during hours when the premises are not open for business.
d)	No signs shall contain string lighting, pennants, moving parts or similar attention gathering devices nor may they contain or support any device capable of emitting noise. No sign shall be illuminated by neon, flashing, moving, intermittent or any other internally generated light.
e)	No sign shall be erected, attached, or maintained upon any tree or drawn or painted on any rock or other natural feature or upon any utility pole or town sign post.
f)	No sign shall be erected which is not on the lot where the activity served by the sign is located. If a lot does not have frontage on a public Road or Highway and is accessed by a private right of way, the interior lot owner may obtain a Zoning Permit for locating a sign in the private access right-of- way to the interior lot, provided that such private access right-of-way is broad enough to allow a sign.
g)	The height of a free-standing sign shall not be more than ten (10) feet.
h)	No sign which is attached to a building shall extend above its roof line.
i)	No sign may be so designed, erected, illuminated, operated or maintained and be in such a location that it conflicts with or detracts from the effectiveness of an official traffic light or sign or constitute a menace to traffic safety. No sign shall be placed that resembles any official marker erected by a government agency or display such words as “Stop” or “Danger”. No Zoning Permit shall be issued for a sign to be located within the right-of-way of a public or private Road or Highway.
 
j)	All signs hereafter constructed, maintained, painted or otherwise established, moved, altered, changed or used in any Zoning District shall comply with the requirements of the Zoning District in which the sign is located, including the dimensional requirements for structures, except as otherwise specifically provided, and also shall comply with the following criteria:
i.	The lot frontage or width of the structure used as the basis for determining permitted sign area for one building or use shall not be used again as the basis for determining the permitted sign area for another structure or use.
ii.	On corner structures, the longer front of the structure may be used to determine the maximum sign dimension.
iii.	For purposes of signs, only one (1) side of the structure facing a Road or Highway shall be considered to be the front of the structure.
iv.	For structures which house more than one (1) business, the front width of each business unit shall be used to determine the maximum sign area for the business.
v.	Sign regulations shall not apply to official Federal, State, or Town signs, including traffic signs, which are erected and intended for public information, direction, safety or control purposes.
k)	No sign shall be erected upon or applied to any roof, except religious symbols unaccompanied by lettering, when applied to the cornice, tower or spire of a place of worship.

5.7.3	Signs - A/R, HDR, R/C and MHP Zoning Districts - In the Agricultural/Residential District, High Density Residential District, Residential/ Commercial District and Mobile Home Park District, one sign (either free-standing, wall, or projecting) per lot shall be permitted upon issuance of a Zoning Permit by the Administrative Officer, provided such signs meet the following requirements:
a)	Free-standing Signs - The free-standing sign shall be located outside of any public or private Road or Highway right-of-way, and shall not exceed 12 square feet on each of two faces. If the sign does not utilize one or more of the following geometric forms; circle, square, rectangle or ellipse, then the DRB shall review the request as a conditional use review.
b)	Wall Signs - The wall sign shall be attached horizontally to and not extending perpendicularly from a wall of the principal structure and shall not exceed in area ten (10) percent of the gross surface area of the facade to which it is mounted, or twenty-five (25) square feet, whichever is less. A wall sign is permitted only for purposes of identifying the name of the resident, the title or nature of the person conducting a permitted home occupation or business, or the name of building and seller or agent.
c)	Projecting Signs - The projecting sign shall be attached to, and extending perpendicularly from, a wall of a principal structure and shall not exceed 10 square feet on each of two faces and shall nor project out more than three (3) feet from the front face of the primary structure.
d)	Roof Signs - No signs shall be erected upon or applied to any roof, except religious symbols, unaccompanied by lettering when applied to the cornice, tower or spire of a place of worship.

5.7.4	Signs - C, G, V/C, JC, VD and I/C Zoning Districts - In the Gateway, Village/Commercial, Commercial, Jolina Court, Village Downtown and Industrial/Commercial Zoning Districts, one sign (either free-standing, wall, or projecting) per lot shall be permitted upon issuance of a Zoning Permit by the Administrative Officer, provided such signs meet the following requirements:
a)	Free-Standing signs - The free-standing sign shall be located outside of any public or private Road or Highway right-of-way and shall not exceed 24 square feet on each of two faces. If the sign does not utilize one or more of the following geometric forms; circle, square, rectangle or ellipse, then the DRB shall review the request as a conditional use review.
b)	Wall Signs - The wall sign shall be attached horizontally to, and not extending perpendicularly from, the wall of a principal structure, and shall not exceed the following size limitations:
i.	Signs with a total surface area not to exceed one (1) square foot of sign for each linear foot of the side of the structure in which the use is contained; however, the total surface area of any sign/s shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet.
c)	Projecting Signs - The projecting sign shall be attached to and extending perpendicularly from a wall of a principal structure and shall not project out more than five (5) feet from the front wall of the
 
building. The maximum square footage of a projecting sign shall be no greater than twenty-five percent (25%) of the linear footage of the front width of the structure on which the sign shall be attached with a maximum of twenty (20) square feet.
d)	Locator Signs for Multiple Uses - For a lot comprising two (2) or more uses and in addition to the sign allowed under this subsection, 5.7.4, each individual use shall be allowed one sign, not exceeding ten (10) square feet which is either a wall sign or projecting sign. Except for maximum square footage, these signs shall meet the above design requirements. The wall or projecting sign must be attached to the exterior wall of the side of the structure in which the use is contained.

5.7.5	Directory Signs - Directory signs may be allowed in two locations: at the intersection of Bridge Street and Railroad Street and at the intersection of Bridge Street and Jolina Court. The directory signs may only advertise businesses or organizations on Railroad Street or Jolina Court. The following standards apply to these directory signs.
a)	One Directory sign per street.
b)	A Directory Sign is a free-standing sign
c)	“Railroad Street” or “Jolina Court” street name may be placed at the top of the sign – maximum of 1 foot high and a total square footage of 2 feet. This street name does not count toward the maximum size of the directory sign.
d)	The directory sign may include the name and logo of each business
e)	The maximum size of the directory sign shall be 5 feet wide and 6 feet tall (30 square feet)
f)	The directory sign must have a vertical orientation (i.e., be taller than wide)
g)	The maximum height of the directory sign is 10 feet including the street name, per c). above, with the lowest panel a minimum of 3 feet from the ground.
h)	Individual letters (words) may not exceed 8” in height.
i)	Individual logos for each business or organization may not exceed 1.5 square feet
j)	The sign is divided as follows with six 1-foot sections – 5 feet total width
k)	Anchor (maximum of 2 anchors) – maximum of two 1-foot sections per anchor
l)	If there are 2 anchor signs, the two additional 1-foot sections may be divided into a maximum of 4 segments
m)	If only one anchor is on the sign, the four additional 1-foot sections may be divided into a maximum of 8 segments
n)	If there are no anchor signs, the 6 1-foot sections may be divided into a maximum of 12 segments
o)	Panels may be added and removed as needed. There is no minimum number of panels needed for the directory sign, however, there cannot be only one panel (anchor or non-anchor) on the sign
p)	Similar/compatible color schemes must be used for the directory sign
q)	The directory sign is not included in the computation of the permissible sign area, allowed per lot, per section 5.7.4.

5.7.6	Maintenance - All signs shall be well maintained.
a)  Sign Removal - Any sign which advertises a business, product or service no longer available on the lot shall be removed. Any sign which is deemed to be structurally unsafe by the Administrative Officer shall be removed or repaired by its owner or permittee. Removal or repair shall be completed within thirty (30) days of notification by the Administrative Officer. If the owner or permittee fails to remove or repair the sign within the specified period, the Administrative Officer may cause the sign to be  removed at the owner’s expense.

5.7.7	Nonconforming Signs - A sign which does not comply to these Zoning Regulations which is lawfully in use when these Zoning Regulations become effective may continue in use but, shall be subject to the provisions of Sections 4.7 and 4.9 of these Zoning Regulations.

5.7.8	Non-commercial Content - Notwithstanding anything else in this Section 5.7, any sign authorized by this section, and requiring a Zoning Permit, may display non-commercial content in lieu of any otherwise permitted content.
 
5.8	Boundary Adjustments
Boundary adjustments may be made by and between only two adjoining landowners upon issuance of a Zoning Permit by the Administrative Officer. A Zoning Permit for boundary adjustments may be appealed to the DRB under Section 8.4, and shall be recorded in the land records of the town in accordance with Section 8.5. Prior to issuance of a Zoning Permit the following conditions shall be met:

5.8.1	No New Lots - No additional lot is created after the adjustment of the boundary lines.
5.8.2	Only Two Lots - Only two lots may be involved in any one boundary line adjustment.
5.8.3	Plan Required - A clear and accurate plan of the lots and the proposed boundary adjustment shall be submitted. The plan does not need to be a survey but must have accurate field measurements, except if the Administrative Officer deems such survey necessary. The plan shall be in a form suitable for recording.
5.8.4	State Permits - All state permits must be approved prior to submission of application and state permit numbers must be included on the application.
5.8.5	New Lot Configuration - No lot may be created by the adjustment of the lot boundary that does not conform to all provisions of these Zoning Regulations.
5.8.6	Appeals – A Zoning Permit for boundary adjustments may be appealed to the DRB under Section 8.4.1.

The approval for a boundary line adjustment shall expire180 days from that approval date, unless, within that 180 day period, the plan for the adjustment and deeds for the transfer of property are filed or recorded with the Richmond Town Clerk.  After the approved plan and deeds are filed, no expiration of the approval shall be applicable.

5.9	Accessory Dwellings

5.9.1	Permitted Use - In accordance with the Act [§4412(1)(E)], one accessory dwelling within or appurtenant to a single-family dwelling, or within or appurtenant to an existing accessory structure to the single-family dwelling, may be allowed as a permitted use to a single-family dwelling, except within the Flood Hazard Overlay District (new Accessory Dwellings are prohibited within the Flood Hazard Overlay District), subject to the issuance of a Zoning Permit by the Administrative Officer, and all of the following requirements:
a)	Either the single-family dwelling or the accessory dwelling must be occupied by the owner or by the owner’s spouse, civil union partner, parents or legal children. In the event that the owner or relative is forced to leave the dwelling, or accessory dwelling, or dies, there shall be no change in status of the accessory dwelling for a period not to exceed twelve months at which time the familiar occupancy rule will be enforced.
b)	The accessory dwelling must be at all times owned by the same party that owns the single-family dwelling.
c)	The accessory dwelling shall be an efficiency, one-bedroom, or two-bedroom apartment that is clearly subordinate to the single-family dwelling and has facilities and provisions for independent living, including sleeping, food preparation and sanitation.
d)	The accessory dwelling shall not exceed 75% of the total habitable floor area of the single-family dwelling or up to 1,000 square feet, or whichever is less. In cases where the State Statutory minimum of 30% of the total habitable floor area of the single-family dwelling exceeds the Town maximum, the State minimum shall take precedence over the Town maximum. e) The property shall have sufficient wastewater capacity.
e)	The accessory dwelling shall meet all applicable setback, coverage and parking requirements for the principal dwelling as specified in these Zoning Regulations. If the accessory dwelling is to be located in a nonconforming structure, it shall not increase the degree of nonconformance, except in accordance with Section 4.7
 
5.9.2	Conditional Use - Conditional use approval by the DRB under Section 5.6 shall be required for an accessory dwelling for which any of the following also apply:
a)  the accessory dwelling is to be located within a new single-family dwelling in a district in which conditional use review is required for single-family dwellings.

5.9.3	Conditions of Approval – In addition to any other conditions of approval, the Zoning Permit issued for an accessory dwelling shall clearly state that the dwelling is allowed only as an accessory to the primary, principal single-family residential use of the property and as such shall be retained in common ownership. An accessory dwelling may be converted and/or subdivided for conveyance or use as a principal dwelling only if it is found to meet all requirements of applicable municipal and state regulations for a two-family dwelling (for an attached unit) or for two single-family dwellings (for a unit in an accessory structure), including all lot, density and dimensional requirements for the zoning district in which it is located. All applicable municipal permits and approvals shall be obtained prior to conversion or conveyance as a principal single-family dwelling.

5.10	Requirements for Specific Structures

5.10.1	Accessory Structure - An accessory structure includes any structure that is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal structure or use on a lot, including but not limited to, fences, walls, barns, sheds, greenhouses, gazebos, patios, and free-standing garages. Accessory structures (except for non-structural fences and walls which mark property boundaries, or enclose portions of the property, and are less than 6 feet high) shall conform to the setbacks established in the applicable Zoning  District, unless a greater setback is required by these Zoning Regulations.
5.10.2	Seasonal Dwelling - A “seasonal dwelling” or “camp” structure shall not be occupied more than 180 days in any one-year period. Camps which are pre-existing nonconforming structures or  nonconforming uses shall be governed by Sections 4.7 or 4.9 of these Zoning Regulations. New  camps and conversions of camps to single-family dwellings shall be permitted wherever single-family dwellings are permitted as long as all requirements for a single-family dwelling are met. Each camp which is converted to year-round single-family use shall be located on a separate conforming lot on which there is no other principal structure.
5.10.3	Temporary Structure - “Temporary Structures” include any structure erected for a transient purpose which remains in place for less than 120 days in any one-year period. A Zoning Permit from the Administrative Officer for such temporary structures, including but not limited to seasonal produce stands, temporary fencing (excluding livestock fencing), wind measuring devices, temporary signs and storage areas, shall be required. No temporary structure may be used as a dwelling.
5.10.4	Public Facilities and Utilities
a)	In accordance with the Act [§4413(a)], the following public facilities or uses may be regulated only with respect to their location, size, height, building bulk, yards, courts, setbacks, density of buildings, off Road or Highway parking, loading facilities, traffic, noise, lighting, landscaping and screening requirements, and only to the extent that such regulations do not have the effect of interfering with the intended functional use. The DRB shall apply these standards and require the Applicant to demonstrate how specific standards, when applied, interfere with the intended functional use of the proposed Land Development:
i.	State- or community-owned and operated institutions and facilities.
ii.	Public and private schools and other educational institutions certified by the Vermont Department of Education.
iii.	Churches and other places of worship, convents and parish houses.
iv.	Public and private hospitals.
v.	Regional solid waste management facilities certified by the state (under 10 V.S.A. Chapter 159).
vi.	Hazardous waste management facilities for which a notice of intent to construct has been received by the state (under 10 V.S.A. §6606a).
b)	Public facilities must meet applicable requirements of these Zoning Regulations, and may be subject to site plan review under Section 5.5 or conditional use review under Section 5.6.
 
Associated conditions of approval, however, shall not exceed allowed municipal regulation of these facilities, as specified under the Act and subsection a).
c)	In accordance with the Act [§4413(b)], public utility power generating plants and transmission facilities regulated by the Vermont Public Service Board (under 30 V.S.A. §248) are specifically exempted from municipal regulation.

5.11	Home Occupations, Child Care Homes, Group Homes

In accordance with the Act (§4412), the following uses are allowed as described below:

5.11.1	Home Occupation – A home occupation shall be permitted in any dwelling upon issuance of a Zoning Permit by the Administrative Officer, providing the following conditions are met:
a)	1/3 or less of the floor area of the dwelling is to be used for the occupation. This condition does not apply to Family Child Care Homes, in which any or all of the floor area may be used.
b)	The occupation does not have an undue effect on the character of the neighborhood.
c)	The occupation is to be carried out by one or more full-time residents of the dwelling unit.
d)	A maximum of two other non-residential employees or fellow entrepreneurs shall be allowed.
e)	Adequate parking and traffic flow shall be provided.
f)	The use shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling. This condition does not apply to Family Child Care Homes for which an outside play area is permitted.
g)	With the exception of Family Child Care Homes, there shall be not more than one accessory structure
devoted to the occupation, and that structure shall not exceed 1200 sq. ft in footprint area. For Family Child Care Homes, more than one accessory structure is allowed, but the total footprint area of the accessory structures shall not exceed 1200 square feet.
h)	There shall be no outside storage of materials beyond that which is customarily associated with residential use, and at a scale consistent with residential use.
i)	There shall be no storage of hazardous waste or fuels.
j)	There shall be no unreasonable noise, smoke, vibrations, dust, odors, heat, glare, unsightliness or other nuisance.
k)	There shall be no traffic generated beyond that which is usual and customary in the neighborhood.

An amendment to the original permit shall be required before any changes are made in the scope of the home occupation. Such changes might include, but are not limited to; new activities, increases in the number or
non-resident employees or parking spaces, changes in the square footage, or new accessory structures.

5.11.2	Child Care Home - As per 24 VSA §4412(5), Family Child Care Homes which serve six or fewer children shall be permitted as a home occupation subject to Section 5.11.1. A Family Child Care Home serving more than six children and less than 11 children shall require Site Plan Review and also be permitted as a home occupation subject to Section 5.11.1. Large Family Child Care Homes and Center- based Child Care Facilities shall be regulated by the zoning district in which it is located. Adequate off- Road or Highway parking shall be provided for all applications for Child Care Homes. Applications for any Child Care Home shall include detailed information and accurate measurements regarding location drop- off, parking, square footage in home for use, etc. The Administrative Officer may require additional information from the Applicant or may conduct a site visit to gather additional information.

5.11.3	Group Home - A group home serving up to eight residents shall be permitted wherever single- family homes are permitted unless they are to be located within 1,000 feet of another group home. If a new group home is to be located within 1,000 feet of an existing group home, then a conditional use review is required. Adequate off-Road or Highway parking shall be provided.



5.12	Planned Unit Development (PUD) and Residential PUD

Purpose – In accordance with the Act (§4417), Planned Unit Developments (PUDs) are authorized within designated zoning districts in order to encourage flexibility of design and the development of land in such a manner
 
as to promote the most appropriate use of land, to facilitate the adequate and economic provision of roads and utilities and to preserve the natural and scenic qualities of the open lands of the Town of Richmond. For purposes of these Zoning Regulations, Residential PUDs shall be considered a type of Planned Unit Development. The modification of the dimensional requirements governing lot area, lot dimension, lot frontage and lot coverage and the dimensional limitations for structures governing front, side and rear yard setback requirements of these Zoning Regulations may be permitted subject to the conditions set forth in this section, simultaneously with the approval of a subdivision plat under the Richmond Subdivision Regulations.

5.12.1	Coordination of Review – Applications for PUD or Residential PUD approval shall be reviewed by the DRB as a conditional use, subject to conditional use review and approval under Section 5.6 and concurrently with the review of a subdivision plat, in accordance with the Town of Richmond   Subdivision Regulations. A Zoning Permit shall not be issued for any building or development in a PUD or Residential PUD until a Master Development Plan has been approved by the DRB if required by Section 5.12.4.viii. Any subsequent Zoning Permit, site plan or conditional use approval of a proposed development within an approved PUD or Residential PUD shall incorporate all applicable conditions of PUD/Residential PUD and Master Development Plan approval, if required by Section 5.12.4(viii), unless the Master Development Plan is also amended.

5.12.2	General Conditions - All PUD and Residential PUD applications shall meet the following conditions:
a)	A PUD may be permitted in the JC and VD Districts. A PUD or Residential PUD may be permitted in the R/C, G, V/C, or I/C Districts. A Residential PUD may be permitted in the A/R and HDR Districts. The PUD provision may be used for any sized parcel, but is required for developments of nine or more lots, or ones in which multiple ownership of buildings, or multiple principal structures on a single lot are proposed. For the purpose of determining the number of lots, all lots shall be counted if they have been approved for subdivision by the DRB or Administrative Officer within a continuous period of sixty months preceding the date of filing the PUD subdivision application.
b)	A Residential PUD shall include only residential units. The dwelling units may be, at the discretion of the DRB, of varied types including single, two-family and multi-family dwellings. Home occupations, child care homes and group homes shall also be permitted.
c)	A PUD may include any permitted or conditional uses in the District in which it is located. Multiple principal structures and/or uses on a lot, or multiple ownership of a single structure may be permitted.
d)	The DRB may impose conditions to assure that a Residential PUD does not place an unreasonable burden on the ability of the Town of Richmond to provide municipal or governmental services.
e)	The DRB may allow for a greater concentration of units than would otherwise be allowed in the underlying district within some section(s) of the development, provided there is an offsetting lesser concentration or an appropriate reservation of open space on the remaining land.
f)	The total number of allowable dwelling units in the PUD or the Residential PUD shall not exceed the number that would be permitted if the land were subdivided into lots in conformance with these Zoning Regulations for the Zoning District in which such land is located, and in accordance with Section 2.5 of these Zoning Regulations. The DRB may authorize multiple uses within PUDs in the JC, VD, V/C and R/C Districts. Multiple uses may be allowed on all lots within PUDs in these districts (including pre- existing, nonconforming lots) provided that adding multiple uses shall comply with the PUD standards and other specific criteria of these Zoning Regulations and state law. In any PUD in the R/C District,  at least 50% of the gross floor area shall be in residential use. In the V/C District, at least 50% of the gross floor area must be in commercial use. In the JC and VD Districts, any or all floors may be in commercial use. However, in the VD District, residential uses shall be restricted to the second floor and above; and in the JC District, residential uses shall be restricted to the second floor and above  and to the walk-out basement floor as long as all applicable Vermont Fire and Building Safety Codes are met.
g)	The PUD or Residential PUD is consistent with the Town Plan.
 
h)	The PUD or Residential PUD is an effective and unified treatment of the development possibilities of the project site. The development plan should make appropriate provision for preservation of the following features when feasible: streams, stream banks, and water bodies, aquifer recharge areas, slopes greater than 20%, wetlands, soils unsuitable for development, agricultural lands, meadow lands, productive forest lands, historic features, unique natural features as identified in the Town Plan, wildlife habitat, high elevations, ridge tops, and floodplains.
i)	The PUD or Residential PUD shall meet local and state regulations for sewage disposal and the
protection of water quality.

5.12.3	Additional Standards - In addition to the specific standards in the Zoning District and, as applicable, review standards in Section 5.6 Conditional Use Review, or subdivision review standards under the Town of Richmond Subdivision Regulations, the following site standards also may be required as a condition of the DRB approval.
a)	Greater setback and screening requirements for structures, parking areas and other development features along the perimeter of the property.
b)	Adequate pedestrian circulation.
c)	Improvements to roads to meet the Public Works Specifications.
d)	Restriction of points of access to state or town roads.
e)	Demonstration of the ability to properly develop, operate, and maintain development roads, utilities, and other private improvements.

5.12.4	Application Procedures –
a)	A Zoning Permit shall not be issued for any building or development in a PUD or Residential PUD until the PUD or Residential PUD has been approved by the DRB.
b)	The DRB shall hold one or more public hearings on the PUD or Residential PUD, warned in accordance with Section 8.2.3, as required for conditional use review.
c)	The Applicant shall submit one set of site plan maps and supporting data to the Administrative Officer for referral to the DRB, which, in addition to the application requirements for conditional use or subdivision review, shall include the following information:
i.	Name and address of the owners of record of adjoining lands. Name and address of person or firm preparing the map. Scale of map, north point, and date. Name, address, and interest of the Applicant in the subject property.
ii.	Survey of the property showing all existing, proposed or potential lot boundaries, and all existing or proposed easements, rights of way and deed restrictions.
iii.	Site resource map, at the same scale as the site plan, showing contours, indicating soils suitable for on-site sewage disposal, wetlands, Areas of Special Flood Hazard, bodies of water, slopes of 20% grade or greater, ridge lines, agricultural and forest land, critical wildlife habitat, and identified natural or historic features.
iv.	Site plan showing the locations of proposed structures and their use; Road(s) or Highway(s), driveways, traffic circulation, parking, and pedestrian ways; landscaping, including site grading, landscape design, and screening; utility lines; lighting; water supply sources and sewage disposal areas; and land that may be set aside for common lands and/or public use.
v.	A statement setting forth the nature of all proposed modifications, changes, or supplements of these Zoning Regulations and the proposed standards and criteria which the Applicant proposes for the development, including standards for the design, bulk and spacing of buildings and sizes of lots and open spaces.
vi.	Construction sequence and time schedule for completion of each phase of buildings, Roads or Highways and parking, landscaping and amenities.
vii.	Proposed restrictive covenants for those developments that shall provide common open space, recreation, roads, parking areas, community water and sewer systems, or other facilities owned or maintained in common.
viii.	A Master Development Plan for any portion of the parcel or lot not proposed for Land
 
Development in the PUD or Residential PUD as of the application date. The Master Development Plan shall conceptually show future roads, future building areas, future open areas, and future uses on such remaining land.

5.12.5	Common Land - If the proposal results in lands available for park, recreation, open space, agriculture, forestry or municipal purposes, such common land must meet the following requirements:
a)	The location, shape, size and character of the common land is suitable for its intended use and for the development given its size, density and physical features.
b)	Common land shall be suitably improved for its intended use, except that common unimproved land, and lands designated for agriculture and forestry, may be so utilized.
c)	Prior to the issuance of any Certificate of Occupancy for any Land Development in the PUD or Residential PUD, the Applicant shall provide for and establish an organization or trust for the ownership and maintenance of any common facilities or open space: the organization or trust shall not be dissolved or revoked nor shall it dispose of any common facilities or open space, by sale or otherwise, except to an organization or trust conceived and established to own and maintain the common facilities or open space, without first offering to dedicate the same to the Town or other government agency to maintain those common facilities or that open space.

5.12.6	Roads and Other Facilities
All roads, sidewalks, recreation paths, water and sewer lines, stormwater facilities, utilities, and related facilities in a PUD or Residential PUD (each a “Facility”) shall remain private until formally accepted by vote of the Town Selectboard. If the Applicant intends to offer any Facility to the Town, then, with the application for FINAL SUBDIVISION approval, the Applicant shall submit the following:
a)	A draft irrevocable offer of dedication;
b)	A draft warranty deed conveying to the Town:
i.	For a road Facility, fee simple title to a 60 foot wide area of land, 30 feet on either side of the road centerline; and
ii.	For any other Facility, either fee simple title to an area where the Facility will be located, or an easement for the Facility’s use, maintenance, repair, enlargement, and replacement. The warranty deed shall not be subject to any encumbrances, including but not limited to mortgages and other easements.

Final Subdivision approval shall not constitute acceptance of the facility as a public facility, as acceptance can only occur by vote of the Selectboard. Final approval shall not be deemed to prevent the Town Selectboard from requiring any modifications to the irrevocable offer or any instruments or the deed that the Selectboard deems appropriate prior to acceptance.

5.12.7	PUD and Residential PUD Review Process-

The PUD or PUD and Master Development Plan decision will be issued concurrently with the  conditional use or final subdivision plan decision. The DRB shall hold a public hearing on the application, warned in accordance with Section 8.2 and shall provide opportunity for any person wishing to achieve status as an Interested Person to demonstrate that they meet the definition of “Interested Person” under the Act (§4465) and these Zoning Regulations for purposes of appeal. The DRB shall act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application and issue a decision as provided in Section 8.2.




6.	SPECIAL ZONING REGULATIONS

6.1	Parking and Loading
 
Purpose - To ensure the adequate provision of parking and loading facilities for all Land Development within the Town of Richmond, in accordance with the Act (§4414) and the following standards.

6.1.1	Loading Requirements - All uses shall provide off-Road or Highway loading spaces in conformance with the below standards, except residential uses and those uses receiving a waiver under this section.
a)	Location - All loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the principal use. Loading spaces shall minimize circulation conflicts on the lot. Loading areas shall not be calculated to include required off-Road or Highway parking spaces.
b)	Size - All loading spaces shall be of sufficient size to allow necessary maneuvering for deliveries without encroaching upon the public right of way, parking spaces, or internal parking lot circulation unless a specific waiver is approved by the DRB. Loading spaces shall be fifteen (15) feet wide by twenty-five (25) feet in length. The DRB may require greater dimensions if deemed necessary to handle projected truck traffic volumes.
c)	Surfaces - All loading areas shall be hard-surfaced and clearly marked with painting to designate the loading area. This requirement may be waived by the Administrative Officer or the DRB based upon projected traffic counts.
d)	Combination of uses - Loading spaces may be designed to serve one or more businesses located in the same building or on the same lot. The DRB may approve joint usage on adjacent lots provided a written agreement is submitted and filed with a deed.
e)	Ratios - One (1) space for the first 5000 square feet of gross floor area. One (1) additional space for each additional 30,000 square feet of gross floor area.
f)	Other standards - Loading areas shall meet screening, landscaping, lighting, and other development standards as specified herein.
g)	Waivers - All waiver requests shall be submitted in writing. The Administrative Officer may approve a waiver request for a change in use which does not increase loading requirements or any building expansion which does not exceed five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area. The DRB may approve waiver requests under one or more of the following circumstances:
i.	The proposed use will require minimal deliveries which will not interfere with the traffic circulation on the lot.
ii.	Deliveries are made during non-business hours. iii. Existing development makes it impossible to meet loading standards.
The DRB may require that waivers be filed with Town Land Records and that a statement be attached that any change in use may require the construction of loading facilities.

6.1.2	Off-Road or Highway Parking Requirements -
a)	All required parking spaces shall have a minimum width of nine (9) feet and a minimum length of eighteen (18) feet.
b)	Parking lot aisles shall meet the following minimum dimensional standards:

Parking Pattern	Minimum One-Way Aisle Width	Minimum Two-Way Aisle Width
90° Perpendicular	Twenty feet	Twenty-five feet
60° Angle	Eighteen feet	Twenty-five feet
45° Angle	Sixteen feet	Twenty-five feet
30° Angle	Fourteen feet	Twenty-five feet
Parallel	Twelve feet	Twenty feet

c)	The required number of off-Road or Highway parking spaces shall be as follows:
 

Land Use \ Building Type	Required Parking Spaces
*SFGFA = Square feet of gross floor area
**SFGRA = Square feet of gross retail area
Auto repair \ Painting	2.0 per 1,000 SFGFA*
Bank	3.3 per 1,000 SFGFA*
Bank with drive-through facility	3.0 per 1,000 SFGFA*
Bowling alley	4.5 per lane
Church/Synagogue/Conference area	.5 per seat or 22 linear inches of bench
Cleaners	1.5 per 1,000 SFGFA
Convenience store	7.5 per 1,000 SFGFA*
Eating and drinking establishment	20 per 1,000 SFGFA*
Drive-through facility	3 spaces per drive-through window
Fast food restaurant	14 per 1,000 SFGFA*
Furniture store	2 per 1,000 SFGFA*
Hardware store	3 per 1,000 SFGFA*
Hospital/clinic	1.5 per bed
Hotel or Motel	1 per room
Industrial park	1.6 per 1,000 SFGRA**
Laundromat	5.0 per 1000 SFGRA*
Museum	3.3 per 1,000 SFGRA**
Nursing home	.33 per room
Personal services establishment	2.0 per 1,000 SFGFA +1 per customer service station
Professional office	3.5 per 1,000 SFGFA*
Recreation center	4 per 1,000 SFGFA*
Residential: Accessory dwelling Bed and breakfast
Boarding house/dormitory
Child care home Retirement Community	
1 per unit
1	per sleeping room + 2 per dwelling 1 per sleeping room
2	per dwelling unit + 1 per nonresident employee
0.5 per dwelling unit or other sleeping room
Land Use \ Building Type	Required Parking Spaces
*SFGFA = Square feet of gross floor area
**SFGRA = Square feet of gross retail area
Fraternity / sorority
Group home Home occupation
Multi-family (3 or more units)
Single-family Two-family Triplex	1.5 per 1,000 SFGFA*
0.3 per sleeping room
2 per dwelling unit + 1 per nonresident employee
2 per dwelling unit + 1 guest space per each 10 units 2 per dwelling unit
2 per dwelling unit
2 per dwelling unit
Retail sales establishment	2.5 per 1,000 SFGFA*
 

Service station	5.5 per 1,000 SFGFA*
Shopping center	4 per 1,000 SFGFA* + 10 spaces/1,000 sq. ft. food service. Off- site employee parking may allow 15% reduction.
Sports club \ Health spa	5 per 1,000 SFGFA*
Warehouse	0.25 per 1,000 SFGFA*

d)	If the land use or building type is not contained in this zoning ordinance, then the American Planning Association's 'Off Street Parking Requirements' shall provide the range for the number of spaces required.

6.1.3.	Drive-through Facilities -
a)	Location. Drive-through facilities shall not utilize required parking spaces to meet stacking requirements. Facilities shall be designed to minimize conflicts with other on-site vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
b)	Stacking requirements. A minimum of six (6) vehicles should be accommodated in each stacking lane.

6.1.4	Parking or storage of junk vehicles - The parking or storage of any unlicensed or junk vehicle is prohibited except as provided in a vehicle repair facility unless screened from view from the adjoining Road or Highway and property line. No junk vehicle may be parked or stored within any required setback. No such vehicle parked, or stored on any lot shall decrease the required number of parking spaces. In no instance may junk vehicles be parked and stored in any residential District except for one personally owned vehicle which is totally screened from view.

6.1.5	Parking of Recreational Vehicles - Recreational vehicles shall meet the following requirements:
a)	No more than one such vehicle may be parked in a driveway or front yard outside of the required setbacks.
b)	No such vehicle, parked or stored, on any lot shall decrease the required number of parking spaces.
c)	The parking of a recreation vehicle owned by visitors may be temporarily parked for a period of time not to exceed three (3) consecutive weeks.
d)	Recreational vehicles parked within the Flood Hazard Overlay District (Section 6.8), shall also meet the requirements of Section 6.8.13(e).

6.1.6	Other Parking Standards and Applicability -
a)	Location - All parking areas subject to administrative review by the Administrative Officer, except for such areas associated with single or two-family dwellings, or other Land Development specifically exempted from site plan review, shall require Site Plan Review (see Section 5.5.1). All parking areas shall be located on the lot for which the parking requirement was generated unless specific alternatives are approved by the DRB.
b)	Surfacing - All parking areas shall be hard-surfaced (asphalt or concrete). The DRB may waive this requirement if the Applicant demonstrates that all of the remaining standards of section 6.1.6 will be met. In addition, the following specific standards shall be considered by the DRB when reviewing a waiver request for surfacing requirements:
1)	The parking area shall be designed so as to prevent the intrusion of gravel or a similar surfacing material onto the road / Road or Highway travel lanes or adverse impacts on drainage systems.
c)	Drainage - All parking areas and associated roadways shall be designed and constructed with detention devices, such as, but not limited to overland grassed and/or stone lined swales, detention basins, and settling ponds, in order to assure that the post development peak flow stormwater volumes from such parking areas and roadways do not exceed the predevelopment quantities based on the run-off from a twenty-five year, twenty-four hour storm event. All such devices shall
 
be designed and constructed to the standards in the Public Works Specifications, except that in the event of a conflict between the Public Works Specifications and the preceding sentence, the preceding sentence shall control. Unless stormwater flows are contained on the lot where such parking areas and roadways are located, there must also be adequate off-site drainage areas to accommodate such flows.
d)	Parking for Persons With Disabilities - All parking areas shall provide for persons with disabilities which are clearly designated and marked, and signed, using the international symbol for access required by Title 21 V.S.A. Section 275, as amended, for use by such persons only.
e)	Off-Site Parking - State, municipal or private commuter lots shall be approved by the DRB subject to Site Plan Review under Section 5.5.
f)	Setbacks - All parking spaces shall meet the setback standards for the District in which it is located except parking in driveways in the Agricultural / Residential District for single-family residential uses, parking in the Jolina Court Zoning District, and the Village Commercial District. Refer to Section 3.9 for specific requirements regarding parking and setbacks in the Jolina Court Zoning District, and Section 3.5.4 for specific requirements regarding parking and setbacks in the Village Commercial District.
g)	Screening - The DRB may require screening for any parking lots located within any front yard.
Screening shall emphasize the separation of parking lots from adjoining public Roads or Highways to minimize glare from vehicle headlights onto public Roads or Highways. The use of berms and landscape materials is the preferred method of screening. The DRB may approve fencing, if it determines the more preferred methods are impractical.
h)	Landscaping - All parking lots shall be landscaped as approved by the DRB.
i)	Pedestrian access - The design of all parking lots shall incorporate measures to minimize safety hazards to pedestrians. Pedestrian paths shall be designated and clearly marked. Separation of vehicle and pedestrian traffic shall be included in all parking lot plans where possible. The DRB may waive this requirement due to unique characteristics of the lot, or innovative alternative designs.
j)	Bicycle access - Parking lots shall be designed to encourage bicycle access. Any parking lot which is required to have fifteen (15) or more parking spaces shall provide bicycle racks at a location convenient to the main entrance to the business. The DRB may waive this requirement if in their judgment the business will not generate bicycle traffic.
k)	Striping - Hard surfaced parking spaces shall be clearly striped and maintained and shall meet standard parking dimensional requirements as specified by the DRB.
l)	Traffic Control Signs - The DRB may require the use of uniform ingress and egress signs, traffic control signs, and other signs as necessary to direct the flow of traffic.
m)	Lighting - Lighting shall be provided in all parking lots as approved by the DRB and in conformance with Section 4.11, Exterior Lighting, of this Regulation.
n)	Joint Parking Facilities - Joint parking arrangements may be approved by the DRB, provided that the Applicant has submitted legal documentation to guarantee continued long-term availability of said parking. Within any shopping center or other areas where joint parking has been established, the DRB may not approve any site plan amendments or other use changes which would increase parking needs, or any waivers of parking requirements, until the Applicant has submitted proof of notice to all tenants or shared parking participants of the proposed change.
o)	Fire Lanes - All fire lanes as recommended to the DRB by the Fire Chief shall be clearly designated by pavement markings and/or signage. All designated fire lanes shall be kept free from obstruction at all times. Vehicles parked within a designated fire lane for any period of time shall be subject to immediate towing at the owner’s expense.
p)	Waivers - The DRB may waive some or all parking requirements and may place conditions on a waiver as necessary to guarantee adequate parking. The DRB may require any change in use on any property where a waiver has been granted to be reviewed for parking impacts, and the change shall be prohibited if it is deemed to generate a parking deficiency. The DRB shall determine that one or more of the following standards are met at a specific location prior to granting a waivers:
i.	The proposed uses have staggered business hours with minimal overlap in business hours.
 
ii.	The Applicant presents evidence that the parking requirements are excessive based upon new parking studies, traffic engineering data, or obvious and apparent existing parking demands.
iii.	The Applicant demonstrates that the demand for parking is reduced because the type of business proposed substantially relies on pedestrian traffic.
iv.	The Applicant demonstrates that sufficient off-Road or Highway parking is available at other locations within two hundred (200) feet which are, or have been approved by the DRB.
v.	The use of mass transit, or other alternate transportation reduces parking demand.
vi.	Joint parking facilities with abutting businesses are sufficient to meet parking demand.
vii.	The I.T.E. (Institute of Traffic Engineers) Parking Manual, or other professional source, provides data which demonstrates parking demand for a proposed use is less than the standards specified in these Zoning Regulations.

6.2	Driveway Requirements

6.2.1	Standards - The following standards for driveways and their intersections with public Roads or Highways shall apply:
a)	Unless specifically approved by the DRB there shall be a maximum of one driveway per lot accessing a public Road or Highway. This provision shall not disallow a shared driveway between two or more lots, or dual driveways where one lane is marked for entering traffic and one lane for exiting traffic.
b)	Driveways shall meet the following standards unless a different size is required by the DRB due to special circumstances: Residential - 12 feet minimum width, 36 feet maximum width; Commercial - 20 feet minimum width, 36 feet maximum width.
c)	The DRB may require installation of acceleration and/or deceleration lanes on the adjacent public Road or Highway if it deems necessary.
d)	Driveways shall be located more than 100 feet from signalized Road or Highway intersections (measured between the near edges of the driveway and intersection). Greater distances may be required on Roads or Highways with high traffic volumes.
e)	The intersection of the driveway to the public or private road shall conform to the standards in the Public Works Specifications. The driveway shall meet the Vermont Agency of Transportation’s B-71 Standards for construction.
f)	For the length of the driveway, the driveway grade shall not exceed twelve (12) percent except that the last 200 feet from the foundation of the primary structure being served shall not exceed fifteen
(15) percent. In measuring the compliance of a driveway, the maximum grade may not be exceeded along the driveway center-line.

6.2.2	Access to Abutting Properties - The DRB may require reservation of land on any lot for provision of access to abutting properties whenever such access is deemed necessary to reduce curb cuts onto an arterial or collector Roads or Highways, to provide additional access for emergency or other purposes, or to improve general access and circulation in the area.

6.3	Pedestrian and Bike Ways
During conditional use review or site plan review, the Applicant may be required to accommodate planned expansions of existing municipal pedestrian paths and bike ways by negotiating an easement for such expansion.

6.4	Swimming Pools
In-ground swimming pool areas must be completely enclosed by a fence or similar structure at least four feet high so as to restrict unsupervised access by young children. Aboveground pools shall not be accessible by unsupervised children.
 
6.5	Mobile Homes and Travel Trailers
Travel trailers shall not be occupied while they are stored on a lot for more than one month during the calendar year and must have suitable disposal of all waste and wastewater generated. Mobile homes may not be located or occupied on any lot which has an existing residential principal use except within an approved mobile home park. Mobile homes outside of a mobile home park must be located on their own lot and have received all required state and local residential permits.

6.6	Taller Structures (Height Exemption)
Farm accessory buildings and structures in §4412(6) of the Act are exempt from the 35’ zoning district height restriction. Spires, chimneys, water towers, windmills, cupolas, rooftop solar collectors, domes, belfries and antennae may extend up to 45’ from the ground. Taller structures may accommodate a steeply pitched roof extending to 45’ provided there is no occupancy or use between 35’ and 45’. The communications industry shall be encouraged to share a single tower to mitigate impacts on ridgelines.


6.7	Shoreline Protection Overlay District
Purpose - It is the purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety, and welfare by protecting the shorelines of the Winooski and Huntington Rivers, Gillette Pond and the Richmond portion of Lake Iroquois from erosion, pollution, and visual blight. These bodies of water are recognized as providing important wildlife habitat, recreational opportunities, and scenic enjoyment for the public. The Shoreline District includes shorelines listed in the Richmond Town Plan and are regulated as depicted on the official “Shoreline Protection Overlay Map” of the Town of Richmond, in accordance with the Act (§4414).

6.7.1	Shoreline Overlay District Boundary - All Land Development occurring within the fifty (50) foot Shoreline District must comply with both the requirements of this section and with the requirements of the underlying district. In situations of conflict between the requirements of the Shoreline District and any other provisions of these Zoning Regulations, the more stringent shall be applied.

6.7.2	Permitted Uses - Agricultural use of land, no structures.

6.7.3	Conditional Uses - Permanent agricultural structures and all other uses allowed in the underlying district except for those uses as prohibited under Section 6.7.5, Prohibited Uses, below.

6.7.4	Additional Conditional Use Criteria - For Conditional Use Review under this section, the following criteria shall be used in addition to those criteria specified in Section 5.6, Conditional Use Review. The DRB shall evaluate the effect of the proposed use based on the following:
a)	That the use shall be planned and located in a manner best suited to protect the shoreline from pollution, erosion, and visual blight.
b)	That the use shall not result in erosion of the shoreline, introduction of pollutants to the river, increase in flooding, detrimental effect on shoreline and aquatic habitats, or other impacts which would effect water quality, visual quality, or other purposes of these Zoning Regulations.

6.7.5	Prohibited Uses -
a)	Storage of hazardous materials including petroleum products.
b)	Open storage of road salt.

6.7.6	Other Rivers, Brooks and Ponds - In order to maintain and improve water quality throughout the Town, a fifty (50) foot buffer is highly encouraged on all streams and brooks.

6.8	Flood Hazard Overlay District

6.8.1.	Statutory Authority for Flood Hazard Overlay District and Underlying Districts
In accordance with 10 V.S.A. Chapter 32 and V.S.A. Chapter 117 §4424, §4411, §4414 and §4469(d), these Flood Hazard Overlay District Regulations are hereby established for areas at risk of Flood damage in the Town of Richmond. With the exception of specified exempt activities described in Section 6.8.9,
 
Development in the Flood Hazard Overlay District requires a Zoning Permit from the Town of Richmond. All Development must comply with the provisions of the Flood Hazard Overlay District and the underlying zoning district. If a conflict exists between the provisions of the Flood Hazard Overlay District and the underlying zoning district, the provisions of the Flood Hazard Overlay District shall take precedence, unless the use is not permitted within the underlying zoning district.

6.8.2.	Statement of Purpose
The purposes of the Flood Hazard Overlay District are:
1.	To implement the goals, policies, and recommendations in the current Town Plan;
2.	To avoid and minimize the loss of life and property, the disruption of commerce, and the public expenditures and demands on public service that result from Flooding related to inundation;
3.	To restrict new residential and commercial development along river corridors leading to healthier rivers and natural areas;
4.	To ensure that the selection, design, creation, and use of development in the flood hazard area is reasonably safe and accomplished in a manner that is consistent with public wellbeing and does not impair the stream equilibrium, the function served by the Floodplain, or the stream corridor; and
5.	To manage all Special Flood Hazard Areas designated pursuant to 10 V.S.A., Chapter 32, §753, the Town of Richmond “All-Hazards Mitigation Plan”; and
6.	To make the Town of Richmond, its citizens, and businesses eligible for federal Flood insurance, federal disaster recovery funds, and hazard mitigation funds as may be available. In recognition of the high level of exposure to the Base Flood in Richmond and the resulting risks, these regulations are designed to meet the minimum requirements established by the National Flood Insurance Program.

6.8.3.	Other Provisions
a)	Precedence of Bylaw - The provisions of Section 6.8 shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any other local, state, or federal laws or regulations. Where Section
6.8 imposes a greater restriction than other provisions in the Richmond Zoning Regulations, the
provisions of this section shall take precedence.
b)	Warning of Disclaimer of Liability - These Flood Hazard Overlay District regulations do not imply  that land outside the Flood Hazard Overlay District or Development permitted within such district will be free from Flooding or Flood damages. These regulations shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Richmond or any town official or employee for any Flood damages that result from reliance on these Zoning Regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.  These regulations do not imply that a property is or is not eligible for Flood insurance. These regulations do not determine Flood insurance rates. The strength of the ordinance is, however, taken into consideration when determining the Town’s cost share during a federally declared disaster that damages the Town’s public infrastructure. The ordinance may play a factor in determining individuals’ flood insurance rates through FEMA’s Community Rating System.



6.8.4	Definitions
In addition to the definitions in Section 7, the following definitions apply only to Section 6.8 and supersede Section 7 definitions if presented in both sections.

Accessory Structures - A structure on the same lot with and of a nature which is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal structure.

Area of Special Flood Hazard – synonymous in meaning with the phrase “Special Flood Hazard Area” for the purposes of these regulations.

Base Flood – the Flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, generally known as the one hundred (100) Year Flood.
 
Base Flood Elevation (BFE) - the elevation of the water surface elevation resulting from a Flood that has a 1 percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. On the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the elevation is usually in feet, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929, the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, or other datum referenced in the Flood Insurance Study report, or the average depth of the Base Flood, usually in feet, above the ground surface.

Basement – any area of the building having its floor elevation below ground level on all sides.

Basement, walkout-on-grade – Any area that is sub grade on only three sides, with the downhill side at or above grade. Also known as daylight basements or terrace basements.
Channel – an area that contains continuously or periodic flowing water that is confined by banks and a streambed.
Contents – personal property that is not considered part of the structure and may include furniture,  portable and window air conditioners, portable microwave ovens and portable dishwashers, clothes washers and dryers, food freezers, and machinery and equipment which are not integral to the structures primary heating, ventilation and cooling systems. Contents may also include outdoor furniture and seasonal decorations.

Critical Facilities – include police stations, fire and rescue facilities, hospitals, shelters, schools, nursing homes, community water supply and waste treatment facilities, and other Structures the community identifies as essential to the health and welfare of the population and that are especially important following a disaster.

Development – [For the Flood Hazard Overlay District, the use of the term “Development” in Section 6.8 replaces the term “Land Development” which is defined in Section 7.0 and applies to the rest of the Richmond Zoning Regulations.] “Development” means any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials, but excluding maintenance and insignificant repairs.

Elevation Certificate – an administrative tool of the NFIP that documents elevation information necessary to ensure compliance with the floodplain management regulations, determining proper insurance rates and to support a request for a Letter of Map Amendment.

Engineering Report and Plan - a report and a plan prepared by and signed by an engineer licensed to practice in Vermont, delineating the Base Flood Elevation Area on a property by an accepted engineering method, including but not limited to a methodology recognized by a federal or Vermont state agency, and which show the calculated Special Flood Hazard Area boundary with sufficient information for such boundary to be confirmed. The Engineering Report and Plan must include a contour map showing the actual BFE of the area and, if no BFE is available from a Flood Insurance Study, a hydrologic and hydraulic study is needed as part of the Engineering Report and Plan to provide the BFE.

Existing Manufactured home park or subdivision - A Manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the Manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before June 21, 1982 (the date of Richmond’s first adopted “Flood Hazard Area Development Standards”) and includes any subsequent improvements to such Structures.

Existing Structure or Facility – A structure or facility that, as of the time an exempt activity is undertaken or an application for a proposed permitted or conditional use development is made under this Section 6.8, that: i) qualifies as a nonconforming structure (as defined in Section 7.2); or ii) complies with this Section 6.8.
 
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured home Park or Subdivision – [The Flood Hazard Overlay District regulations do not allow the expansion to an Existing Manufacturing Home Park or Subdivision.] Means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

Farm Structure – a Building, enclosure, or fence for housing livestock, raising horticultural or agronomic plants (e.g., a silo or commercial greenhouse) or carrying out other practices associated with Accepted Agricultural Practice, including a silo, as “farming” is defined in state law [10 V.S.A. §6001 (22)], but excludes a Dwelling for human habitation, in accordance with the Act (§4413).

FEMA – U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS), Federal Emergency Management Agency

Fill – Any placed material that changes the natural grade, increases the elevation, or diminishes the Flood storage capacity at the site.

Fill as needed to elevate an existing principal structure – fill required to elevate and reinforce a newly elevated existing principal structure.

Flood – is (a) A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and mudslides which are proximately caused by Flooding and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current, or (b) The collapse or subsidence of land along the  shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash Flood or abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in Flooding.

Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - an official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

Flood Insurance Study (FIS) – A FEMA examination, evaluation and determination of Flood hazards and, if appropriate, the corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and /or Flood related erosion hazards. [For purposes of these regulations, the term “Flood Elevation Study” is synonymous in meaning with the Flood Insurance Study.]

Floodplain or Flood-prone area - any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of “Flood”).

Flood proofing - any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to Structures which reduce or eliminate Flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, Structures and their contents.

Floodway, Regulatory, in Town of Richmond - the Channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the Base Flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot at any point.

Historic Structure - any Structure that is: (a) listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
 
historic district; (c) individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: (i) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (ii) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

Insignificant activities – placement or erection of decorative or directional elements which do not result in new obstructions to flood flows or alter drainage or have the potential to be a substantial improvement. Insignificant activities may include mowing, planting a garden, adding soil amendments, installing a mail box for the delivery of US postal mail or newspaper, or erecting a flag pole. Insignificant activities will not result  in new obstructions to flood flows or impair drainage or have the potential to be a substantial improvement.

Insignificant repair – to fix or mend to a sound condition after decay or damage and the cost of which does not exceed $500 or does not result in the replacement, alteration, addition or extension of an existing structure. Insignificant repairs will not result in new obstructions to flood flows or impair drainage or have  the potential to be a substantial improvement.

Improvement, non-substantial – any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement to a Structure which does not meet the definition of Substantial Improvement, Maintenance, Insignificant Repair or Insignificant Activities. Non-substantial improvements will not result in new obstructions to flood flows or impair drainage

Improvement, Substantial - any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a Structure, after the Effective Date of adoption, the cost of which, cumulatively exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the Structure before the Start of Construction of the improvement, or which results in an expansion of greater than 25% of the existing Gross Floor Area, whichever is less. This term includes Structures which have incurred Substantial Damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include (a) any project for improvement of a Structure to correct existing Violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specification which have been identified by the state or local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe conditions or (b) any alteration of a Historic Structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the Structure’s continued designation as a Historic Structure.



Letter of Map Change - a general term used to refer to the several types of revisions and amendments to maps issued by FEMA that can be accomplished by letter. The following are types of Letter of Map Change:
A.	“LOMA”; Letter of Map Amendment – A letter of map revision issued by FEMA officially removing a Structure, Lot, or portion of a Lot from the FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) as designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps, based on information provided by a certified engineer or surveyor. This is used where Structures or Lots are located above the Base Flood Elevation and have been inadvertently included in the mapped Special Flood Hazard Area.
B.	“LOMR”; Letter of Map Revision – Based on a formal request from a property owner or Applicant and supporting documentation, a LOMR is a revision to a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM), or both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a Flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory Floodway, the effective Base Flood Elevations (BFEs), or the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
C.	“LOMR-F”; Letter of Map Revision based on Fill – A modification of the Special Flood Hazard Area (based on Fill placed to raise a Structure or Lot to or above the 1% annual chance Flood elevation) outside of the existing regulatory Floodway, based on a formal request from a property owner or Applicant and supporting documentation.
 
Lowest Floor - the Lowest Floor of the lowest enclosed area, including Basement or Walkout-on-grade Basement.

Maintenance – routine care or upkeep of a structure or property which results in retention of the current condition or value. Routine maintenance will not result in new obstructions to flood flows or impair drainage or have the potential to be a substantial improvement. Also includes maintenance of existing paths, recreation areas, storm water drainage areas, roads, bridges, culverts, boardwalks or channel management activities

Manufactured home – [For purposes of Section 6.8, the term “Manufactured home” includes a “modular home” and a “Mobile Home” but does not include a “recreational vehicle.”] Means a Structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a Permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a Permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.

Manufactured home park or subdivision – a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more Manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

Minor Accessory Structures - A structure on the same lot with and of a nature which is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure and is smaller than 500 square feet as measured by the gross floor area and that represents a minimal investment. If the Minor accessory structures has two or more walls and a roof, it may not be used for human habitation. Minor accessory structures may include buildings without walls such as carports, picnic pavilions, board walks and decks.

New Construction – For the purposes of determining insurance rates, Structures for which the “Start of Construction” commenced on or after the effective date of the original Flood Insurance Rate Maps for the Town of Richmond [dated January 5, 1982], including any subsequent improvements to such Structures. For Floodplain management purposes, New Construction means Structures for which the Start of Construction commenced on or after June 21, 1982 (the date of Richmond’s first adopted “Flood Hazard Area Development Standards”) and includes any subsequent improvements to such Structures.

New Manufactured home park or subdivision - [For purposes of Section 6.8, Manufactured home parks are not permitted or conditional uses.] Means a Manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the Manufactured homes are to be affixed   (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after June 21, 1982.

No-Rise Certification – A certification by a licensed engineer supported by hydraulic or hydrologic technical data (or an explanation of why an analysis is not required) based on the computer model utilized to develop the 100-year floodway shown on the FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and the results tabulated in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Richmond.

Nonconforming Structure - a Structure or part of a Structure that does not conform to these Zoning Regulations but was in conformance with all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations prior to the enactment of these Zoning Regulations, including a Structure improperly authorized as a result of error by the administrative officer. Structures that were in Violation of the Flood hazard regulations at the time of their creation, and remain so, remain Violations and are not Nonconforming Structures.

Nonconforming use - use of land that does not conform to these Zoning Regulations but did conform to all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations prior to the enactment of these Zoning Regulations, including  a use improperly authorized as a result of error by the administrative officer.

Nonconformity - a Nonconforming use, Structure, lot, or parcel.
 
Non-Residential – includes but is not limited to: small business concerns, churches, schools, nursing homes, farm buildings (including grain bins and silos), pool houses, clubhouses, recreational buildings, government buildings, mercantile Structures, agricultural and industrial Structures, and warehouses.

Principal Structure - A structure, which includes a walled and roofed building, in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which the structure is situated.

Recreational vehicle - a vehicle which is: (a) Built on a single chassis; (b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (d) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

Special Flood Hazard Area or FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area – the Floodplain within a community subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of Flooding in any given year. For purposes of these regulations, the term “special Flood hazard area” is synonymous in meaning with the phrases “area of special Flood hazard” and “Flood Hazard Area”. Also note that zone designations from the Federal Flood Insurance Program apply to FEMA Special Flood Hazard Areas. This area is usually labeled Zone A, AO, AH, AE, or A1-30 in the most current Flood insurance studies and on the maps published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

Start of Construction – for purposes of Floodplain management, determines the effective map or Bylaw that regulated Development in the Special Flood Hazard Area. The “Start of Construction” includes Substantial Improvement, and means the date the Zoning Permit was issued provided the actual Start of Construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within  180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a Structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a Manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and Filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a Basement, footing, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main Structure. For any improvement, the actual Start of Construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, regardless whether that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

Structure - An assembly of materials for occupancy or use, including, but not limited to, a building, mobile home or trailer, sign, wall or fence, except a wall or fence on an operating farm. The term Structure also includes liquid and gas storage tanks that are principally above ground. Unless otherwise specifically provided, (1) the term Structure does not include parking areas and driveways, (2) for purposes of determining setbacks, the term Structure does not include fences, except where specifically provided, and
(3) for the determination of setbacks, septic systems shall not be considered structures and the setbacks shall be dictated by state law.  See also Recreational Vehicle and Existing Structure.

Substantial Damage – damage of any origin sustained by a Structure whereby the cost of restoring the Structure to its before-damaged conditions would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the Structure before the damage occurred.

Temporary Structures – one-story Structures not on the site for more than 180 consecutive days, which do not exceed 400 square feet of floor area and do not involve wastewater systems, includes recreational vehicles.

Violation – Failure of a Structure or other Development to be fully compliant with Section 6.8 and all provisions pertaining to Flood hazards. A Structure or other Development without the Elevation
 
Certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3 is presumed to be in Violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

6.8.5	Lands to Which These Regulations Apply
a)	Regulated Flood Hazard Areas - These regulations shall apply to the Flood Hazard Overlay District which overlays any other existing zoning districts and the regulations herein are the minimum standards that must be met before meeting the additional standards applicable in the underlying district. The Flood Hazard Overlay District includes FEMA Special Flood Hazard Areas (however identified and by whatever language or terms described) on the most current Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) and Flood Insurance Studies (FIS) published by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) as provided by the Secretary of the Agency of Natural Resources pursuant to V.S.A. 10, Chapter 32 §753. The FEMA Flood insurance studies and maps are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of these Zoning Regulations; and
b)	Base Flood Elevations - Where available, Base Flood Elevations (BFE) and Floodway limits provided by the National Flood Insurance Program and in the Flood Insurance Study and accompanying maps shall be used to administer and enforce these regulations. In Special Flood Hazard Areas where Base Flood Elevations and/or Floodway limits have not been provided by the National Flood Insurance Program in the Flood Insurance Study and accompanying maps, it is the applicant’s responsibility to develop the necessary base flood data. Where available, the applicant shall use regulatory data provided by FEMA, or State, or Federal agencies. An engineering report or plan or a FEMA determination may be used to determine a BFE.

6.8.6	Flood Hazard Overlay District Jurisdictional Determination Process
The purpose of the Flood Hazard Overlay District jurisdictional determination process is to establish whether a given area on a property shall be subject to the jurisdiction of Section 6.8.
a)	General Review – The process for establishing jurisdiction for the Flood Hazard Overlay District begins with a review by the Administrative Officer regarding the locations of any parcel proposed for Development to assess whether the area (measured horizontally) is within the FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area as defined in Section 6.8.5.a). Any area within the FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area is subject to the Flood Hazard Overlay District regulations. The Flood Hazard Overlay District jurisdictional determination shall be made by the Administrative Officer prior to any action taken on an application for proposed Development for any parcel.
b)	Jurisdictional Determination Process - The Flood Hazard Overlay District jurisdictional determination is an opinion issued by the Administrative Officer and must be conducted for any parcel proposed for Development. The Administrative Officer shall institute the Flood Hazard Overlay District jurisdictional determination process, based on the following: When an area proposed for Development is inside the FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area, the jurisdictional determination process is initiated by the Administrative Officer upon receipt of a complete application for proposed Development. The jurisdictional determination follows procedures for Administrative Officer approval as established in Section 5.2.2.
1.	The Administrative Officer shall review the application for proposed Development provided by the Applicant and refer to the boundaries and other features shown on the most recent FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps. In addition, the Administrative Officer will review any applicable map amendments created via a Letter of Map Change Approved by FEMA. The information presented on any FEMA maps or studies, adopted by reference, is presumed accurate. The Administrative Officer will make a jurisdictional determination regarding the locations of all areas proposed for Development on the property. The Administrative Officer may require additional information if necessary to make that determination.
2.	Any area within the FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area shall be under the jurisdiction of Richmond’s Flood Hazard Overlay District unless that area is formally removed by a Letter of Map Change, specifically a LOMA or LOMR as determined by FEMA, per Section 6.8.8. A LOMR-F shall not be used to remove land from the jurisdiction of the Town of Richmond Flood Hazard Overlay District. A Letter of Map Change includes a report of findings which
 
shall be presented by the Applicant to the Administrative Officer. If the area proposed for Development appears to be within the FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area, the Administrative Officer shall consider the area to be within the FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area.
3.	The Applicant has the option to concede that the area proposed for Development falls within the jurisdiction of the Flood Hazard Overlay District regarding a specific application. This concession is not applicable and is not binding on any future Flood Hazard Overlay District jurisdictional determinations or new applications for either the Applicant or the Town of Richmond.
4.	Notwithstanding b), an applicant has the option of seeking a jurisdictional opinion from the Administrative Officer to determine if an area is within the FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area without filing a Zoning Permit application.
c)	Jurisdictional Determination Decisions - Jurisdictional Determinations by the Administrative Officer shall be issued in writing within the following time frames based on the nature of the request or application:
i)	Within 30 days of the date when a complete application for Land Development is submitted. or
ii)	If applicable, within 30 days of expiration of the time provided in Section 6.8.17.c ).
d)	Jurisdictional Determination Appeals - Appeals concerning Flood Hazard Overlay District jurisdictional determination of the Administrative Officer may be made to the DRB within 15 days of the issuance of the jurisdictional determination or of the Zoning Permit approval or denial in which a Flood Hazard Overlay District jurisdictional determination was made. The DRB shall hear the appeal in accordance with Section 5.2.3 and Section 8.5 and shall make its decision in conformance with Section 6.8.6.

6.8.7	Substantial Improvement Determinations
When a proposal for development within the Special Flood Hazard Area is reviewed, the Administrative Officer shall make a Substantial Improvement determination. Such determinations, shall be used to determine the appropriate development standards for additions, improvements, rehabilitation, repair and rebuilding of an existing structure. In making such a determination the Administrative Officer may require:
a)	An estimate of the market value of structure from one of the following sources: 1An independent appraisal by a professional appraiser2Property values used for tax assessment purposes with an adjustment recommended by the tax appraiser to reflect current market conditions;3The value of buildings taken from NFIP claims data;
b)	A cost estimate provided by a qualified contractor, Professional Engineer or Licensed Architect.
The cost estimate shall include a detailed accounting of the proposed improvements, additions, reconstruction or rehabilitation work, repairs or associated construction and development. A Substantial Improvement determination can be appealed by an applicant to the Development Review Board. The DRB shall hear the appeal in accordance with Section 5.2.3 and Section 8.5.

6.8.8	Removing Land from a FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area
By federal regulation, land can only be removed from a FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area by obtaining from FEMA a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) or Letter of Map Change (LOMC). No Permit for Development may be issued for land within the FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area, except as provided in this Section 6.8, unless a LOMA or LOMR is first obtained from FEMA. The property owner or Applicant must submit the application for a request for a LOMA or LOMR directly to FEMA. A LOMR-F shall not be used to remove land from the jurisdiction of the Flood Hazard Overlay District. Existing principal structures which have received LOMR-F’s are prohibited from developing basements or walkout on grade basements. No new structure may be built on Filled areas unless that Structure would have been allowed in that location prior to the Fill being placed there. See Section 6.8.16.s) regarding limitations for use of a LOMR-F.

6.8.9	Required Permits in Flood Hazard Overlay District
If any portion of proposed development is within the FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area, the entire development is considered to be within the FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area. Except for exempt activities, per Section 6.8.10, a Zoning Permit is required from the Administrative Officer for all Development in all
 
areas within the Flood Hazard Overlay District. Development that requires a conditional use approval, change or expansion of non-conforming structures or use approval, or a variance from the DRB under Section 6.8 must have such approvals prior to the issuance of a Zoning Permit by the Administrative Officer. Any Development subject to municipal jurisdiction in the Flood Hazard Overlay District shall meet the development standards in Section 6.8.16. See Section 6.8.17.c) regarding state and federal permits.

Uses and activities within the Special Flood Hazard Overlay District, as listed in Figure 6.8-1 are subject to the following permit requirements. Please refer the underlying District requirements to determine which additional requirement may apply.
X – Prohibited, development not allowed within the FHOD
✓	- Exempt, not subject to FHOD review,
P – Permitted use, subject to FHOD review by Administrative Official
CU – Conditional Use, subject to FHOD review by Development Review Board Figure 6.8 -1 Special Flood Hazard Overlay District Use Standards Table

Activity	
SFHA	
Floodway
Additions to existing accessory structures	P	X
Additions to existing minor structures	P	CU
Additions to existing principal structures	CU	X
		
Temporary structures	P	X
New minor accessory structures	P	X
New accessory structures	CU	X
New dwelling units (including accessory apartments)	X	X
New principal structures	X	X
New basements	X	X
		
Maintenance	✓	✓
Insignificant Repairs and Insignificant Activities	✓	✓
Removal, repair, replacement or additions of contents	✓	✓
Demolition of a structure in whole or in part	✓	✓
Improvements, Non substantial	P	CU
Improvements, Substantial	CU	CU
Replacement of a manufactured home	P	CU
		
New parking area and driveways, at-grade	P	P
New Parking areas and driveways requiring grading or excavating	P	CU
Grading or excavating for the purpose of any other activity not specifically
listed	CU	CU
Creation of a pond	CU	CU
Widening, re-aligning or significant changes to existing roads	CU	CU
New bridges, culverts, docks or other public projects which are functionally
dependent on stream access or stream crossings	
CU	
CU
New drainage or channel management projects	CU	CU
New dams or bank stabilization projects	CU	CU
New fill as needed to elevate an existing principal structure	CU	CU
New fill	X	X
		
 

New Agricultural activities in accordance with VT Agency of Agriculture,
Food & Markets Accepted Agricultural Practices (AAP)	✓	✓
New Silvicultural (forestry) activities in accordance with VT Dept of Forest &
Parks Acceptable Management Practices (AMP)	✓	✓
New Recreation Areas w/out Structures	P	P
New Public Utilities	CU	CU
New Outdoor storage	CU	X
New Junk yards	X	X
New Storage of Hazardous materials	X	X
New Critical facilities	X	X


6.8.10	Exempt Activities
As listed within Figure 6.8-1, the following are exempt from regulation under Section 6.8:
1.	Agricultural activities conducted in accordance with VT Agency of Agriculture, Food & Markets Accepted Agricultural Practices (AAP)
2.	Removal, repair, replacement of Content
3.	Insignificant Repairs and insignificant Activities
4.	Maintenance
5.	Demolition of a structure in whole or in part
6.	Silvicultural (forestry) activities conducted in accordance with VT Dept of Forest and Parks Acceptable Management Practices (AMP)

6.8.11	Permitted Development by Administrative Officer Approval
As listed within Figure 6.8-1, the following Development activities require a Zoning Permit from the Administrative Officer, and must conform with the applicable standards presented in Section 6.8.16:
a)	In SFHA and outside of the Floodway
1.	Additions to Accessory structures
2.	Additions to minor accessory structures
3.	Temporary structures
4.	New Minor accessory structures
5.	Improvements, non-substantial
6.	Replacement of a manufactured home
7.	New parking area and driveways, at-grade
8.	New parking areas and driveways requiring grading or excavating
9.	New Recreation Areas w/out Structures
b)	Within the Floodway
1.	New parking area and driveways, at-grade
2.	New Recreation Areas w/out Structures

6.8.12	Conditional Use Approval by the DRB after a Public Hearing
As listed within Figure 6.8-1, the following Development activities may be approved as a conditional use by the Development Review Board as per section 5.6. and 8.2, and must conform with the applicable standards presented in Section 6.8.16:
a)	In SFHA and outside of the Floodway
1.	Additions to existing principal structures
2.	New Accessory Structures
3.	Improvements, Substantial (not including replacement of a manufactured home)
4.	Grading, excavating, or the creation of a pond
5.	Widening, re-aligning or significant changes to existing roads
6.	New bridges, culverts, docks or other public projects which are functionally dependent on stream access or stream crossings
7.	New Dams or bank stabilization projects
 
8.	New Drainage or channel management projects
9.	New fill as needed to elevate an existing principal structure
10.	New Public Utilities
11.	New Outdoor Storage
b)	Within the Floodway
1.	Additions to existing minor accessory structures
2.	Improvements, Substantial (not including replacement of a manufactured home)
3.	Improvements, non- substantial
4.	Replacement of a manufactured home
5.	New parking areas and driveways requiring grading or excavating
6.	Creation of a pond
7.	Grading or excavating for the purpose of any other activity not specifically listed
8.	Grading, excavating, or the creation of a pond
9.	Widening, re-aligning or significant changes to existing roads
10.	New bridges, culverts, docks or other public projects which are functionally dependent on stream access or stream crossings
11.	New Dams or bank stabilization projects
12.	New Drainage or channel management projects
13.	New fill as needed to elevate an existing structure
14.	Public Utilities

6.8.13	Prohibited Development
As listed within Figure 6.8-1, the following development is prohibited in the Flood Hazard Overlay District. Prohibited Development includes, but is not limited to:
a)	In SFHA and outside of the Floodway
1.	New dwelling units
2.	New Principal structures
3.	New basements
4.	New Fill
5.	New Junk yards
6.	New Storage of Hazardous materials
7.	New Critical facilities
b)	Within the Floodway
1.	Additions to existing accessory structures
2.	Additions to existing principal structures
3.	Temporary Structures
4.	New Minor accessory structures
5.	New accessory structures
6.	New dwelling units
7.	New principal structures
8.	New basements
9.	New Fill
10.	New outdoor storage
11.	New Junk yards
12.	New Storage of Hazardous materials
13.	New Critical facilities

6.8.14	Variances
Variances to specific provisions of Section 6.8 may be granted by the DRB only in accordance with 24 VSA Section 4469(d) and 44 CFR Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, after a public hearing noticed as described in Section 8.4. Special provisions for variances for Development in the Flood Hazard Overlay District include the following:
a)	Any variance issued in the Special Flood Hazard Area will not increase Flood heights, and will inform the applicant in writing over the signature of a community official that the issuance of a
 
variance to construct a Structure below the Base Flood Elevation increases risk to life and property and will result in increased Flood insurance premiums up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of coverage. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions.
b)	A copy of such a variance shall be affixed to the deed of the property on file in the municipal clerk’s office.

6.8.15	Nonconforming Structures and Uses
Special provisions regarding Nonconforming Structures and uses apply to Section 6.8. The general provisions of Section 4.7 and 4.9 shall also apply. The DRB, after public notice and hearing per Section 8.2, may approve the repair, relocation, replacement, or enlargement of a Nonconforming Structure within the jurisdiction of the Flood Hazard Overlay District provided that:
a)	The proposed Development is in compliance with all the Development standards in Section 6.8.16 and must meet the requirements covered under definitions in Section 6.8.4.
b)	A Nonconforming Structure that is Substantially Damaged or destroyed may be reconstructed only in circumstances when the Structure cannot be relocated to a less hazardous location on the parcel. The Lowest Floor of the reconstructed residential principal Structure must be rebuilt to one foot or more above the Base Flood Elevation and the Structure must otherwise comply with all requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program;
c)	Nonconforming Structures or uses shall be considered abandoned where such Structures or uses are discontinued for more than 12 months; and
d)	An individual Manufactured home lot in an existing Manufactured home park that is vacated shall  not be considered a discontinuance or abandonment of nonconformity. Replacement Manufactured homes must be placed so as to meet the Development standards in Section 6.8.16.

6.8.16	Development Standards
Where more than one area is involved (i.e., the Floodway, FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area) the more restrictive standard shall apply.

 
a)	All Development shall be reasonably safe from Flooding;
1.	Designed, operated, maintained, modified, and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, release, or lateral
movement of the Structure during the occurrence of the Base
Flood;
2.	Constructed with materials
 






















Figure 6.8-2. Example of interior renovations which are reasonably safe from flooding.
 
resistant to Flood damage;
 
3.	Constructed by methods and practices that minimizes Flood damage;
4.	Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of Flooding;
5.	Adequately drained to reduce exposure to Flood hazards;
6.	Located so as to minimize conflict with changes in Channel location over time and the need to intervene with such changes;
b)	All fuel storage tanks are required to be securely anchored to prevent flotation or lateral movement (as needed to serve an
existing building in the Special Flood Hazard Zone). Fill and vent pipes shall be elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation; or storage tanks may be buried underground, if securely anchored as certified by a qualified professional.
c)	New Fully enclosed areas below grade on all sides (including below
grade crawlspaces and
 
basements) are prohibited.
d)	New Fully enclosed areas
 
Figure 6.8-3. Example of an anchored above ground propane tank.
 
above grade, and below the Base Flood Elevation (such as crawlspaces) shall be:
1.	Solely used for parking of vehicles, storage, or building access, and are prohibited from future conversion to residential or commercial use; and
2.	Wet flood proofed and designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic Flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of Floodwaters. Such designs must be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, and meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: i. A minimum of two openings on two walls
having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to Flooding shall be provided.
ii. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or
devices provided that
 
they permit the automatic entry and exit of Floodwaters.
 
Figure 6.8-4. Examples of an elevated structure on a wet flood-
proofed, at-grade crawl space with opening which permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
 
e)	All existing Residential Structures to be substantially improved or replaced, and all additions to principal residential structures shall: 1. Be reasonably safe from flooding;
 
2.	Have the Lowest Floor elevated to a minimum of one foot above the Base Flood Elevation. Dry flood proofing is prohibited for residential structures;
3.	Have structural designs, specifications, and plans prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect. Designs and proposed methods of construction shall be in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting all FEMA Flood proofing and elevation provisions.
f)	All existing non-residential Structures to be substantially improved or replaced, and all additions to nonresidential structures shall:
1.	Be reasonably safe from flooding; 2.
Have either:
i.	The Lowest Floor elevated to a minimum of one foot above the Base Flood Elevation; or ii. Be
dry flood proofed at least two feet
above the Base Flood
Elevation; or iii. If solely used for parking of vehicles, storage, be wet flood proofed as per 6.8.16 d) 2.
3. Have structural designs, specifications, and plans prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect. Designs and proposed methods of construction shall be in accordance with accepted standards of
 
practice for meeting all FEMA Flood proofing and elevation provisions.
g)	All new Accessory Structures shall:
 
Figure 6.8-4. Example of a dry flood proofed commercial building.
 
1.	Be reasonably safe from flooding; 2. Have either:
i.	The Lowest Floor elevated to a minimum of one foot above the Base Flood Elevation; or
ii.	Be dry flood proofed at least two feet above the Base Flood Elevation; or
iii.	If solely used for parking of vehicles, storage, be wet flood proofed as per 6.8.16 d) 2.
3. Have structural designs, specifications, and plans prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect. Designs and proposed methods of construction shall be in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting all FEMA Flood proofing and elevation provisions.
h)	All new Minor Accessory Structure smaller than 500 square feet as measured by the Gross Floor Area that represents a minimal investment need not be elevated to the Base Flood Elevation provided the Structure shall:
1.	Be reasonably safe from flooding;
2.	Be used only for parking or storage;
3.	Be constructed and placed on the site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of Floodwaters;
4.	Be wet flood proofed as per 6.8.16 d) 2.
i)	All new Minor Accessory Structure smaller than 150 square feet as measured by the Gross Floor Area that represents a minimal investment need not be elevated to the Base Flood Elevation provided the Structure shall:
1.	Be reasonably safe from flooding; 2. Be used only for parking or storage.
3.	Be constructed and placed on the site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of Floodwaters.
4.	Wet flood proofed and designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic Flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of Floodwaters. Such designs meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
i.	A minimum of two openings on two walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to Flooding shall be provided.  ii. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be
 
equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of Floodwaters.
j)	Manufactured homes to be replaced or substantially improved shall be:
1.	Be reasonably safe from flooding;
2.	Elevated on a permanent foundation such that the Lowest Floor of the Manufactured home is elevated to at least one foot above the Base Flood Elevation:
3.	Securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement during the occurrence of the Base Flood.
4.	If a manufactured home is located in an existing Manufactured home park (created before the FIRM), where elevating a replacement home to or above Base Flood Elevation is not possible, the Lowest Floor shall be supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 48 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
k)	Recreational Vehicles shall be:
1.	On the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or 2. Fully licensed and ready for highway use.
l)	Replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of Flood waters into the systems.
m)	Replacement on-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during Flooding.
n)	Replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of Flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into Flood waters.
o)	Altered or relocated portions of any watercourse shall maintain the Flood carrying capacity and sediment transport capacity, and any alteration or relocation shall not result in any decrease of stream stability.
p)	Bridges and culverts, which by their nature must be placed in or over the stream, must have a stream alteration permit from the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources.
q)	Parking areas and driveways built above grade shall be designed by a licensed engineer to minimize or eliminate the potential for Flooding and loss or damage associated with Flooding. (See subsection s) regarding Filling.)
r)	Roads and bridges shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the Structure during the occurrence of the Base Flood. (See subsection s) regarding Filling.)
s)	Fill, can be moved from one place to another within the Special Flood Hazard Area outside of the Floodway, on a Lot or between adjoining Lots, if there is no net loss in the Floodwater holding capacity of the land.
1.	Fill can only be moved in support of an exempt or allowed use as described in Section 6.8.10 , Section 6.8.11, and Section 6.8.12.
2.	Fill shall not be used to raise land elevations and remove land from the Flood Hazard Overlay District for Development not allowed in the Flood Hazard Overlay District, and the Town of Richmond shall not approve or consent to a Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F) for this purpose.
3.	Fill may only be used as needed for the sole purpose of elevating an existing principal structure, structural elevation designs must demonstrate the proposal shall reasonably minimizes impacts.
t)	New subdivision Developments, planned unit Developments, or Manufactured home parks of more than 5 acres or 50 lots, whichever is less, shall:
1.	Include Base Flood Elevation data;
2.	Be designed to minimize Flood damage within the Flood-prone area;
3.	Have adequate drainage to reduce exposure to Flood hazards; and
4.	Have utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, located and constructed so as to minimize or eliminate Flood damage.
u)	In Zones A and AE where base flood elevations and/or floodway limits have not been determined, development applications are required to demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated encroachment on the property, will not increase the base flood elevation more than 1.00 foot at any point within the municipality. The
 
demonstration must be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles and certified by a registered professional engineer.
v)	Within the Floodway development shall:
1.	Not result in any increase in Flood levels (0.0 feet) during the occurrence of the Base Flood, this will be demonstrated by the submission of a No Rise Certification;
2.	Not increase any risk to surrounding properties, facilities, or Structures from erosion or Flooding.
3.	Allow for public utilities to be placed underground, and the No Rise analyses waived, where a registered professional engineer certifies that there will be no change in grade and the utilities will be adequately protected from scour.

6.8.17	Administration
a)	Application Submission Process - When an application for proposed Development is received:
a)	The Administrative Officer shall make a:
i.	Flood Hazard Overlay District Jurisdictional Determination, per Section 6.8.6.; and
ii.	Substantial Damage Determination, per Section 6.8.7.
b)	No action shall be taken on a Development application by the Administrative Officer or DRB until a Flood Hazard Overlay District jurisdictional determination and Substantial Damage Determination has been completed.
c)	Once the jurisdictional determination has been determined, per Section 6.8.6, and the proposed
Development is determined to be under the jurisdiction of the Flood Hazard Overlay District, the Administrative Officer shall determine the type of review required:
i.	Prohibited, development not allowed within the FHOD;
ii.	Exempt, not subject to FHOD review;
iii.	Permitted use, subject to FHOD review by Administrative Official; or
iv.	Conditional Use, subject to FHOD review by Development Review Board.
Applications for proposed Development seeking approval by the DRB submitted per Section 6.8.12 require at least one public hearing per RZR Section 8.2.3 and Section 8.2.4
d)	For all proposed Development in the Flood Hazard Overlay District, the application for Development shall be in compliance with all requirements for “Permits and Approval” within Section 5 and with all provisions contained in Section 6.8 for the Flood Hazard Overlay District.
b)	Application Submission Requirements - Any application for Development within the Flood Hazard Overlay District requires:
a)	Site plans drawn to scale as specified in Section 5.5.2.c),with accurate measurements of survey quality or prepared by a Vermont licensed surveyor or engineer showing;
i.	All proposed Development and existing structures, including locations of any existing and
proposed driveways, road and parking areas;
ii.	All water bodies, Special Flood Hazard Areas, Floodways;
iii.	The Base Flood Elevations at the site;
iv.	The shortest distance from the proposed Development to the top of bank of any stream;
v.	Any existing and proposed drainage;
vi.	Any pre- and post-Development grades;
vii.	Any proposed areas and extent of dredging or grading;
viii.	The elevation of the proposed Lowest Floor, as referenced to the same vertical datum as the elevation on the current Flood Insurance Rate Maps if applicable;
ix.	Any storage locations showing materials proposed for outdoor storage, including types of materials;
b)	Plan for meeting applicable provisions of Section 6.8.16a)
c)	FEMA Elevation Certificate for Existing Structures depicting their Lowest Floor Elevation in relation to mean sea level (a FEMA Elevation Certificate) if applicable;
d)	A Vermont Agency of Natural Resources Project Review Sheet for the proposal identify all state and federal agency permits from which permit approval is required (this is not required for non- substantial improvements or minor accessory structures);
e)	Any proposed structural elevation or Flood Proofing measures as certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect.
 
f)	No-Rise Certification for development within the floodway.
g)	A profile showing the slope of the bottom on the Channel of the flowline of the stream and the extent to which the Channel is to be relocated shall also be provided for channel relocation projects
h)	Information that demonstrates that the proposed Development meets the requirements for the
underlying zoning district in effect, in addition to the requirements imposed within the Flood Hazard Overlay District. These requirements include but are not limited to permitted and conditional uses, Building setbacks, Lot coverage, Building Heights, etc. for the underlying zoning district.
i)	When applicable, the Applicant shall provide an additional set of all application materials, to comply
with Section 6.8.15.b).
j)	Relevant information that the Administrative Officer deems necessary.
k)	If the request is an appeal for a variance, then the appeal application must include responses to the criteria set forth in 24 VSA §4469 and CFR 60.6.

c)	Referral to Agency of Natural Resources
When an application for proposed new development or substantial improvement (but not necessarily for improvements) within the FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area or for any proposed development in the floodway is deemed complete, the Administrative Officer shall submit a copy of the application and supporting information to the State National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) Coordinator at the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources, in accordance with 24 V.S.A. § 4424. A DRB decision or Zoning Permit may be issued only following receipt of comments from the Agency, or the expiration of 30 days from the date the application was mailed to the Agency, whichever is sooner.

If the applicant is seeking a Zoning Permit for the alteration or relocation of a watercourse, copies of the application shall also be submitted to the adjacent communities, the Stream Alteration Engineer at the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources, and the Army Corps of Engineers. Copies of such notice shall be provided to the State National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) Coordinator at the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources, Department of Environmental Conservation. A Zoning Permit may be issued only following receipt of comments from the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources, or the expiration of 30 days from the date the application was mailed to the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources, whichever is sooner.

d)	Decisions
The Administrative Officer and the DRB shall consider comments from the NFIP Coordinator at the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources. The DRB may recess the proceedings on any application pending submission of additional information.

Conditions such as non-conversion of storage areas to residential use and areas solely used for parking of vehicles, storage, or building access, shall clearly be stated on any Decisions and Zoning Permits.

e)	Administrative Officer Records
The Administrative Officer shall properly file and maintain a record of:
a)	Zoning Permits issued in areas covered by these Zoning Regulations;
b)	An Elevation Certificate with the as-built elevation (consistent with the datum for the elevation on the current Flood Insurance Rate Maps for the community) of the Lowest Floor, including Basement, of all new accessory structures, substantially improved Structures, or Flood proofed Structures (not including accessory Structures), in the Flood Hazard Overlay District, including the FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area;
c)	All Flood proofing and other certifications required under this regulation; and
d)	All decisions of the Administrative Officer and the DRB (including variances and Violations) and all supporting findings of fact, conclusions, and conditions.

6.8.18	Certificate of Occupancy
In accordance with 24 V.S.A. §4449, it shall be unlawful to use or occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of any land or Structure, or part thereof, created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or
 
enlarged in its use or Structure within Special Flood Hazard Area until a certificate of occupancy is issued by the Administrative Officer, stating that the proposed use of the Structure or land conforms to the requirements of these regulations.

The requirements for a Certificate of Occupancy are set forth in Section 5.3.5. Within 14 days of the receipt of the application for a certificate of occupancy, the Administrative Officer shall inspect the premises to ensure that all required local, State, and federal permits have been acquired and all that all work has been completed in conformance with the Zoning Permit and associated approvals. If the Administrative Officer fails to grant or deny the certificate of occupancy within 14 days of the submission of the application, the certificate shall be deemed issued on the 15th day.

6.8.19	Enforcement and Penalties
a)	It shall be the duty of the Administrative Officer to enforce the provisions of Section 6.8 under 10 VSA
§1974a, 24 VSA §4451 and §4452, including Section 8.3. Upon determination that a Violation exists, the Administrative Officer shall institute appropriate action in accordance with the provisions of 24
V.S.A. Chapter 117. A copy of any notice of Violation shall be mailed to the State NFIP Coordinator.
b)	If the Violation occurs in the areas within the FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area and remains after all appeals have been resolved, the Administrative Officer shall submit a declaration to the Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program requesting a denial of Flood insurance for the property pursuant to Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended.
Violations of the Accepted Agricultural Practices shall be enforced as Violations of these Zoning Regulations. Such Violations shall also be immediately reported to the Secretary of Agriculture for enforcement under 6 V.S.A. Section 481

6.9	Wetlands

No building, roadway or septic system shall be constructed within 100 feet of a Class I wetland and within 50 feet of a Class II wetland. Classifications of wetlands are established by the State of Vermont.

In addition, no draining, dredging, filling, or alteration of the water flow shall occur within 50 feet of Class I and Class II wetlands, unless such use has been approved by the Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation’s Wetlands Section through the issuance of a Conditional Use Determination.

6.10	Water Supply Source Protection Area

All Land Development within the municipal water supply source protection area is governed by the Town of Richmond’s Water Supply Source Protection Ordinance. Contact the Administrative Officer for location of the Protection Area and requirements of the Ordinance.

6.11	Steep Slopes

Any proposed construction on land with a slope of over 20% shall be required to submit engineering plans for adequate erosion control and safe construction methods as part of a complete application for the proposed use, activity or structure. An access must be provided which meets the Vermont Agency of Transportation’s B-71 Standards and local requirements, and if conflicting, the stricter apply.

6.12	Wireless Telecommunications Facilities

Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall include those of all wireless telecommunications service providers, licensed and/or regulated by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), and associated equipment and buildings.

Purpose - The purpose of Section 6.12 is to protect the characteristics of our zoning districts, aesthetics, safety and general welfare of the Town of Richmond while accommodating the communication needs of
 
residents and businesses. This section is intended to strike an appropriate balance between the interests of private landowners and other residents. This section shall:
a)	Preserve the character and appearance of the Town of Richmond while allowing adequate telecommunications services to be developed.
b)	Protect the scenic, historic, environmental, and natural resources of the Town of Richmond.
c)	Provide standards and requirements for the operation, siting, design, appearance, construction, monitoring, modification, and removal of telecommunications facilities and towers.
d)	Minimize tower and antenna proliferation by requiring the sharing of existing communications facilities, towers and sites where possible and appropriate.
e)	Facilitate the provision of telecommunications services to the residences and businesses of the Town of Richmond.
f)	Minimize the adverse visual effects of towers and antennas through collocation, careful design, siting, landscaping, screening, and innovative aesthetic mitigation standards.

6.12.1	Authority
Pursuant to the Act [§4414(12)] the DRB of the Town of Richmond is authorized to review, approve, conditionally approve, and deny applications for telecommunications facilities, including sketch,   preliminary and final plans, and installation. Pursuant to the Act (24 V.S.A. §4440) and Section 5.2.1, the DRB is authorized to hire qualified persons to conduct an independent technical review of applications and to require the Applicant to pay for reasonable costs thereof.

6.12.2	Consistency with Federal Law
In addition to other findings required by Section 6.12, the DRB shall find that its decision regarding an application is consistent with federal law, particularly the Telecommunications Act of 1996. This section does not:
a)	Prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services;
b)	Unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services; or
c)	Regulate the placement, construction, and modification of personal wireless service facilities on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such facilities comply with FCC regulations concerning such emissions.

Notwithstanding restrictions imposed by Section 6.12, an Applicant may obtain a Zoning Permit if the Applicant establishes that the denial of any application because of any provision of this section would be inconsistent with the Telecommunications Act of 1996. To assert that the application of this section would be inconsistent with the Telecommunications Act of 1996, an Applicant must provide written notice of such assertion as part of its written application. The notice must: 1) specify the basis for the claim of inconsistency; 2) establish that there are no alternative sites (including sites controlled by others at the time of the application) within the Town of Richmond that could serve as an alternative to the application and comply with this section; and 3) provide a statement of any facts that the Applicant intends to provide to support its assertions of inconsistency between this section and the Telecommunications Act of 1996. The Applicant will bear the burden of proving any claim that the application of this section would be inconsistent with the Telecommunications Act of 1996. The DRB may approve a Zoning Permit that is inconsistent with this section only to the extent required to comply with the Telecommunications Act of 1996.

6.12.3	Definitions and Technical Standards
Some of the following terms do not appear in the text of this section. If a defined term is not used in the text of this section, it serves the purpose of providing a technical standard that may prove relevant in some proceedings under these Zoning Regulations.

Adequate Capacity: Capacity is considered to be “adequate” if the grade of service (GOS) is 98% or higher (i.e. Blocking of 2% or lower) during Busy Hour Traffic, as assessed by direct measurement of the facility in question. The GOS shall be determined by the use of standard Erlang B calculations. As call blocking may occur in either the land line or radio portions of a wireless network, adequate capacity for this
 
regulation shall apply only to the capacity of the radio components. Where capacity must be determined prior to the installation of the personal wireless services facility in question, adequate capacity shall be determined on the basis of a 20% busy hour (20% of all offered total daily traffic occurring within the busiest hour of the day), with total daily traffic based on aggregate estimates of the expected traffic in the coverage area.

Adequate Coverage: Coverage for wireless telephony is “adequate” within that area surrounding a base station where the predicted or measured median field strength of the transmitted signal is such that 90% of the time, transceivers properly installed and operated will be able to communicate with the base station without objectionable noise (or excessive bit-error-rate for digital) and without calls being dropped. In the case of cellular communications in a rural environment, this would be a signal strength of at least – 90 dBm. It is acceptable for there to be holes within the area of adequate coverage as long as the signal regains its strength further away from the base station. The outer boundary of the area of adequate coverage, however, is that location past which the signal does not regain.

Affiliate: When used in relation to an operator, another person who directly or indirectly owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or common control with the operator, or an operator’s principal partners, shareholders, or owners of some other ownership interest. When used in relation to the municipality, any agency, board, authority or political subdivision affiliated with the municipality or other person in which the municipality has legal or financial interest.

Alternative Design Tower Structure: Artificial trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles, silos and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers (see also Stealth Facility).

Antenna: A device for transmitting and/or receiving electromagnetic waves, which is attached to a tower or other structure.

Antenna Height: The vertical distance measured from the base of the antenna support structure at grade to the highest point of the antenna. If the support structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the highest and lowest grades of the base of the support structure shall be used in calculating the antenna height.

Antenna Support Structure: Any pole, telescoping mast, tower tripod, or any other structure which supports a device used in the transmitting and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves.

Applicant: A person who applies for a wireless telecommunications facility siting. An applicant can be the telecommunications service provider with the owner’s written permission (or other legally designated representative) or the owner of the property.

Available Space: The space on a tower or structure to which antennas of a telecommunications provider are both structurally able and electromagnetically able to be attached.

Base Station: The primary sending and receiving site in a wireless telecommunications facility network. More than one base station and/or more than one variety of wireless telecommunications provider can be located on a single tower or structure.

Blocking: Blocking is the failure of calls due to insufficient line availability. For the purpose of Erlang B calculations, Blocking is expressed as the fraction of failed calls. For example, Blocking of 2% means 2 calls dropped for every 100 attempted and equates to a Grade of Service of 98%.

Bulletin 65: “Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields,” Published by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) Office of
 
Engineering and Technology specifying radiofrequency radiation levels and methods to determine compliance. OET Bulletin 65 Edition 97-01 dated August, 1997 unless further revised by the FCC.

Busy Hour Traffic: BHT (in Erlangs) is the number of hours of call traffic there are during the busiest hour of operation of a telecommunication facility.

Cell Site: A tract or parcel of land that contains a cellular communication antenna, its support structure, accessory building(s), and parking, and may include other uses associated with and ancillary to cellular communications transmission.

Cellular Service: A wireless telecommunications service that permits customers to use wireless, mobile telephones to connect, via low-power radio transmission sites called cell sites, either to the public switched network or to other mobile cellular phones.

Cellular Telecommunications: A commercial Low Power Mobile Radio Service bandwidth licensed by the FCC to providers in a specific geographical area in which the radio frequency spectrum is divided into discrete channels which are assigned in groups to geographic cells within a service area and which are capable of being reused in different cells within the service area.

Cellular Telecommunications Facility: Consists of the equipment and structures at a particular site involved in receiving telecommunication or radio signals from mobile radio communications sources and transmitting those signals to a central switching computer which connects the mobile unit with the landbased telephone lines.

Channel: The segment of the radio frequency spectrum to or from an antenna, which carries one signal. An antenna may radiate on many channels simultaneously.

Collocation: Locating wireless telecommunications equipment from more than one provider on a single site. Collocation also means the mounting or installation of an antenna on an existing tower, building, or structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes.

Common Carrier: An entity licensed by the FCC or a state agency to supply local and/or long distance telecommunications services to the general public at established and stated rates.

Communication Equipment Shelter: A structure located at a base station designed principally to enclose equipment used in connection with telecommunications transmissions.

Communication Tower: A guyed, monopole, or self-supporting tower, constructed as a free standing structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure or equipment, containing one or more antennas intended for transmitting and/or receiving television, AM/FM radio, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, or similar forms of electronic communication.

Communications Facility: A land facility supporting antennas and/or microwave dishes that sends and/or receives radio frequency signals. Communications facilities may include structures, towers or accessory buildings.

dBm: Unit of measure of the power level of a signal expressed in decibels above 1 milliwatt.

Directional Antenna: An antenna or array of antennas designed to concentrate a radio signal in a particular area.

Dish Antenna: A dish-like antenna used to link communications sites together by wireless transmission of voice or data. Also called microwave antenna or microwave dish antenna.
 
Electromagnetically Able: The determination that the signal from and to the proposed new antenna will not significantly interfere with the existing signals from and to other facilities or antennas located on the same tower or structure as determined by a qualified radio frequency engineer. The use of available technologies to alleviate such interference shall be considered when making this determination.

Erlang: An international unit created to measure telephone use. One Erlang is equivalent to one caller talking for our hour on one telephone.

Erlang B Calculations: The Erlang B traffic model is used to mathematically relate Busy Hour Traffic (BHT), call Blocking, and the number of Lines in a trunk group. For the purposes of this document, Erlang B Calculations are used to verify Adequate Capacity.

Facility Site: A property, or any part thereof, which is owned or leased by one or more wireless telecommunications facility(s) and where required landscaping is located.

FCC: Federal Communications Commission. The government agency responsible for regulating telecommunications in the United States.

Frequency: The number of cycles completed each second by an electromagnetic wave measured in hertz (Hz).

GHz: Gigahertz. One billion hertz

Grade of Service: GOS is an estimate of customer satisfaction with a particular aspect of service such as noise, echo, or blocking. For the purposes of this document, GOS refers to the percentage of calls that are blocked in the radio portion of the wireless network. A GOS of 98% equates to 2 dropped calls for every 100 attempted calls.

Hertz: (Hz) One hertz is the frequency of an electric or magnetic field which reverses polarity once each second, or one cycle per second.

Location: References to site location shall be the exact longitude and latitude, to the nearest tenth of a second. Bearing or orientation should be referenced to true North.

MHz: Megahertz, or one million hertz.

Microcell: A low power mobile radio service telecommunications facility used to provide increased capacity in high call-demand areas or to improve coverage in areas of weak coverage.

Microwave: High-frequency radio frequency emissions, including UHF and extending to infrared frequencies.

Microwave Antenna: A dish-like antenna manufactured in many sizes and shapes used to link communication sites together by wireless transmission of voice or data.

Monitoring: The measurement, by the use of instruments in the field, of non-ionizing radiation exposure from telecommunications facilities.

Monopole: A single self-supporting vertical pole with no guy wire anchors, usually consisting of a galvanized or other unpainted metal or a wooden pole with below grade foundations.
 
Omnidirectional Antenna: An antenna that is equally effective in all directions and whose size varies with the frequency and gain for which it is designed.

Permit: Embodies the rights and obligations extended by the municipality to an operator to own, construct, maintain, and operate its facility within the boundaries of the municipality.

Personal Communications Services (PCS): Digital wireless telephone technology such as portable phones, pagers, faxes, and computers; generally operates at high frequencies.

Personal Wireless Services: Commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services. These services include: cellular services, personal communications services, specialized mobile radio services, and paging services.

Preexisting Towers and Antennas: Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been issued prior to the effective date of these Zoning Regulations.

Radiated-Signal Propagation Studies or Coverage Plots: Computer generated estimates of the signal emanating, and prediction of coverage, from antennas or repeaters sited on a specific tower or structure. The height above ground, power input and output, frequency output, type of antenna, antenna gain, topography of the site and its surroundings are all taken into account to create these simulations. They are the primary tools for determining whether the telecommunications equipment will provide adequate coverage for that site.

Repeater: A receiver/relay transmitter and antenna, often of relatively low power output, designed to provide service to areas which are not able to receive adequate coverage directly from a base or primary station.

Roof and/or Building Mount Facility: A facility in which antennas are mounted to an existing structure on the roof (including rooftop appurtenances) or a building face.

Scenic View: A scenic view is a wide angle or panoramic field of sight and may include natural and/or human made structures and activities. A scenic view may be from a stationary viewpoint or be seen as one travels along a roadway, waterway, or path. A view may be to a far away object, such as a mountain, or a nearby object, or to Open Space.

Self-Supporting Tower: A communications tower that is constructed without guy wires.

Spectrum: Relating to any transmissions or reception of electromagnetic waves.

Stealth Facility: Any communications facility that is designed to blend into the surrounding environment to the extent that it becomes invisible to the naked eye at or beyond the property line. Examples of stealth facilities may include architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, buildingmounted antennas painted to match the existing structure, and antennas integrated into architectural elements. (See also Alternative Design Tower Structure.)

Structurally Able: The determination that a tower or structure is capable of carrying the load imposed by the proposed new antenna(s) under all reasonable predictable conditions as determined by professional structural engineering analysis.

System: The communications transmission system operated by a telecommunications service provider in the municipality or region.

Telecommunications Provider: An entity authorized by the FCC, the Vermont Public Service Board, or law to provide telecommunications services to individuals or institutions.
 
Temporary Wireless Communication Facility: Any tower, pole, antenna, etc., designed for use while a permanent wireless facility is under construction, or for a special event or conference.

Tower: A vertical structure for mounting antenna(s) that provide telecommunications services. A tower shall also mean any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting FCC-licensed antennas and their associated facilities.

Unlicensed Wireless Services: The offering of telecommunications services using duly authorized devices which do not require individual licenses, but does not mean the provision of direct-to-home satellite services.

View Corridor: A three-dimensional area extending out from a viewpoint. The width of the view corridor depends on the focus of the view. The focus of the view may be a single object, such as a mountain, which would result in a narrow corridor, or a group of objects, such as a downtown skyline, which would result in a wide corridor. Panoramic views have very wide corridors and may include a 360degree perspective. Although the view corridor extends from the viewpoint to the focus of the view, the mapped portion of the corridor extends from the viewpoint and is based on the area where base zone heights must be limited in order to protect the view.

Whip Antenna: A vertical antenna that normally transmits signals in 360 degrees. Whip antennas are typically cylindrical in shape, narrow (less than 6 inches in diameter) and long (often measure 18 inches in height or more).

Wireless Telecommunications Facility: All equipment (including repeaters) and locations of equipment with which a wireless telecommunications provider transmits and receives the waves which carry their services. This facility may be sited on one or more towers or structure(s) owned and permitted by the provider or another owner or entity. This term includes all types of towers defined or described in Section
6.12. This term includes all of the physical facilities defined or described in this section. Consumer model television satellite dishes are not covered by these Zoning Regulations.



6.12.4	Permitted and Prohibited Locations
A Stealth Facility may obtain a Zoning Permit as a conditional use in all zoning districts.

All other Wireless Telecommunications Facilities may obtain a Zoning Permit as a conditional use in the following zoning districts: Residential/Commercial; Commercial; Industrial/Commercial; Village Commercial; and Gateway Commercial. Wireless Telecommunications Facilities (other than Stealth Facilities) are prohibited from all other districts.

Even in districts where they may be located as conditional uses, Wireless Telecommunications Facilities that do not qualify as Stealth Towers may not be sited in any of the following locations:
a)	Within 300 feet horizontally from any property or district listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
b)	Closer than 50 feet horizontally to the boundary of the property on which it is located.
c)	If it is higher than 40 feet, closer than its actual height plus 10 feet horizontally to the boundary of the property on which it is located.
d)	Closer than 300 feet horizontally to any structure existing at the time of the application which is used as either a primary or secondary residence.
e)	Within 100 feet horizontally of any pond, river or perennial stream, and within 50 feet of any intermittent stream.
f)	Within 300 feet horizontally of a public road.
 
g)	Where its height would exceed the average height of the surrounding forest within 200 feet of its base by more than 20 feet, as measured by reference to the expected height of the forest at maturity.
h)	On a ridgeline or hilltop with an elevation of more than 900 feet, at a location where its height would exceed the height of that ridgeline or hilltop, as measured at the nearest point to the facility. Instead, it should be located (assuming that all other criteria are met) sufficiently below the height of the ridgeline or hilltop so that its height does not protrude above the ridgeline or hilltop in its immediate vicinity. This requirement is in addition to the requirements of Section
6.12.8 of these Zoning Regulations.

If located in or near Open Space (i.e., as defined in these Zoning Regulations), the Applicant must demonstrate that the Wireless Telecommunications Facility has been sited to be as unobtrusive as feasible.

The purposes of these siting requirements are to preserve the pattern of development promoted by the various zoning districts; protect aesthetic interests and water quality of the Town; and to provide adequate separation from existing development of what are fundamentally commercial structures.

All distances specified in this section shall be calculated including antennas and other vertical appurtenances. Waivers to the above setback requirements may be granted to encourage antenna collocation on existing towers. The DRB may grant a request for a waiver only if it finds that the waiver will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of Section 6.12, and that it has required other conditions that will secure the objectives of the waived requirements.

6.12.5	Exemptions and Applicability of Other Regulations
This Section (6.12) specifically exempts the following Wireless Telecommunications Facilities: police, fire, ambulance and other emergency dispatch; licensed amateur (ham) radio; citizens band radio; and radio dispatch services licensed by local businesses, provided that the antenna support structure (including any building that forms part of the antenna support structure) does not exceed 65 feet above grade and the attached antenna is no higher than required for reasonable use, or it is a Stealth Facility.  Wireless Telecommunications Facilities exempted from this section under this paragraph must comply with all other applicable provisions of the Richmond Zoning Regulations, Subdivision Regulations, and other bylaws. If the antenna support structure exceeds the heights specified herein, the facilities described in this sub paragraph must comply with this section. No wireless telecommunications facility shall be deemed exempt from this section because it is proposed that said facility share a tower or other structure with such exempt uses.

All facilities subject to this section must comply with all other applicable provisions of the Richmond Zoning Regulations, Subdivision Regulations, and other bylaws, in addition to complying with this section.

6.12.6	Application Requirements for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
An Applicant for all Wireless Telecommunications Facilities must be a personal wireless service provider or FCC licensee, or must provide a copy of its executed contract to provide land or facilities to such an entity, to the Administrative Officer at the time that an application is submitted. A permit shall not be granted for a tower or facility to be built on speculation.

No construction, alteration, modification (including the installation of antennas for new uses) or installation of Wireless Telecommunications Facility shall commence without a Zoning Permit first being obtained from the DRB.

In addition to information otherwise required in these Zoning Regulations, Applicants for all Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall include the following supplemental information:
a)	The name and address of the Applicant, the record landowners and any agents of the landowners or Applicants as well as an Applicant’s registered agent and registered office. If the Applicant is
 
not a natural person, the name and address of the business and the state in which it is incorporated and has its principal office shall be provided.
b)	The name, address and telephone number of the person to be contacted and who is authorized to act in the event of an emergency regarding the structure or safety of the facility.
c)	The names and addresses of the record owners of all abutting property.
d)	A report from qualified engineers and/or licensed land surveyors that:
i.	Describes the facility height, design and elevation.
ii.	Documents the height above grade for all proposed mounting positions for antennas to be collocated on a telecommunications tower or facility and the minimum separation distances between antennas, and that the antennas’ height are no higher than required for the provision of reasonable service.
iii.	Describes the tower’s proposed capacity, including the number, height and type(s) of antennas that the Applicant expects the tower to accommodate.
iv.	In the case of new tower proposals, demonstrates that existing telecommunications sites  and other existing structures, or other structures within 5 miles of the proposed site cannot reasonably be modified to provide adequate coverage and/or adequate capacity to the Town of Richmond. The documentation shall include, for each facility site or proposed site within such radius, the exact location, ground elevation, height of tower or structure, and sufficient additional data to allow the independent reviewer to verify that other locations will not be suitable.  The report shall also demonstrate that the tower’s height is no higher than
required for the provision of reasonable service.
v.	Demonstrates that the Applicant has analyzed the feasibility of using repeaters or micro- cells in conjunction with all facility sites listed in compliance with Section 6.12.6 D. iv. (above) to provide adequate coverage.
vi.	Describes the operating frequency and/or channels, sector orientation and power output per channel for each proposed antenna.
vii.	Includes a written explanation for the use of the proposed telecommunications facility,
including reasons for seeking capacity in excess of immediate needs if applicable, as well as plans for additional development and coverage within the Town.
viii.	Demonstrates the tower’s compliance with structural standards and the Town of Richmond
setbacks for towers and support structures.
ix.	Provides assurance that at the proposed site the Applicant will be in compliance with all FCC rules and regulations, particularly with respect to radio frequency exposure. The DRB may hire independent engineers to perform evaluations of compliance with the FCC regulations, standards and requirements on an annual basis at unannounced times.
x.	Includes other information requested by the DRB that is necessary to evaluate the request.
xi.	Includes an engineer’s stamp and registration number, where appropriate.
xii.	Includes a letter of intent committing the facility owner and his or her successors to permit shared use (collocation) of the facility if additional users agree to reasonable terms and conditions for shared use.
e)	For a facility to be installed on an existing structure, a copy of the Applicant’s executed contract with the owner of the existing structure (to be provided to the Administrative Officer at the time an application is submitted).
f)	To the extent required by the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) as administered by the FCC, a complete Environmental Assessment (EA) draft or final report describing the probable impacts of the proposed facility.
g)	A copy of the application or draft application for an Act 250 permit, if applicable.
h)	Copies of correspondence between the Applicant and all State and Federal regulatory agencies regarding the proposed facility prior to and during the DRB review process.

The permit application shall be signed under the pains and penalties of perjury.
 
6.12.7	Site Plan Requirements for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
In addition to site plan requirements found in Section 5.5.3, site plans for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities subject to this Section 6.12, including applications subject to conditional use review, shall include the following supplemental information:

a)	Location Map: a copy of a portion of the most recent USGS Quadrangle map showing the area within at least a two-mile radius of the proposed facility site.
b)	Vicinity Map showing the entire vicinity within a 2500-foot radius of the facility site, including the facility or tower, topography, public and private roads and driveways, buildings and structures, water bodies, wetlands, landscape features, Historic Sites and habitats for endangered species. It shall indicate the property lines of the proposed facility site parcel and all easements or rights of way needed for access from a public way to the facility.
c)	Proposed site plans of the entire development indicating all Land Development including landscaping, utility lines, guy wires, screening and roads.
d)	Elevations showing all facades and indicating all exterior materials and color of towers, buildings and associated facilities.
e)	Computer generated photo simulations of the proposed facility showing the facility from all public rights-of-way and any adjacent property from which it may be visible. Each photo must be labeled with the line of sight, elevation and with the date taken imprinted on the photograph. The photos must show the color of the facility and method of screening.
f)	In the case of a proposed site that is forested, the approximate average height of the existing vegetation within 200 feet of the tower base.
g)	Construction sequence and time schedule for completion of each phase of the entire project. Plans shall be drawn at a minimum at the scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet.
6.12.8	Collocation Requirements
An application for any new Wireless Telecommunication Facility shall not be approved unless the DRB finds that the facilities planned for the proposed structure cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or structure due to one of the following reasons:

a)	The proposed antennas and equipment would exceed the structural or spatial capacity of the existing or approved tower or facility, as documented by a qualified engineer licensed to practice in the State of Vermont. Additionally, the existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment, at a reasonable cost, to provide coverage and capacity comparable to that of the proposed facility.
b)	The proposed antennas and equipment would cause interference materially impacting the usefulness of other existing or permitted equipment at the existing or approved tower or facility as documented by a qualified engineer, and such interference cannot be mitigated at a reasonable cost.
c)	The proposed antennas and equipment, either alone or together with existing facilities, equipment or antennas, would create excessive radio frequency exposure.
d)	Existing or approved towers and structures cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably or are too far from the area of needed coverage to function reasonably as documented by a qualified engineer.
e)	Aesthetic reasons make it unreasonable to locate the planned telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or building.
f)	There is no existing or approved tower in the area in which coverage is sought.
g)	Other unforeseen specific reasons make it unreasonable to locate the planned telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or building.

Towers shall be designed structurally, electrically and in all respects to accommodate both the Applicant’s antennas and additional antennas when overall permitted height allows.
 
6.12.9	Access Roads and Above Ground Facilities
Where the construction of new facilities subject to this section (6.12) requires construction of, or improvement to, access roads, to the extent practicable, roads shall follow the contour of the land, and be constructed or improved within forest or forest fringe areas, and not in open fields to the extent practicable. Utility or service lines shall be underground. The Town may require closure of access roads to vehicles following facility construction where it is determined that site conditions warrant the same, and where maintenance personnel can reasonably access the facility site on foot.

6.12.10	Tower and Antenna Design Requirements
Proposed facilities shall not unreasonably interfere with the view from any public park, natural scenic vista, historic building or district, major view corridor, named river, or public roadway. Height and mass of facilities shall not exceed that which is essential for its intended use and public safety.
a)	Towers, antennas and any necessary support structures shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through the use of color camouflaging and architectural treatment, except in cases in which the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), state or federal authorities have dictated color. Use of Stealth Design or Alternative Design Structure may be required in visually sensitive locations.
b)	In order to protect public safety and to preserve the scenic character and appearance of the area, the height limit for towers, antennas and tower-related fixtures shall be not more than 20 feet above the average height of the tree line measured within 200 feet of the highest vertical element of the telecommunications facility. Notwithstanding the above, additional height may be approved upon a finding by the DRB that the additional height is necessary in order to provide Adequate Coverage in the Town of Richmond (or to accomplish collocation of facilities) and that the additional height will not cause an undue, adverse visual impact on the scenic character or appearance of the area.
c)	Towers, antennas and any necessary support structures shall be designed to avoid having an Undue Adverse Effect regarding aesthetic impact on scenic Open Space, prominent ridgelines and hilltops. In determining whether a tower’s aesthetic impact would be undue and adverse, the DRB will consider:
i.	the period of time during which the proposed tower would be viewed by the traveling public on a public road;
ii.	the frequency of the view experienced by the traveling public;
iii.	the degree to which the tower would be screened by existing vegetation, the topography of the land, and existing structures;
iv.	background features in the line of sight to the proposed tower that obscure the facility or make it more conspicuous;
v.	the distance of the proposed tower from the view point and the proportion of the facility that is visible above the skyline;
vi.	the sensitivity or unique value of a particular view affected by the proposed tower; vii. significant disruption of a view shed that provides context to a historic or scenic resource.
viii. the provisions of the Richmond Town Plan.
The DRB shall have the authority to impose conditions consistent with the purpose of this section in approving a proposed facility. Furthermore, the DRB may require an Applicant to consider alternative sites, or demonstrate why no such sites are technically feasible.
d)	All buildings and structures accessory to a tower shall meet the minimum setback requirements of the underlying zoning district or setback requirements specified in this section (6.12).
e)	Ground mounted equipment or antennas as well as buildings and structures accessory to a tower shall be screened from view by suitable vegetation, except where a design of nonvegetative screening better complements the architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood. A planted or vegetative screen shall be a minimum of ten feet in depth with a minimum height of six feet and, in the case of towers, shall have the potential to grow to a  height at maturity that will be within 20 feet of the highest point of the tower and its attached antennas. Existing on-site vegetation outside the immediate site for the wireless facility shall be
 
preserved or improved. Disturbance to existing topography shall be minimized unless the disturbance is demonstrated to result in less visual impact on the facility from surrounding properties and other vantage points.

6.12.11	Amendments to Existing Telecommunications Facility Permit
Any material alteration or addition to a Wireless Telecommunications Facility shall require a permit amendment, including when any of the following are proposed:
a)	Change in the number, design or configuration of buildings or facilities permitted on the site; or
b)	Addition or change of any equipment resulting in greater visibility or structural wind loading, or additional height of the tower, including profile of additional antennas, not specified in the original application.

6.12.12	Tower Lighting and Signage; Noise Generated by Facility
Unless required by the FAA, no lighting of towers is permitted. In any case where a tower is determined to need obstruction marking or lighting, the Applicant must demonstrate that it has or will request the least visually obtrusive marking and/or lighting scheme in FAA applications. The Applicant shall submit copies  of required FAA applications. Heights may be reduced to eliminate the need for lighting or another location selected.

No commercial signs or lettering shall be placed on a tower. Signage shall be limited to that required by federal or state regulation.

Noise at the site perimeter from the operation of any machinery or equipment shall be minimized and shall comply with all performance standards of these Zoning Regulations.

6.12.13	Temporary Wireless Communication Facilities
Any telecommunications facility designed for temporary use is subject to the following:
a)	Use of a temporary facility is permitted only if the owner has received a temporary use permit from the Administrative Officer.
b)	Temporary telecommunications facilities are permitted for no longer than five days use in conjunction with a special event.
c)	The maximum height of a temporary facility is 50 feet from grade.
d)	Temporary facilities must comply with all applicable portions of these Zoning Regulations.

6.12.14	Continuing Obligations
It shall be a condition of every permit that the permittee shall annually demonstrate compliance with all FCC standards and requirements regarding radio frequency exposure, and provide the basis for such representations in a filing on January 15 of each year with the Administrative Officer. The DRB may also require the filing of information on an annual or more frequent basis to assure the compliance with permit conditions and these Zoning Regulations.

6.12.15	Facility Removal
Abandoned or unused towers or portions of towers and their facilities shall be removed as follows:
a)	The owner of a facility/tower shall annually, on January 15, file a declaration with the Administrative Officer certifying the continuing safe operation of every facility/tower installed subject to these Zoning Regulations, compliance with the provisions of the permit and compliance with the representations of the permit application. Failure to file a declaration shall mean that the facility/tower is no longer in use and considered abandoned.
b)	Abandoned or unused towers or facilities shall be removed within 180 days of cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the DRB. In the event the tower is not removed within 180 days of the cessation of operations at a site, the Town shall notify the owner and may remove the tower and all associated facilities. Costs of removal shall be assessed against the property or tower owner.
 
c)	The Applicant shall, as a condition of the conditional use permit, provide a financial surety bond payable to the Town of Richmond and acceptable to the DRB and Selectboard to cover the cost of removal of the facility and remediation of the landscape.
d)	The annual declaration must be accompanied by a certificate of insurance and a review and filing fee as established by the Richmond Selectboard. Any annual declaration received after January 15 must be accompanied by an additional late filing fee, plus interest at the legal rate for each day that the filing fee and the penalty remain unpaid.

6.12.16	Maintenance Requirements
The Applicant shall maintain all facilities. Such maintenance shall include, but not be limited to painting, structural integrity and landscaping. In the event the Applicant fails to maintain the facility, the Town of Richmond may, but is not obligated to, undertake such maintenance at the expense of the Applicant or landowner.

6.12.17	Insurance Requirements
The facility owner shall maintain adequate insurance on all facilities. A certificate of insurance must accompany each annual declaration.

6.12.18	Fees
Fees for filing an application to build or alter any facility subject to these Zoning Regulations shall be as established by the Richmond Selectboard, in accordance with the Act (§4440), payable to the municipality. Additional fees may include the reasonable costs of an independent technical assessment of the application that may be incurred during the review and permitting process.



7.	DEFINITIONS

7.1	General
When not consistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future and words in the singular number include the plural number.

The word “shall” is mandatory.  The word “may” is permissive. The word “used” includes the words “arranged,” “designed,” or “intended to be used;” the term “occupied” includes the words “designed,” or “intended to be occupied.”
Unless otherwise defined herein, definitions contained in the Title 24 Vermont State Statutes Annotated, Chapter 117 shall be applicable throughout these Zoning Regulations.

7.2	Specific
For the purpose of these Zoning Regulations, certain words and terms are hereby defined as follows:

Acceptable Management Practices for Silviculture- any forestry activity as defined the Commissioner of Forests, Parks and Recreation including those regulated by the “Acceptable Management Practices for Maintaining Water Quality on Logging Jobs Rule.”

Accessory Dwelling - One accessory dwelling per lot includes efficiency, one-bedroom, or two-bedroom apartment that is located within or appurtenant to, and is clearly subordinate to, a single-family dwelling; is on the same lot as the single-family dwelling; has the facilities and provisions necessary for independent living, including sleeping, food preparation, and sanitation; and that also meets the requirements of these Zoning Regulations (see Section 5.9), in accordance with the Act (§4412).

Accessory Uses or Structures - A use or structure on the same lot with and of a nature which is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure.

Act, The - The Vermont Municipal and Regional Planning and Development Act, Title 24, Chapter 117, Vermont Statutes Annotated (V.S.A.), as subsequently amended. If any provision of these Zoning Regulations are or become inconsistent with the Act, the Act shall control.
 
Adaptive Use - The development of a new use for an older building or for a building originally designed for a special or specific purpose.

Adjoining Property Owner – Owners of properties adjoining the property subject to Land Development, including the owners of properties which would be contiguous to the property subject to Land Development but for the interposition of a road or highway or other public right-of-way.

Administrative Officer – The Administrative Officer administers the Zoning Regulations and shall not permit any Land Development that is not in conformance with these regulations. The term also includes the Interim Administrative Officer and the Assistant Administrative Officer.

Affiliated Ownership or Control - Any legal or equitable title interest to lands held by individuals or entities affiliated with each other for profit or other consideration. A legal or equitable title interest held by an individual’s spouse, civil union partner, natural or adopted children, parents, or siblings, and the spouse or civil union partner of an individual’s parents, children or siblings, shall be presumed to be affiliated ownership unless satisfactory evidence is provided that such person will not derive any profit or other consideration from the contiguous lands.

The following rules shall apply in determination of whether certain types of ownership interests are affiliated:

a)	a stockholder in a corporation which holds the legal or equitable title interest shall be presumed to be affiliated if the stockholder and the stockholder’s spouse, civil union partner, natural or adopted children, parents, and siblings own, control or have a beneficial interest in more than five percent (5%) of the outstanding shares in the corporation

b)	an individual who owns the legal or equitable interest solely as an agent of another, such as a court appointed guardian, a licensed attorney, or similar agency relationship, shall not be deemed affiliated unless the compensation received or other consideration obtained as a result of those duties indicates more than an agency relationship;

c)	a seller or chartered lending institution holding a legal or equitable title interest as security for money loaned to the individual shall not be deemed to be affiliated.

Agriculture - The use of property or structures for common farming-related activities necessary for crop and animal production. A plant or tree nursery shall be deemed an agricultural related activity. This definition means to include the sale of agricultural products or byproducts on agricultural property. See also Accepted Agricultural Practices, Farm Structure.

Alteration, structural - Any change in the supporting or load-bearing members of a building such as loadbearing walls, columns, beams, girders or floor joists, or in the exit facilities, or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height

Amusement Arcade - An indoor or outdoor area, open to the public, that contains coin-operated games, rides, shows, and similar entertainment facilities and devices.

Applicant – person who applies for Zoning Permit on behalf of the property owner. The applicant may be the property owner.

Approved - Sanctioned by the appropriate official as required by law so long as all provisions of these Zoning Regulations are met.

Artist/Crafts Studio - An interior enclosed space where art work and crafts are created then displayed and/or sold by the individual(s) working within the same space without any off-site production or re-sale of products from other locations. This type of activity includes, but is not limited to, the following: painter, sculptor, photographer, musician, and performing artist.

Automobile and/or Marine Sales - The use of any building, land area, or other premise for the display and  sale of new or used automobiles or marine vessels generally but may include light trucks or vans, trailers, or recreation vehicles and including any vehicle preparation or repair work conducted as an accessory use.
 
Automobile Service Station - Any building, land area, or other premises, or portion thereof, used for the retail dispensing or sales of vehicular fuels; servicing and repair of automobiles and light trucks; and including as an accessory use the sale and installation of lubricants, tires, batteries, and similar vehicle accessories. This definition does not include any other uses, such as restaurants, deli’s, car washes, etc. which may only be allowed under separate review and approval under these Zoning Regulations.

Bank - shall mean any financial institution involved in the direct deposit or withdrawal of funds or a structure which houses facilities to deposit or withdraw funds electronically.

Basement – the level, floor or portion of a building that is wholly or partially below ground level. Special types of basement include:

 •	Walkout Basement: a basement that incorporates one or more walls with windows and a door that opens at grade so that a person may “walk out”
•	Daylight Basement: a basement with windows above grade but no door to the outside



Bed and Breakfast - An owner inhabited residential structure with six or fewer rooms for rent by the day or the week.

Bedroom - A room within a dwelling unit used for the primary purpose of sleeping. To qualify as a bedroom, all applicable fire safety codes specific to bedrooms must be met.

Bikeway - A roadway for non-motorized bicycles.

Brewery - a place where fermented or distilled beverages are manufactured, stored, bottled, and sold wholesale or retail in sealed containers for consumption off premises. This establishment may include a tap room, a tasting room, or a retail area as an accessory use

Buffer - Undisturbed naturally occurring vegetation which may be initially created and planted for screening or environmental purposes.

Building - A structure having a roof and used or occupied by persons or animals.

Business, Retail - Building or portion of building where the principal activity is the offering of goods and/or services  at retail cost, or for a rental fee (such as video tape rental).

Business Yard - A business which operates out of a yard which may include structures, indoor and outdoor storage of materials, equipment or vehicles. Customary accessory uses for the business are small office space and vehicle and equipment repair. A majority of the business activity shall take place off-site. No assembly is involved or allowed.

Bylaws - The Town of Richmond Zoning Regulations, Town of Richmond Subdivision Regulations, and any official map adopted under the authority of 24 V.S.A., Chapter 117.

Car wash - Any facility whose principal business is the cleaning and washing of vehicles of any type, or a facility which provides two (2) or more bays for the washing of vehicles by the customer or for hire by the business.

Catering services - Any facility which prepares food for delivery and consumption off the premises.

Cemetery - Property used for the interring of the dead.

CFR - The Code of Federal Regulations is the codification of the general and permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the executive departments and agencies of the Federal Government (www.gpoaccess.gov/cfr).

Child Care Facility - an establishment whose function is the care of children on a regular basis outside the child(ren)s own home for less than 24 hours per day by a person or persons other than the child or children’s own parents or guardians. All regulations from the Vermont Agency of Human Services “Child Care Licensing Regulations” shall be followed.
 
•	Family child care home – A child care facility in which fewer than 11 children are cared for in the caregiver’s own residence, per 24 V.S.A. §4412(5). Family child care homes shall be regulated as in Section 5.11.2 of these regulations.
•	Large Family child care home – a child care facility in which 11 or more children are cared for in the caregivers’ residence. This facility shall be state-registered or licensed, and shall be regulated under Section 5.11.2 of these regulations.
•	Center-based child care facility – Any child-care facility establishment operated as a business or service not in the caregiver’s own residence. Also referred to as a “Day Care Center”.

Commercial Use - Activity involving the sale of goods or services carried out for profit.

Commercial, Multi-use - Activity involving the sale of goods or services carried out for profit in conjunction with two or more types of commercial activities on the same lot.

Communication Use - Establishments and structures furnishing point-to-point communication services, whether by wire or radio, either aurally or visually, including radio and television broadcasting stations, satellite relay stations, telephone communications, radar and the exchange or recording of messages.

Contiguous Lands - Contiguous lands are described as one or more of the following:

a)	Lands which have in common one or more linear parts on any boundary.

b)	Lands which, prior to the Effective Date of these Zoning Regulations, are divided by easements or interests of less than fee simple ownership (other than state or municipal road rights of way) shall be deemed “contiguous”.

Cottage Industry - A commercial, manufacturing, or industrial use which is housed in a single-family dwelling or in an accessory structure to a single-family dwelling, on the same lot as the dwelling. A Cottage Industry is not a Home Occupation

Development - See Land Development.

Directory Sign – A sign with advertises multiple businesses or organizations, whether on not such businesses or organizations are located on the parcel where the sign is located on the parcel where the sign is located.

Distribution Center - An establishment engaged in the receipt, storage, and distribution of goods, products, cargo, and materials, including transshipment by boat, rail air, or motor vehicle.

DRB - Development Review Board.

Drive-through Facility - An establishment that by design, physical facilities, service, or by packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive services, obtain goods, or be entertained while remaining in their motor vehicles.

Driveway – An improved surface for vehicular access to no more than three (3) lots. Dwelling, Detached - A dwelling that is not attached to any other dwelling by any means. Dwelling, Single-Family - A single structure containing one (1) dwelling unit.
Dwelling, Two-Family - A single structure containing two (2) dwelling units.

Dwelling, Multi-Family - A single structure containing three (3) or more separate dwelling units.

Dwelling Unit - a room or group of rooms within a building containing cooking, bathing and sleeping facilities that functions as the living space for a single set of family members or roommates.  A building or structure may be occupied by one, two or multiple dwelling units. The term “dwelling” is also used to refer to a dwelling unit in these regulations.

Educational Facility - Any establishment certified by the Vermont Department of Education, including parochial, private, public and nursery schools, colleges, universities and accessory uses, but specifically excluding commercially operated schools of beauty culture, business, dancing, driving, music and other similar establishments.
 
Effective Date – Date on which Zoning Regulations, including provisions therein, take effect.

Efficiency (or Efficiency Apartment) - a type of dwelling unit in which the functions of the living room, kitchen and bedroom exist in a single room.

Equipment Supply and Rental - The storage, warehousing, and distribution of residential or commercial equipment used in the construction, repair, or maintenance of buildings or property on a retail or rental basis.

Establishment - a business, organization, institution or household

Farm Structure - A building, enclosure, or fence for housing livestock, raising horticultural or agronomic plants or for carrying out other practices associated with accepted agricultural or faming practices, including a silo, as “farming” is defined in state law [10 V.S.A. §6001(22)]. This definition specifically excludes any dwelling for human inhabitation, in accordance with the Act (§4413).

Fitness Facility - an establishment less than 5,000 square feet in size that provides exercise facilities, including but not limited to exercise equipment, game courts, swimming facilities, saunas, and massage rooms, as well as fitness instruction and classes in disciplines including but not limited to yoga and pilates.

Floor Area, Gross - The sum of the gross horizontal areas measured between the exterior faces of exterior walls of the several floors of a building including interior walls, balconies, mezzanines, hallways, stairwells, and including the area of roofed porches, roofed patios and carports having more than one (1) wall, but excluding basements.

Food Processing Establishment - An establishment in which food is processed or otherwise prepared for eventual human consumption but not consumed on the premises.

Foot-candle - The unit of illumination when the foot is the unit of length.

Front Lot Line - See Line, Front Lot.

Frontage - That portion of a lot contiguous to a public or private Road or Highway right of way, or to public water.

Funeral Parlor - an establishment used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and rituals connected therewith before burial or cremation

Garage, Repair - Any building, premises, and land in which or upon which a business, service, or industry involving the maintenance, servicing, repair, or painting of vehicles is conducted or rendered.

Gross Floor Area - See Floor Area, Gross.

Group Home - A residential facility to be operated under state licensing or registration, that serves not more than eight persons, not including caregivers, who have a handicap or disability as defined by the state (9
V.S.A. §4501). In accordance with the Act (24 V.S.A.§4412) a group home shall be considered by right to constitute a permitted single-family residential use of property, unless it is to be located within 1,000 feet of another group home.

Health Care Services - an establishment providing support to medical professionals and their patients, such as medical and dental laboratories, blood banks, oxygen, miscellaneous types of medical supplies and devices, and record and document storage

Height, of a building - the vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished grade of the ground to the highest point of the roof.

Height of a structure - the vertical distance from the average finished grade or the base of the structure, whichever is lower, to the highest point of the structure.

Historic Site – Any site, structure, district or archeological landmark which has been officially included in the National Register of Historic Places and/or the state register of historic places or which is established by testimony of the Vermont Advisory Council on Historic Preservation as being historically significant.
 
Home Occupation - The use of a minor portion of a dwelling unit by a resident thereof for an occupation which is customary in residential areas and does not have an undue adverse effect on the character of the residential area where the dwelling is located, and which meets the requirements of these Zoning Regulations, in accordance with protections provided in the Act (§4412). -

Horticulture - The cultivation of a garden or orchard. See also Agriculture, Accepted Agricultural Practice.

Hospital - A licensed institution providing primary health care services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity, and other physical or mental conditions requiring medical treatment, and including as an integral part of the institution related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities, and training facilities. Hospitals customarily include the retail sale of pharmaceuticals and medical supplies as an accessory use.

Hotel/Motel - A structure containing more than six (6) guest rooms with access usually from a common hallway.

Impervious Surface - An area which significantly restricts or prevents penetration such as but not limited to asphalt paving and concrete surfaces but not including a gravel or grassed surface.

Industrial Use - Any use whose primary activity is the production of goods for wholesale or retail distribution.

Inn or Guest House - A residential structure with more than six rooms offering overnight lodging, and which may serve food and/or alcoholic beverages to guests and to the general public. Access to each room is from the interior.

Institution - An organization established to promote a cause. Furthermore, public and semi-public uses including, but not limited to: colleges, universities, hospitals, churches, membership clubs and private colleges. See Section 5.10.4 .

Interested Person – For purposes of appeals of all decisions under these Zoning Regulations, an Interested Person, as defined under the Act (§4465) includes:

a)	A person owning title to property, or a municipality, or a solid waste management district empowered to condemn it or an interest in it, affected by these Zoning Regulations, who alleges that these Zoning Regulations impose on the property unreasonable or inappropriate restrictions of present or potential use under the particular circumstances of the case.

b)	The Town of Richmond or any municipality that adjoins the Town of Richmond.

c)	A person owning or occupying property in the immediate neighborhood of a property that is subject of any decision or act taken under these Zoning Regulations, who can demonstrate a physical or environmental impact on the person’s interest under the criteria reviewed, and who alleges that the decision or act, if confirmed, will not be in accord with the policies, purposes, or terms of the Richmond Town Plan or these Zoning Regulations.

d)	Any ten persons who may be any combination of voters or real property owners within the Town of Richmond or a municipality adjacent to the Town of Richmond who, by signed petition to the DRB, alleges that any relief requested by a person under these Zoning Regulations, if granted, will not be in accord with the policies, purposes, or terms of the Richmond Town Plan or these Zoning Regulations. The petition to the DRB shall designate one person to serve as the representative of the petitioners regarding all matters related to an appeal.

e)	Any department or administrative subdivision of the State of Vermont owning property or any interest in property within the municipality, and the Vermont Agency of Commerce and Community Development.

Kennel - Any lot or premises on which more than six dogs, cats or household pets are either permanently or temporarily boarded, bred or sold.

Land Development - [For the Flood Hazard Overlay District, the use of the term “Land Development” is replaced by the term “Development” as defined in Section 6.8.4.] The division of a parcel into two or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any building or other structure, or of any mining, excavation, or landfill, and any change in the use of any
 
building or other structure, or land, or extension of use of land. Land Development shall not include maintenance and interior remodeling projects. This exemption does not apply to a structural alteration which results in an exterior addition or enlargement. Land Development shall not include any stairway landings or ramps up to 50 square feet in size providing external access to a building which is built in the agricultural-residential district, provided that the entry ways must be in compliance with all other elements of these Zoning Regulations. For purposes of these Zoning Regulations, the definition of Land Development shall also include administratively approved subdivisions and boundary (lot) line  adjustments, as regulated herein, which are not subject to subdivision review under the Town of Richmond Subdivision Regulations. A Zoning Permit is required for all Land Development, including subdivision of land.

Laundromat - an establishment providing apparel laundering services or machines on the premises for the general public, but does not provide dry-cleaning on or off premises

Light Manufacturing - The processing and fabrication of certain materials and products where no process involved will produce noise, vibration, air pollution, fire hazard, or noxious emission which will disturb or endanger neighboring properties. Light manufacturing includes the production of the following goods: Home appliances; electrical instruments; office machines; precision instruments; electronic devices; timepieces; jewelry; optical goods, musical instruments; novelties; wood products; printed material; lithographic plates; type composition; bookbinding; machine tools; dies and gages; ceramics; apparel; lightweight non-ferrous metal products; plastic goods, pharmaceutical goods; and food products, but not animal slaughtering, curing, nor rendering of fats.

Line, Front Lot - Each boundary between a lot and a public or private Road or Highway right of way contiguous to the lot.

Line, Lot - Each boundary of a lot.

Line, Rear Lot - The line which is opposite and most distant from a front line, or, on an irregular or triangular lot, a line at least ten (10) feet long entirely within the lot, parallel to and furthest distant from the front lot line.

Line, Side Lot - A line connecting a front lot line with a rear lot line.

Loading Space - A space on the same lot as the principal structure, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks and/or semi-trailers.

Lot - A lot means any land in affiliated ownership on the Effective Date of these Zoning Regulations. If a lot (as so defined) is approved for subdivision or re-subdivision by the DRB under the Richmond Subdivision Regulations and a final plat thereof is duly filed for a record in the Richmond Town Clerk’s Office within   one hundred eighty (180) days of such approval (or within ninety days in cases of approvals issued prior to July 1, 2004), each area of land approved for division shall also be a “lot.”  Land which has been  previously identified and properly recorded in surveys or through deeds prior to the Effective Date of the Richmond Zoning Regulations and Subdivision Regulations shall also be deemed to be “Lots.” Lands which are divided by state or municipal road rights of way or surface waters with a drainage area of greater than 10 square miles shall not be deemed contiguous, but shall be deemed to be “Lots”.

Lot, Corner - A Lot situated at the junction of two (2) or more Roads or Highways.

Lot Coverage - That portion of the ground area of a Lot, covered by structures, or, as applicable, by structures, parking areas, walkways, driveways, and areas covered by impervious materials.

Lot, Interior - A lot with no frontage on a public or private road, nor on public water.

Lumber Yard - The storage and distribution of wood products for retail or wholesale, including other products utilized in residential and commercial building, construction and repair.

Main Floor - the floor of primary ingress and egress into a building or structure that is not a basement of any type. May also be referred to as the “street level” or “ground floor”.
 
Mean Annual High Water Level - The highest point on the river bank which experiences annual scouring by high water as indicated by exposed rock, lack of soil or vegetation.

Mobile Home - A pre-fabricated, pre-assembled structure, which can be moved upon public Roads or Highways as a single unit, so designed and so constructed as to permit occupancy thereof as a dwelling unit or sleeping place for one (1) or more persons or for commercial use, and which can have a foundation of wheels, jacks or a regular house foundation. For purposes of flood hazard area regulation, a mobile home is a structure built on a permanent chassis, transported to its site in one or more sections, and affixed to a permanent foundation.

Mobile Home Park - Means any Lot which contains, or is designed, laid out or adapted to accommodate, three or more mobile homes. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to apply to premises used solely for storage or display of mobile homes.

Motel - A building or group of buildings containing guest rooms, usually with access directly from a parking Lot.

Multiple Use Building - A building containing two or more distinct uses.

Municipal Land Use Permit – In accordance with the Act (§4303), municipal land use permits include:

a)	A zoning, subdivision, site plan, or building permit or approval, any of which relate to “Land Development” as defined in these Zoning Regulations that has received final approval from the applicable Town board or officer.

b)	The final official minutes of a meeting that relate to a permit or approval that serve as the sole evidence of the permit or approval.

c)	A Certificate of Occupancy, Certificate of Compliance, or similar certificate issued by the Town that relates to permits and approvals listed above.

d)	An amendment of any document listed above.

Museum - An institution for the acquisition, preservation, study, and exhibition of works of artistic, historical, or scientific value.

New Construction - the construction of structures or filling commenced on or after the Effective Date of these Zoning Regulations, and any subsequent improvements to such structures.

Nonconforming Lot (Parcel) - A lot or parcel that does not conform to the dimensional requirements of these Zoning Regulations, but was in compliance with all applicable municipal bylaws and ordinances prior to the enactment of these Zoning Regulations. This includes a lot or parcel that was improperly authorized as a result of an error by the Administrative Officer.

Nonconforming Structure – A structure, or portion thereof, that does not conform to these Zoning Regulations, but was in compliance with all applicable municipal bylaws and regulations prior to the enactment of these Zoning Regulations. This includes a structure that was improperly authorized as a result of an error by the Administrative Officer.

Nonconforming Use – A use of land or a structure that does not conform to these Zoning Regulations, but did conform to all applicable municipal bylaws, ordinances, and regulations prior to the enactment of the present Zoning Regulations. This includes a use that was improperly authorized as a result of an error by the Administrative Officer.

Nonconformity – A nonconforming use, structure, or lot (parcel).

Office, Business - A building where the management affairs of a business, commercial or industrial organization, or firm are conducted.

Office, Medical - Any establishment where human patients are examined and treated by doctors, dentists or other medical professionals but not hospitalized overnight. Medical office may include as an ancillary use the assembly, fitting, testing and sale of products directly related to the medical service provided in the same establishment.
 
Office, Professional - an establishment used for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry, or like activity. Such office uses have limited contact with the general public. It also does not involve manufacturing, repairing, processing, and retail sales of articles and goods

Open Space - An area or parcel of land unobstructed by man-made facilities except those incidental to recreation or agricultural needs.

Parapet Wall - A low wall extending above a roof.

Parking - The assembling or standing of motor vehicles for relatively temporary periods of time.

Parking Area - An area for the parking of motor vehicles.

Parking, Off-Road or Highway - Parking of motor vehicles off the public rights of way.

Parking Space - The area required by the provisions of these Zoning Regulations for the parking of one (1) motor vehicle.

Pedestrian - A person traveling on foot.
Permanent - Continuing or enduring in the same state, place, or the like without marked change. Personal Service(s) - Services such as hairdressing, barbering, shoe repair, massage, tanning salon Person - An individual, partnership, corporation, association, municipality, and any other incorporated or
nonincorporated entity.

Pharmacy - an establishment where prescription and over-the-counter medications are sold

Planned Unit Development (PUD) - One or more lots to be developed as a single entity according to a   Master Development Plan. If authorized under Section 5.12, a Master Development Plan may have a creative layout, a mix of land uses, and may deviate from bylaw requirements that are otherwise applicable to the area in which it is located with respect to lot size, bulk, or type of dwelling or building, use, density, intensity, lot coverage, parking, required common open space, or other standards

Planned Unit Development (PUD), Residential  A type of Planned Unit Development, to include an area of a minimum contiguous size, as specified by these Zoning Regulations, to be planned, developed, operated, and maintained as a single entity for residential uses, and containing one or more residential clusters

Plat - A scaled drawing showing the relationship of a group of lots to one another and other information required by these Zoning Regulations.

Principal Structure - A building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which the building is situated, and including areas such as garages, carports, and storage sheds which are attached to the principal building.

Private Club - A building and related facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, or group of individuals established for the fraternal, social, educational, recreational, or cultural enrichment of its members and not primarily for profit, nor general public and whose members pay dues and meet certain prescribed qualifications for membership.

Pub – See “Tavern”

Public Water - All natural inland lakes, ponds, rivers and streams within the town of Richmond that are navigable by boat under the laws of the state [10 V.S.A. §1422(4)].

Public Works Specifications - The Town of Richmond’s most recently adopted manual outlining and specifying the requirements for roads, driveways and other such improvements, including water and sewer improvements, which come under jurisdiction of the Town or are made a part of Town approvals.

Rear Lot Line - See Line, Rear Lot.

Recreation Facility - - A establishment greater than 5,000 square feet in size designed and equipped for the conduct of sports and leisure-time activities. Recreation facilities can be indoor or outdoor, as well as a facility or a park.
 
Recreational Vehicle – Any vehicle which is (a) built on a single chassis, (b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a single family dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.

Religious Use - A structure or place in which worship, ceremonies, rituals, and education pertaining to a particular system of beliefs are held. In accordance with the Act (§4413), a religious use or facility also includes convents and parish houses.

Renewable Energy Resources - Energy available for collection or conversion from direct sunlight, wind, running water, organically derived fuels including wood, agricultural sources, waste materials, waste heat and geothermal sources.

Required Agricultural Practice – any farming activity as defined by the “Required Agricultural Practices Rule” developed by the Vermont Agency of Agriculture, Food and Markets pursuant to Act 64.

Research Laboratory - An establishment or other facility for carrying on investigation in the natural, physical, or social sciences, which may include engineering and product development.

Residential Use - residential use includes dwelling units and those uses that are associated with dwelling units such as owner or tenant storage, parking, laundry, common space or common land owned or used by tenants or owners for private use of said tenants or owners.

Restaurant, Fast-Food/Take-Out - An establishment whose principal business is the preparation and sale of foods or beverages, for consumption either on or off the premises, and whose operation is characterized  by 1) food and/or beverages sold in a form ready for consumption, 2) insufficient seating facilities within the restaurant building for the volume of food sold, and 3) consumption designed to take place outside the confines of the restaurant, which may include ordering and pickup of food from an automobile.

Restaurant, Standard - An establishment where food and drink are prepared, served, and consumed primarily within the principal building.

Retail Sales - Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods.

Retirement Community - A residential community providing housing for the elderly (one resident in each unit being 60 or older) consisting of not more than 100 independent living units (in the form of buildings containing multi-family, two-family or single-family dwellings, common facilities including dining facilities, primarily for the use of the retirement home residents, and a health center which may include facilities of the type offered in a group home.

Road or Highway - A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a Road or Highway, road titled to town in simple fee, town rights-of-way, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, or otherwise. These zoning regulations specify, in particular instances, whether a public or private road or highway is involved.

Road or Highway, Center Line of - The true center line of the right of way of a Road or Highway.

Sewer System, Community - Sewer system serving more than two users.

Setback - The distance from a Lot Line or, if applicable, the center line of the Road or Highway right of way, to the edge of any structure on the Lot, including the building footprint, edge of deck, cantilevered areas, but not including the roof overhang. However, the setback provisions of these Zoning Regulations do not apply to fences or signs outside of a road right-of-way, except where specifically provided.

Shoreline District: The area along both sides of the Winooski and Huntington Rivers, the Oxbows, Gillette Pond, and Lake Iroquois, which lies within fifty (50) feet of the Mean Annual High Water Level. The fiftyfoot measurement shall be made perpendicular to the tangent of the riverbank.

Side Lot Line - See Line, Side Lot.

Sign - Any words, lettering, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, devices, designs, pictures, symbols or trade marks by which anything is made known, such as are used to designate a firm, an association, a
 
corporation, a business, a service or a commodity or product, or any type of publicity, whether placed on natural objects or on a building, fence or other man-made structure, which are visible from any public road right of way.

Sign Area - The total area enclosed by uprights, poles, or braces in or upon the ground.

Sign, Projecting - A sign which is attached directly to the building wall.

Sign, Roof - A sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet wall of a building or structure.

Sign, Wall - Any sign painted on, attached to, or erected against the wall of a building or structure with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the plane of the wall.

Silviculture - The development and/or maintenance of a forest or wooded preserve.

Single-family Dwelling – any building or structure in which a household resides that contains sleeping facilities and is not otherwise classified as a “public building” as defined in Title 20, 2730(a) or as a condominium or multiple unit dwelling as defined in Title 20, 2729(d).

Site Plan – A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensions, the boundaries of a site and the location of all buildings, structures, uses, and illustrations or drawings of principal development features proposed for a specific parcel or parcels of land, including parking, landscaping, roads and driveways, drainage, wetlands, floodplain, etc.

Storage, Indoor - The keeping, in an enclosed area, of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than twenty-four (24) hours.

Storage, Outdoor - The keeping, in an un-enclosed area, of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than twenty-four (24) hours.

Structural Alteration - Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.

Structure - An assembly of materials for occupancy or use, including, but not limited to, a building, mobile home or trailer, sign, wall or fence, except a wall or fence on an operating farm. The term Structure also includes liquid and gas storage tanks that are principally above ground. Unless otherwise specifically provided, (1) the term Structure does not include parking areas and driveways, (2) for purposes of determining setbacks, the term Structure does not include fences, except where specifically provided, and
(3) for the determination of setbacks, septic systems shall not be considered structures and the setbacks
shall be dictated by state law.  See also Mobile Home, Recreational Vehicle.

Substantial Damage – Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

Tavern - Also known as “Pub”. An establishment used primarily for the  serving of liquor by the drink to the general public and where food or packaged liquors may be served or sold only as accessory to the primary use.

Theater - A building or part of a building devoted to showing motion pictures or for dramatic, dance, musical, or other live performances.

Travel Trailer - Any vehicle (whether designed to be towed by another vehicle or self-propelling) designed to travel upon roads and so designed and constructed as to permit occupancy thereof as a dwelling unit or sleeping place for one (1) or more persons seasonally or for commercial use seasonally, having no other foundation than wheels or jacks.

Trip End - Each time a vehicle comes to or leaves a site it is a trip end.

Undue Adverse Effect – An effect or impact which is substantial or material. In making a determination of undue adverse impact or effect, the DRB may consider any factors it deems relevant under the applicable section of these regulations where the term is being used, including but not limited to, the nature of the project’s surroundings, compatibility with the project’s surroundings, whether the project violates a clear
 
written community standard in a municipal bylaw or regulation, or in the Town Plan, whether the project’s applicant has failed to take generally available mitigating steps which a reasonable person would take to minimize the impact, in the case of Section 5.6.1(b), the purpose or purposes of the zoning district in which the project is located and the specifically stated policies and standards of the Town Plan and, in the case  of traffic issues, safety considerations and resulting levels of service.

Use - Any activity taking place upon land and/or in structures.

Use - permitted - A use allowed in a Zoning District upon issuance of a Zoning Permit.

Veterinary Clinic -  An establishment intended primarily for the medical and surgical treatment of domestic animals including the short-term boarding of animals while receiving treatment. Allowable accessory uses include pet grooming and the retail sale of pet supplies.


Village Scale - A style of development in which buildings resemble in size and character existing village single- family homes, and in which pedestrian accessibility is an important feature.

Warehouse Use - A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials, which may also be made available to the general public for a fee.

Water System, Community - Water System serving more than two users.

Wetlands - Means those areas that are inundated by surface or groundwater with a frequency sufficient to support vegetation or aquatic life that depend on saturated or seasonally saturated soil conditions for growth and reproduction. Such areas include but are not limited to marshes, swamps, sloughs, potholes, fens, river and lake overflows, mud flats, bogs and ponds, but excluding such areas as grow food or crops in connection with farming activities.

Wholesale Trade - Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users; to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals.

Yard - An area between a lot line and a line parallel to a Lot Line at a distance from such Lot Line equal to the required setback for a principal structure.

Yard, Front - An area between the Front Lot Line and a line parallel to the front Lot Line at a distance from such front Lot Line equal to the required front yard setback for a principal structure.

Zoning District - A land area or land areas as defined by the Zoning District Maps.

Zoning District Maps - The maps of the Town dated 1996 dividing the Town into the Zoning Districts described in Section 2, the originals of which are in the Richmond Town Clerk’s Office; copies of the Zoning District maps are attached as Appendix A and B.

Zoning Permit - A permit issued by the Administrative Officer as described in Section 5 and elsewhere in these Zoning Regulations.





8.	ADMINISTRATION, APPEALS AND ENFORCEMENT

8.1	Administrative Officer
The Administrative Officer, and an Acting Administrative Officer to serve in the Administrative Officer’s absence, shall be appointed by the Richmond Selectboard from nominations submitted by the Richmond Planning Commission, in accordance with the Act (§4448). The Administrative Officer may be removed for cause at any time by the Selectboard after a hearing and consultation with the Planning Commission. The Acting Administrative Officer shall serve at the pleasure of the Selectboard.
 
The Administrative Officer shall administer these Zoning Regulations literally and shall not have the power to permit any Land Development which is not in conformance with these Zoning Regulations.


8.2	Development Review Board (DRB)
The Selectboard shall establish the number of seats on the DRB in accordance with the Act (§4460). Each term shall be for three (3) years and no more than three (3) terms shall expire in any one year. During March of each year the Selectboard shall appoint new members or re-appoint existing members. The Selectboard may also appoint alternates to serve in the event that one or more members are unable to serve in a particular proceeding. The DRB shall meet as required and shall operate under the authority granted under the Act [§4460(e)] and these Zoning Regulations. A member may be removed by the Selectboard for just cause after a public hearing duly warned and held.


8.2.1	Organization and Meetings - The DRB shall elect a chair from its membership, shall appoint a secretary and shall adopt rules of procedure and rules of ethics with respect to conflicts of interest for the conduct of its affairs. A quorum shall be not less than a majority of the members of the DRB, and a concurring vote of a majority of the DRB shall be necessary to affect an order. Meetings shall be at the call of the chair or a majority of the members, and at such other regular times as it may determine. Majorities are of all members, not just those present at a meeting. All meetings of the DRB, except for deliberative and executive sessions, shall be open to the public in accordance with Vermont’s Open Meeting Laws. The Officers of the DRB may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of material germane to any issue within the preview of these Zoning Regulations.

8.2.2	Responsibilities - The DRB shall be authorized to:
a)	To hear and decide access approval for lots lacking required frontage on public or private roads or public waters.
b)	To hear and decide applications for Site Plan Approval required by the terms of these Zoning Regulations.
c)	To hear and decide applications for Conditional Use Approval required by the terms of these Zoning Regulations.
d)	To hear and decide applications for Planned Unit or Planned Residential Development as allowed or required by the terms of these Zoning Regulations.
e)	. To hear and decide appeals of any decision or act of the Administrative Officer under these Zoning Regulations, including DRB referrals and the issuance or denial of Zoning Permits, Certificates of Occupancy and notices of violation.
f)	To hear and decide appeal for a variance from the strict application of these Zoning Regulations.
g)	To receive testimony under oath and make such studies and surveys as are required to carry out the duties herein outlined.
h)	To request information or opinions from the Planning Commission and/or the Chittenden County Regional Planning Commission relative to such application.
i)	To request information or opinions from any civil or administrative officer of the municipality or any other person or persons considered expert on the matter before the DRB.
j)	To attach such requirements and conditions to its approvals as may be necessary to carry out the intent and purposes of these Zoning Regulations.
k)	To present to the Planning Commission such suggestions for amendment of these Zoning Regulations as it deems necessary to clarify the intent and purpose or improve any section, article, or paragraph on which the DRB has occasion to rule.

8.2.3	Public Hearing Notice Requirements - All public hearings of the DRB as required under these Zoning Regulations and the Act shall be warned in accordance with the Act (§4464):
a)	Public hearings for conditional uses, Planned Unit Development and Planned Residential Development, appeals, and variances shall be given not less than 15 days notice in advance of the hearing date by publication of the date, place and purpose of the hearing in a newspaper of general
 
circulation within the Town; by posting the same information in three (3) or more public places within the municipality, including posting by the Applicant on the subject property within view of the nearest public right-of-way; and by written notification to the Applicant, and to all property owners adjoining the property subject to development without regard to public rights-of-way.
b)	Public notice for site plan and other development review hearings shall be given not less than seven
(7) days prior to the hearing date and, at minimum, shall include the posting of the date, place and purpose of the hearing in three (3) or more public places within the Town, in
conformance with Vermont’s Open Meeting Law [1 V.S.A. §312(c)(2)], and written notification to the Applicant, and to all property owners adjoining the property subject to development, without regard to public rights-of-way.
c)	The notification for a public hearing shall include a description of the proposed project, and be accompanied by information that clearly informs the recipient where additional information may be obtained, and that participation in the hearing process is a prerequisite to the right to take any subsequent appeal.
d)	The Applicant shall be required to bear the cost of public warning, and the cost and responsibility of notifying adjoining property owners. The Applicant shall provide a list of names and addresses of those adjoining property owners. The Applicant shall demonstrate proof of delivery to adjoining property owners either by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by written notice hand delivered or mailed to the last known address, supported by a sworn certificate of service.
e)	No defect in the form or substance of any public notice required under this section shall invalidate the action of the DRB where reasonable efforts have been made to provide adequate posting and notice,

8.2.4	Public Hearings - The DRB shall conduct public hearings in accordance with the Act (§§4461- 4464):
a)	The DRB may examine or cause to be examined any property, maps, books or records bearing upon the matters concerned in the proceeding, may require the attendance of any person having knowledge in the premises, and may administer oaths, take testimony and require proof material for its information.
b)	Opportunity shall be provided for each person wishing to achieve status as an Interested Person, for purposes of participation or appeal under Section 8.4, to demonstrate that the criteria for achieving such status are met. The DRB shall keep a written record of the name, address and participation of each of these persons.
c)	Any person can participate in the public hearing. However, appeals are limited to Interested Persons.
d)	The DRB may recess the proceedings on any application pending submission of additional information, and should close evidence promptly after all parties have submitted requested information.

8.2.5	Decisions - In accordance with the Act (§4464), all decisions of the DRB shall be issued within 45 days after the date of hearing adjournment. Failure to issue a decision within this period shall be deemed approval and shall be effective on the 46th day, provided, however, that for a “deemed approval” to be effective, the Applicant must seek court affirmation of the applicability of this remedy by direct appeal to the Environmental Court. In addition:
a)	Decisions shall be issued in writing and shall separately state findings of fact, to include a statement of the factual bases on which the DRB has made its conclusions, and a statement of conclusions of law related to applicable review standards, based on the evidence presented.
b)	Decisions shall also include a statement of the time within which an appeal may be taken to the Environmental Court under Section 8.4.6.
c)	In rendering a decision in favor of the applicant, the DRB may attach additional conditions and safeguards as it deems necessary to implement the purposes of the Act, these regulations, and the Richmond Town Plan then in effect. Such conditions may include the following:
i	For the purpose of this Section, the Term “Security” shall mean a performance bond issued by either a bonding or surety company approved by the Town’s Selectboard or issued by the owner with security acceptable to the Town’s Selectboard or an escrow or letter of credit
 
arrangement acceptable to the Town’s Selectboard, in each case securing to the Town the completion of the required improvements for which the Security is supplied, their required maintenance and site restoration or remediation, as provided below in (iii). In the event of non-performance, the bonding or surety company, or the Town, as the case may be, may complete the required improvements and perform the maintenance, to the extent of the Security, and may enter onto the owner’s property for such purposes.
ii	The DRB may require that no Zoning Permit, except for any permits that may be required for infrastructure construction, may be issued for approved Land Development unless the required Roads and Highways and improvements on or in those Roads and Highways, parking areas, stormwater facilities, sewer and water systems, and other required infrastructure improvements (including those anticipated to be dedicated to the Town and those anticipated to remain private) have been satisfactorily installed in accordance with the approval decision, and these regulations, and as-built plans submitted by a registered professional engineer.
iii	In lieu of the condition in (ii) above, the DRB may require, prior to commencement of any Land Development, Security in an amount sufficient to cover the full cost of required Roads and Highways, improvements on or in those Roads and Highways, parking areas, stormwater facilities, water and sewer systems, and other required infrastructure improvements, submission of as-built plans by a registered professional engineer, the maintenance of all forgoing improvements for a period of two years after submission to and approval by the Administrative Officer of as-built plans, and also including restoration or remediation in the event the applicant abandons or otherwise fails to complete the project or required infrastructure improvements, as such full cost is estimated by the DRB or by such Town departments or officials as the DRB may designate. Such security shall secure to the Town completion of such required improvements within three years of the start of construction of the first of such required improvements and the maintenance of such required improvements for such period of two years after completion of the last of such required improvements.
iv	The DRB may also require, prior to commencement of any Land Development, Security in an amount sufficient to cover the full cost of any required landscaping, screening, buffers, and site restoration, adequate stabilization, and protection of public facilities that may be affected by the project, and maintenance of all the foregoing for a period of two years after completion, as such full cost is estimated by the DRB or such municipal departments or officials as the DRB may designate. Such security shall secure the Town the completion of all such required improvements within three years from the start of installation of the first such required improvements and their maintenance for a period of two years after completion of the last of such required improvements.
v	The time periods for completion in (iii) and (iv) above may be extended by the DRB for an additional 3 years with the consent of the land owner.
vi	The Security required by (iii) and (iv) above may be by one consolidated instrument, or by separate instruments.
vii	Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any required improvements, the  applicant shall reimburse the Town within 30 days of invoice for the Town’s engineering, legal, and other professional fees related to the inspection of the work, preparing reports to the Town, and other related activities. This provision shall be deemed a condition of every approval whether or not expressly stated in the approval.
d)	All decisions of the DRB shall be sent by certified mail to the applicant, or appellant. Copies of the decision shall also be mailed to every person or body appearing and having been heard at the hearing, and shall be filed with the Administrative Officer and the approval or notice of approval filed with the Richmond Town Clerk as part of the public records of the municipality.
e)	Any approval granted by the DRB for the project shall not be personal to the applicant, but shall run with the land. Any approval shall expire 24 months from the date of the final approval unless a valid Zoning Permit has been obtained, or the DRB determines at a warned public hearing that substantial commencement of the project has begun or that the work, time and expenditures invested in the project indicates a good faith intent to presently commence upon the project. The
 
DRB may grant an extension of up to 12 months for good cause, if a request for extension was made before the end of the 24-month period after the final approval.

8.3	Violations and Enforcement

8.3.1	Violations - The commencement or continuation of any Land Development that is not in conformance with these Zoning Regulations shall constitute a violation. All violations shall be pursued in accordance with the Act (§§4451, 4452). Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. The Administrative Officer shall institute in the name of the Town of Richmond any appropriate action, injunction or other proceeding to enforce the provisions of these Zoning Regulations, including conditions of approval. All fines imposed and collected for violations shall be paid over to the Town.

8.3.2	Notice of Violation – Any person who violates these Zoning Regulations shall be fined not more than $100.00 for each offense. No action may be brought under this section unless the alleged offender has had at least seven (7) days’ warning notice by certified mail, as provided in the Act (§4451). The warning notice shall state that a violation exists, that the alleged offender has an opportunity to cure the violation within the seven days, and that the alleged offender will not be entitled to an additional warning notice for a violation occurring after the seven days. An action may be brought without the seven-day notice period and opportunity to cure if the alleged offender repeats the violation after the seven-day period and within the next succeeding 12 months. In default of payment of the fine, the person, the members of any partnership, or the principal officers of the corporation shall each pay double the amount of the fine. Each day that a violation is continued shall constitute a separate offense.

8.4	Appeals and Variances

8.4.1	Appeals to the Development Review Board (DRB) – In accordance with the Act (§4465), an Interested Person may appeal any decision or act taken by the Administrative Officer, or failure to act within a required period, by filing a notice of appeal with the secretary of the DRB or with the Town Clerk if no such secretary has been elected. If the appeal is taken with respect to a decision or act of the Administrative Officer, the notice of appeal must be filed within fifteen days of the date of such decision or act, and a copy of the notice of appeal shall be filed with the Administrative Officer.

8.4.2	Notice of Appeal - Such notice of appeal shall be in writing and shall include the name and address of the appellant, a brief description of the property with respect to which the appeal is taken, a reference to the regulatory provisions applicable to that appeal, the relief requested by the appellant, including any request for a variance from one or more provisions of these Zoning Regulations, and the alleged grounds why such requested relief is believed proper under the circumstances.

8.4.3	Hearing on Appeal – The DRB shall warn and hold a public hearing on a notice of appeal within 60 days of its filing, in accordance with Section 8.2.3, and as required under the Act (§4468). In accordance with the Act [§4470(a)], the DRB may reject an appeal or request for consideration without hearing, and render a decision within 10 days of the filing of a notice of appeal if it determines that the issues raised by the appellant have been decided in an earlier appeal or are based on substantially or materially the same facts raised by or on behalf of the appellant. All appeal hearings shall be open to the public, and the rules of evidence applicable to these hearings shall be the same as the rules of evidence that apply to contested cases in hearings before administrative agencies (10 V.S.A. §810). Any Interested Person may appear in person or be represented by an agent or attorney at the hearing.

8.4.4	Decisions on Appeal – A decision on appeal shall be rendered no later than 45 days after the date of hearing adjournment, in accordance with Section 8.2.5.
 
8.4.5	Variances - In accordance with the Act (§4469), on appeal from a decision of the Administrative Officer, the DRB may grant variances and render a decision in favor of the appellant only if all the following facts are found, and the findings are specified in its decision:

a)	That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of Lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions, and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of these Zoning Regulations in the neighborhood or Zoning District in which the property is located.
b)	That because of these physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of these Zoning Regulations and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property.
c)	That the unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant.
d)	That the variance, if authorized, shall not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use of development of adjacent property, reduce access to renewable energy resources, nor be detrimental to the public welfare.
e)	That the variance, if authorized, shall represent the minimum variance that shall afford relief and shall represent the least deviation possible from these Zoning Regulations and from the Town Plan.

Variances for Land Development (as defined in Section 6.8.3) within the Flood Hazard Overlay District shall follow the requirements for this section. In rendering a decision in favor of an appellant under this section, the DRB may attach such conditions to the variance as it may consider necessary and appropriate under the circumstances to implement the purposes of these Zoning Regulations, the Richmond Town Plan, and the Act.

8.4.6	Appeals to Environmental Court - Any Interested Person who has participated in a regulatory proceeding under these Zoning Regulations may appeal a decision of the DRB, or an approval resulting from the failure of the DRB to act within the required 45-day period, within 30 days of such decision to the Vermont Environment Court, as provided in the Act (§§4449, 4471).

a)	“Participation” in a DRB proceeding shall consist of offering, through oral or written testimony, evidence of a statement of concern related to the subject of the proceeding.
b)	A copy of the notice of appeal filed with the Environmental Court shall be sent to the Richmond Town Clerk, or the Administrative Officer if so designated, who shall supply a list of Interested Persons to the appellant within five (5) working days of receipt of the notice. Upon receipt of the list, the appellant shall, by certified mail, provide a copy of the notice of appeal to every Interested Person. If one or more of those persons are not then parties to the appeal, upon motion they shall be granted leave by the court to intervene.
c)	If an appeal is taken to Environmental Court, a Zoning Permit shall not take effect until the Environmental Court rules in accordance with 10 V.S.A. §8504 on whether to issue a stay, or until the expiration of 15 days, whichever comes first.

8.4.7	Finality - In accordance with the Act (§4472), upon the failure of any Interested Person to appeal an act of the Administrative Officer or DRB, all Interested Persons affected shall be bound by that decision or act, and shall not thereafter contest, directly or indirectly, the decision or act, or any proceeding to enforce such decision or act.



8.5	Recording Requirements

8.5.1	Within 30 days of the issuance of a Municipal Land Use Permit or notice of violation, the Administrative Officer shall deliver either the original, a legible copy, or a notice of the permit or notice to the Richmond Town Clerk for recording in the land records of the Town, as generally
 
provided in 24 V.S.A. §1154(c), and file a copy in the Town Office in a location where all Municipal Land Use Permits shall be kept, as required under the Act [§4449(c)]. The Applicant may be charged recording fees.

8.5.2	The Administrative Officer shall also maintain a record of all permits, elevation certificates, floodproofing certifications and variance actions issued for Land Development within the Flood Hazard Overlay District.

8.6	Fee Schedule
In accordance with the Act (§4440), the Richmond Selectboard shall establish a schedule of fees to be charged in administering these Zoning Regulations, with the intent of covering the Town’s administrative costs; and establish procedures and standards for requiring Applicants to pay for the reasonable costs of independent technical reviews of their applications.

8.7	Availability of Documents
In accordance with the Act (§4445), copies of these Zoning Regulations, other related municipal bylaws and ordinances, and the Richmond Town Plan shall be made available to the public during normal business hours in the Richmond Town Clerk’s office.

8.8	Amendments of Statutes Referenced Herein
Certain provisions of the Act in effect as of the Effective Date of these regulations are incorporated in substance or verbatim as sections or subsections of these regulations. If any such regulatory or statutory referenced provision of the Act is amended after the Effective Date of these regulations, the corresponding section or subsection of these regulations shall be deemed automatically amended to conform with the language of such amendment of the Act.
 

 


A

Accessory Dwelling...................................41, 80
Accessory Structure ...............................42, 80
Act, The	80
Adaptive Use of Existing Structures	37
Administration, Appeals And Enforcement	90
Administratively Created Lots	4
Agricultural / Residential District (A/R)	7
Agricultural Practices ................................3, 80 Amendment or Repeal of Sections	1
Appeals and Variances	93
Application of Zoning Regulations	1
Availability of Documents
.......................................95

B

Boundary Adjustments
.............................................41
Business Yard
..........................................................82

C

Certificates of Occupancy
.....................................31
Commercial District (C)
...........................................17
Conditional Use Review
..........................................34
Conflicting Ordinances or Regulations
......................1
Contiguous Lands
...................................................82
Contiguous Lots - Merger
.....................................24
Cottage Industries
..................................................36
Curb Cuts
.................................................................24

D

Day Care Center
....................................................82
Day Care Home
..................................................42, 82
Definitions.............................................................
...80
 
Index
Development Review Board	90
Driveway Requirements	51
E
Existing Small Lots	24
Exterior Lighting	27
Extraction of Earth Resources	35
F
Fee Schedule	95
Flood Hazard Overlay District	53
Forestry (Silvicultural) Practices ......................3, 80
G
Gateway Commercial District (G)	13
Group Home ......................................................42, 83
H
High Density Residential District (HDR)	8
Home Occupation ..............................................42, 83

I

Industrial / Commercial District (I/C)
...................... 19
Interested Person................................................ 35, 84

L

Land Capability
......................................................... 3
Land Development............................................... 1, 84
Legal Status of the Regulations
................................. 1
Lots with no frontage
............................................... 24

M

Mobile Home Park District (MHP)
......................... 21
Mobile Homes and Travel Trailers
.......................... 51
Multiple Use of Lots
................................................ 24

N

Noise
........................................................................ 26
 

Richmond Zoning Regulations	108	Effective August 11, 2020
 
Nonconforming Lot
........................................... 24, 86
Nonconforming Structure
.................................. 25, 86
Nonconforming Use
.......................................... 26, 86

P

Parking and Loading
................................................ 47
Pedestrian and Bike Ways
....................................... 51
Permit appeals.....................................................
... 30
Permit application process
....................................... 29
Permits - Amendments
.......................................... 31
Permits - Misrepresentations
................................ 31
Permits - process after issuance
............................... 31
Planned Residential Development
........................... 43
Planned Unit Development
...................................... 43
Public Facililties and Utilities
............................... 42
Public Hearings
...................................................... 91
Public Works Specifications
.............................. 24, 87
Purpose of Zoning Regulations
................................. 1

R

Recording Requirements
......................................... 94
Required Frontage
................................................... 24
Residential / Commercial District (R/C)
................. 10

S

Seasonal Dwelling
.................................................. 42
Setback Modifications
............................................. 25
 
Severability of the Regulations
.................................. 1
Shoreline Protection Overlay District
...................... 51
Signs
........................................................................ 38
Silvicultural Practices
........................................ 3, 80
Site Plan Review
...................................................... 32
Special Zoning Regulations
..................................... 47
Steep Slopes
............................................................. 68
Subdivision Review
................................................. 32
 




Richmond Zoning Regulations	109	Effective August 11, 2020
 

Swimming Pools	51
T
Taller Structures	51
Temporary Structure	42
U
Undue Adverse Effect	89
Use Index (Summary Table)	4
Uses and Exemptions for Districts	3
V
Village Commercial District (V/C)	15
Violations and Enforcement	93
W
Water Supply Source Protection Area	68
Wetlands ............................................................68, 89
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities	68
Z
Zoning Administrator	90
Zoning District Map	3
Zoning Districts	2




































Richmond Zoning Regulations	110	Effective August 11, 2020
 
Appendix A1

INSERT REDUCED COPY OF TOWN ZONING DISTRICT MAP
As Amended April 27, 2009
 
Appendix A2

INSERT REDUCED COPY OF VILLAGE AREA ZONING DISTRICT MAP
As Amended April 27, 2009
 
Appendix B

INSERT REDUCED COPY OF OFFICIAL SHORELINE PROTECTION OVERLAY MAP
 

Appendix C

INSERT REDUCED COPY OF OFFICIAL ROAD MAP
 

Appendix D

INSERT REDUCED COPY OF JOLINA COURT ZONING DISTRICT WITH SETBACKS MAP
 

 







Subdivision	Regulations



Adopted	May 12, 1982

Amended	August 18, 1986
Amended	February 9, 1998

Last Amended: April 27, 2009
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009




 
Table of Contents
 


Page
 
Article I. Title, Purpose, and Authorization …………………………………………..……………......	1
100	Title ……………………………………………………………………………………………….	1
110	Authority and Intent ……………………………………………………………………………..	1
120	Purpose ………………………………………………………………………………………….	1
130	Applicability…………………………………………………………………………………….…	2
140	General Procedure ………………………………………………………………………………	2
Article II. Subdivision Sketch Plan…………………………………………………………………………	2
200      Purpose and Procedure ………………………………………………………………………….      2
210	Sketch Plan Requirements ……………………………………………………………………	3
Article III. Preliminary Subdivision………………………………………………………………………	3
300      Purpose ……………………………………………………………………………………………..    3
310   Preliminary Subdivision Application Submission Requirements ……………………………...   3 320      Field Markers …………………………………………………………………………………….…    5
330      Preliminary Subdivision Public Hearing ………………………………………………………….    5
340      Action on Preliminary Subdivision………………………………………………………………..     5

Article IV. Final Subdivision…………………………………………………………………………………. 6 400      Purpose……………………………………………………………………………………………...    6
410      Final Subdivision Application ……………………………………………………………………..    6
420      Final Subdivision Application Submission Requirements ……………………………………..    6
430      Public Hearing for Final Subdivision Application ……………………………………………….    8
440      Action on Final Subdivision Application ………………………………………………………….   8

Article V. Planning Standards ……………………………………………………………………………… 9 500      General Planning Standards ……………………………………………………………………..    9

Article VI. Required Improvements and Design Standards …………………………………………….. 10 600     Roads………………………………………………………………………………………………… 10
610      Lot Layout……………………………………………………………………………………………  12
620      Pedestrian and Bicycle Access……………………………………………………………………  12
630  Outdoor Lighting…………………………………………………………………………………….  12 640  Trees, Shrubs, and Landscaping ………………………………………………………………..   12 650  Drainage and Fill……………………………………………………………………………………  13 660  Water Supply and Wastewater Disposal Systems ……………………………………………..  13 670     Utilities……………………………………………………………………………………………….  14
680      Phasing ……………………………………………………………………………………………..  14

Article VII. General Requirements…………………………………………………………………………. 14 700	Application Fees ……………………………………………………………………………	14
701      Legal Data ………………………………………………………………………………………….   15
702      Continuing Maintenance Requirements………………………………………………………….  15
703      Association of Owners …………………………………………………………………………..     15
704 Waivers ……………………………………………………………………………………………..  15 705	Filing of Final Plat and Expiration Dates ……………………………………………………	15
706	Revisions……………………………………………………………………………………………	16
707	Effect of Final Approval ……………………………………………………………………………	16
708      Conditions to All Final Approvals………………………………………………………………….  16

Article VIII. Miscellaneous…………………………………………………………………………………... 18 800      Decisions and Administration……………………………………………………………………… 18
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009






810	


Severability      ………………………………………………………………………………………..	Page

21
820	Enforcement and Penalties ……………………………………………………………………..	21
830	Saving      Provision………………………………………………………………………………….	21
840	Appeals      ……………………………………………………………………………………………	21
850	Amendments of Statutes Referenced Herein …………………………………………………	22
Article	IX.   Definitions    ………………………………………………………………………………………	22
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009


ARTICLE

SECTION	I.

100	TITLE, PURPOSE, AND AUTHORIZATION

Title

These Bylaws shall be known as the Richmond Subdivision Regulations.
		This bylaw contains definitions in its last Article for each term that is
capitalized in the text.

SECTION	
110	
Authority and Intent
	
110.1	
The Town of Richmond regulates SUBDIVISION and subsequent LAND DEVELOPMENT through these Subdivision Regulations and ZONING REGULATIONS. The Town enacts these Subdivision Regulations under the authority of the Vermont Planning and Development Act, V.S.A. Title 24, Chapter 117 (the ACT.
		
These Subdivision Regulations are adopted for purposes specified in the ACT (§4302) and to implement the TOWN PLAN, and shall be adopted and administered in conformance with the TOWN PLAN. The Town intends to promote the orderly and planned development of Richmond so as to maintain and improve the quality of life in Richmond, enhance Richmond’s economy, and sustain the environment.

SECTION	
120	
Purpose
		
The Town of Richmond adopts these Subdivision Regulations for the following purposes:

(1)	to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the Town of Richmond;
(2)	to guide the orderly development of the Town in accordance with the ACT, the TOWN PLAN, the ZONING REGULATIONS and all other Town ordinances and bylaws enacted to implement the TOWN PLAN;
(3)	to provide for adequate light, air and privacy; to secure safety from fire, flood and other danger; and to prevent developments which exceed the capacity of the land;
(4)	to provide for housing in appropriate locations to meet the community’s housing needs as identified in the TOWN PLAN;
(5)	to guide public and private actions to provide adequate transportation, potable water, wastewater disposal, parks, playgrounds, recreation, schools and other public facilities;
(6)	to provide the most beneficial circulation of traffic throughout the Town, to avoid congestion on the roads, and to maximize pedestrian and cyclist safety;
(7)	to prevent adverse impact on public facilities;
(8)	to prevent the pollution of air, ground water, streams and ponds; to assure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water tables; to prevent environmental degradation; and to encourage the prudent use and management of natural resources throughout the Town;
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009


(9)	to preserve the village and rural characters, natural resources, natural beauty and topography of the Town; and,
(10)	to preserve sites that are historically significant.

SECTION	130	Applicability

These Subdivision Regulations apply to all SUBDIVISIONS including MINOR
		REVISIONS except for boundary (lot line) adjustments governed by the
ZONING REGULATIONS. No LOT shall be subdivided until the SUBDIVIDER has obtained final approval of the FINAL SUBDIVISION from the Development Review Board (DRB) and the approved FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT is recorded in the Richmond Land Records.

SECTION	
140	
General Procedure
	
140.1.	
The SUBDIVIDER shall file all applications with the Administrative Officer.
	
140.2.	
The first step in the process for a SUBDIVISION application is optional, and is a SKETCH PLAN review. The SKETCH PLAN review is an informal exchange of ideas between the SUBDIVIDER and the DRB.
	
140.3.	
The second step in a SUBDIVISION application is for the SUBDIVIDER to prepare and submit a PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION application. Major issues and concerns will be identified and potential solutions explored. The DRB will hold a warned public hearing at this stage. DRB approval of a PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION is required prior to application for a FINAL SUBDIVISION.
	
140.4.	
The third step in a SUBDIVISION application is for the SUBDIVIDER to submit an application for approval of a FINAL SUBDIVISION to the DRB. The DRB will hold a warned public hearing during the application process to consider the final application. The DRB shall approve or deny the proposed FINAL SUBDIVISION and shall issue its final decision in writing.





ARTICLE

SECTION	II

200	SUBDIVISION SKETCH PLAN

Purpose and Procedure

The purpose of the SKETCH PLAN review is to acquaint the DRB with the
	intent of the SUBDIVISION at an early stage in the design process. The
	SUBDIVIDER will explore, with the DRB, alternative design schemes that
	could satisfy the standards of these Subdivision Regulations, the TOWN
	PLAN, ZONING REGULATIONS, and all other applicable Town ordinances.
	SKETCH PLAN review is a voluntary, informal review, and is not binding on
	the DRB or the SUBDIVIDER. SKETCH PLAN review determinations by the
	DRB are advisory only and, as such, are not appealable to the
	Environmental Court.
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009





SECTION	210	Sketch Plan Requirements

SKETCH PLAN review is optional, but encouraged for all SUBDIVIDERS. To
	facilitate an exchange of ideas, the Administrative Officer shall invite
	ADJOINING PROPERTY OWNERS to participate to the first SKETCH PLAN
	review meeting for a given project . Accompanying the request for SKETCH
	PLAN review shall be: one copy of the applicable section(s) of the Town
	orthophoto map(s) (which are available at the Town offices) or other
	referencing materials with the subject area defined; a sketch plan of the land
	to be subdivided that depicts the proposed development; and one set of
	stamped envelopes addressed to each ADJOINING PROPERTY OWNER.
	The DRB shall consider the sketch plan materials and may hold more than
	one meeting on any SKETCH PLAN review.


ARTICLE

SECTION	III

300	PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION

Purpose

The purpose of the PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION application is to require a
		landowner to present a plan for a proposed SUBDIVISION to the DRB.
Major issues and concerns will be identified and potential solutions will be explored. All applications for PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION review must be approved by the DRB before an application for FINAL SUBDIVISION will be considered.

SECTION	
310	
Preliminary Subdivision Application Submission Requirements
		
Any SUBDIVIDER of land shall follow the application submission requirements as set forth in Section 800.2 and Section 800.3. The SUBDIVIDER shall also submit three (3) (24” by 36”) copies of a PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION plat and separate plan showing project boundaries and proposed LOT layout, and eight (8) (11” by 17”) copies of the foregoing and any other supporting materials as provided in Section 310.1 and Section 310.2
		
The DRB may vote to waive any of the application requirements in accordance with Section 704, if it finds that the information waived is not necessary to determine PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION conformance with the standards and requirements of these Subdivision Regulations, the ZONING REGULATIONS, or any other Town bylaws.
	
310.1	
The PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION plat shall include the following information:
(1)	proposed SUBDIVISION name or identifying title, tax map number
and the name of the Town;
(2)	name and address of the owner of record of the property, and of the SUBDIVIDER if different;
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009


(3)	a location map showing the relationship of the proposed SUBDIVISION to adjacent property and surrounding areas within two thousand (2,000) feet of any property line of the proposed project. Such location map may be shown on a USGS map at a scale of 1 inch equals 2,000 feet;
(4)	boundaries of the proposed SUBDIVISION and the names of the owners of record of all adjoining properties, to the proposed SUBDIVISION;
(5)	existing easements within the proposed SUBDIVISION;
(6)	the zoning district, including overlay districts, in which the property is located and the relevant ZONING REGULATION provisions applicable to the site;
(7)	the location, names and widths of existing roads, easements, and building setbacks;
(8)	the location of any bridges, drains, drainage ways or culverts which are proposed in the SUBDIVISION;
(9)	proposed LOT lines with dimensions and planned locations and uses for buildings, any stream and wetland buffer zones, and any overlay district(s) applicable to the proposed SUBDIVISION;
(10)	potential layouts for the SUBDIVISION showing all roads, pedestrian ways, recreational trails, utilities, and all proposed access to the SUBDIVISION; and
(11)	date, true north arrow and scale.


310.2	The PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION plan shall include the following information:

(1)	name of the designer of the SUBDIVISION;
(2)	number of acres within the proposed SUBDIVISION, buildings, water courses and other noteworthy physical features;
(3)	the location of all natural features or resources on the site such as streams, ponds, wetlands, flood plain, floodway, forest stands, established LARGE ANIMAL HABITAT;
(4)	designation of each segment of adjoining property boundaries of all adjoining properties common with the proposed SUBDIVISION ;
(5)	the location of known archaeological sites such as cellar holes, building foundations, wells, or known fences;
(6)	the location and dimensions of any existing wastewater disposal systems, water supplies, culverts, drains, drainage ways, or underground cables on the site;
(7)	the location, names and widths of parks, public open space, trails, etc. on the site as well as similar information regarding adjacent properties;
(8)	contour lines, at intervals of twenty (20) feet, of existing grades;
(9)	means of providing water supply to the proposed SUBDIVISION;
(10)	general information regarding the location(s) of potential wastewater systems and potable water supplies in the proposed SUBDIVISION
(11)	proposals for maintaining open spaces, natural features and resources on the site;
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009


(12)	As specified in Section 6.10.1, a master development plan prepared by an engineer, land use planner, or other professional acceptable to the DRB.
(13)	a list of waivers, if any, which the SUBDIVIDER requests from the requirements of these Subdivision Regulations, and the justification for the request; and,
(14)	written authorization appointing a representative, if appropriate.



SECTION	320	Field Markers

Field markers shall be located on the site and maintained until a final
	decision is made on the application to enable the DRB to readily locate and
	evaluate the proposed layout in the field. Field markers shall have different
	labels or color codes to show proposed roads, rights-of-way, corners of
	proposed structures or building envelopes, and all LOTS, plus any areas to
	be dedicated to public use.


SECTION	330	Preliminary Subdivision Public Hearing

The DRB shall hold a public hearing in accordance with Sections 800.3 and
800.4. of these Subdivision Regulations

(1)	The SUBDIVIDER, or a duly authorized representative, shall attend the PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION public hearing to discuss with the DRB the SUBDIVISION, possible alternatives, and the proposal’s compliance with these Subdivision Regulations;
(2)	The DRB shall study the information provided and consider whether or not the proposed development conforms to the ACT, the ZONING REGULATIONS and any other Town bylaws in effect. The DRB may request alternative layouts and arrangements of the SUBDIVISION and identify key features or provisions which it feels should be recognized in the final layout.  The DRB may recess the public hearing for a time and date certain within six months of the initial hearing date.


SECTION 340	Action on Preliminary Subdivision
The DRB shall act to approve, to approve with recommendations or to deny the PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION application within forty- five (45) days of the date when the DRB closed the public hearing, in accordance with Section 800.4.

Approval of PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION does not imply approval of the FINAL SUBDIVISION by the DRBbut is simply authorization to proceed with a formal application for FINAL SUBDIVISION approval.
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009


ARTICLE

SECTION	IV

400	FINAL SUBDIVISION

Purpose
		The FINAL SUBDIVISION review is the final step in the DRB review of a
SUBDIVISION plan, the SUBDIVISION PLAT, and all evidence regarding a SUBDIVISION application to ensure compliance with the Subdivision Regulations, the ZONING REGULATIONS, and all other applicable Town standards.

SECTION	
410	
Final Subdivision Application
		
Within six (6) months of PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION approval, the SUBDIVIDER shall submit a COMPLETE APPLICATION and associated fees for FINAL SUBDIVISION to the Administrative Officer, or request an extension in writing from the DRB. If a COMPLETE APPLICATION is not received within six months or as extended, the SUBDIVIDER shall resubmit a PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION or SKETCH PLAN application. The FINAL
SUBDIVISION application shall be consistent with and incorporate all conditions made by the DRB in its PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION decision.

SECTION	
420	
Final Subdivision Application Submission Requirements
	
420.1	
The SUBDIVIDER shall submit to the Administrative Officer three (3) full sized (24” by 36”) plans and eight (8) copies (11” by 17”) of the following: a complete FINAL SUBDIVISION application, FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT, FINAL SUBDIVISION plan, and any other supporting documentation.	The FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT shall be prepared by a licensed surveyor and marked “DRAFT – For Review Only.” The FINAL SUBDIVISION plan shall be prepared by a qualified surveyor, professional planner, engineer, architect, or landscape planner.
	
420.2	
The FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT shall be consistent in all respects to the layout as approved by the DRB for the PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION. The final plat shall be drawn to a scale of not more than two hundred (200) feet to the inch, and shall show:

(1)	proposed SUBDIVISION name or identifying title, the name of the municipality, the name and address of the owner of record and of the SUBDIVIDER (if different), the name, registration number and seal of the registered land surveyor, the boundaries of the SUBDIVISION and its general location in relation to existing roads or other landmarks, scale, date, magnetic north, with true north declination and legend;
(2)	road names and lines, pedestrian ways, recreational trails, LOTS, reservations, easements and areas to be dedicated to public use, if any;
(3)	the location, bearing and length of every road line, LOT line and boundary line. All locations should be tied to known reference points such as road intersections;
(4)	the length of all straight lines, the deflection angles, radii, length of curves, tangent distances and bearings for each road;
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009


(5)	all public open space for which offers of dedication are made by the SUBDIVIDER, and those spaces for which title is reserved by the SUBDIVIDER;
(6)	LOTS within the SUBDIVISION numbered sequentially (any reserved land shall have the highest number). Below each LOT number, within the LOT boundaries, the following shall be listed: the acreage, new parcel ID number, and building envelope to contain all proposed primary structures.
(7)	the location of any zoning overlay district(s) applicable to the proposed SUBDIVISION;
(8)	location of well shields on all LOTS;
(9)	location of any existing or proposed easements on all LOTS;
(10)	location of all of the improvements referred to in ARTICLE VI, landscaping, utility poles, and rough grading and other devices for draining the area within the SUBDIVISION;
(11)	locations of proposed MONUMENTS at all right-of-way intersections and at all points of curvature (P.C.) and points of tangency (PT) on both sides of any road lines, and at any other critical points in the road lines as will enable a land surveyor to correctly stake out any LOT in the SUBDIVISION.;
(12)	names of all SUBDIVISIONS immediately adjacent and the names of ADJOINING PROPERTY OWNERS; and,
(13)	SUBDIVISION location map.

420.3	FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT AND PLAN AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS

Along with the FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT, the SUBDIVIDER shall submit to the Town a set of materials that constitute a FINAL SUBDIVISION plan, which shall include the following information:


(1)	location and envelope area of wastewater disposal system(s) including primary and any required replacement areas, and a letter from the wastewater disposal system designer stating that all such systems will be designed and constructed in conformance with all applicable state regulations and standards;
(2)	location of and envelope area of all existing and proposed sources of potable water and wastewater system(s); ;
(3)	location and design of all of the considerations and improvements referred to in Article V (Planning Standards) and Article VI (Required Improvements and Design Standards);
(4)	identification and methods of protection of natural features or site elements (i.e., streams, ponds, wetlands, flood plain, forest stands, established LARGE ANIMAL HABITAT, rock outcroppings, etc.);
(5)	typical cross sections and proposed grading of roadways;
(6)	designs of any bridges or culverts which may be required on the SUBDIVISION;
(7)	A signed statement reciting:
a)	the location, type and length of any proposed road or roads. All roads shall be designed to the specifications in SECTION 600 of these Subdivision Regulations;
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009


b)	the nature and extent of any recreational features, open spaces, parks, or playgrounds to be provided, if any, and whether or not and under what conditions they are intended to be dedicated to the Town.
(8)	contours of finish grades at five (5) foot intervals if finished grade varies from existing grade by five (5) feet or more, except that contours at two (2) foot intervals shall be shown in areas where wastewater disposal systems are to be located;
(9)	At the discretion of the DRB, letters from the Chittenden East School District Superintendent, the Richmond Police Chief, the head of Richmond Rescue, and the Richmond Fire Chief indicating their assessment of the impact of the proposed SUBDIVISION on the provision of school, police, rescue or fire protection services, or letters from others on relevant issues;
(10)	A letter from a professional engineer retained by the SUBDIVIDER stating that all proposed public and private infrastructure is in compliance with these Subdivision Regulations and other standards established by the Town of Richmond such as ZONING REGULATIONS, Public Works Specifications or other standards; and,
(11)	Any other documents required by the DRB as a result of SKETCH PLAN, PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION, or FINAL SUBDIVISION
review and these Subdivision Regulations.
The DRB may vote to waive any of these application requirements in accordance with Section 704, if it finds that the information waived is not necessary to determine whether the FINAL SUDIVISION plan is in conformance with the standards and requirements of these Subdivision Regulations and the ZONING REGULATIONS.


SECTION	430	Public Hearing For Final Subdivision Application
		
The DRB shall hold a public hearing after the submission of a COMPLETE APPLICATION for a FINAL SUBDIVISION review to the Administrative Officer, warned and held in accordance with the ACT and Sections 800.3 and 800.4.


The DRB may recess the public hearing for a time and date certain within six months of the initial hearing date.


SECTION	440	Action on Final Subdivision Application

The DRB shall, within forty-five (45) days after the date the public hearing is
		closed, act to approve or deny the FINAL SUBDIVISION, in accordance with
Section 800.3. The DRB shall describe the grounds for any required conditions of approval or detail the reasons for denial in a written notice of decision..
ARTICLE	V	PLANNING STANDARDS

SECTION	
500	
General Planning Standards
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009



The DRB shall evaluate any application for SUBDIVISION approval in accordance with the following considerations. The DRB may require the SUBDIVIDER to submit information addressing impacts related to these considerations.

(1)	Whether SUBDIVISION or development would be harmful to the safety, health and general welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the SUBDIVISION and/or its surrounding areas, due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, topography, utility easements or other features;
(2)	Whether the proposed SUBDIVISION has an UNDUE ADVERSE IMPACT on existing historical resources or natural features, trees, brooks, rock outcroppings, water bodies, ground water, or other natural and/or historical resources;
(3)	Whether the proposed SUBDIVISION includes adequate provision for the control of runoff and erosion during and after construction;
(3)	Whether the proposed SUBDIVISION is in compliance with the ACT, the ZONING REGULATIONS and any other bylaws or town ordinances in effect;
(4)	Whether the proposed design and configuration of parcel boundaries and location of associated improvements achieve the desired settlement pattern for the zoning district and neighborhood in which the SUBDIVISION is located;
(5)	Whether the site is suitable for the proposed density;
(6)	Whether the proposed SUBDIVISION, when reviewed in the context of the Town’s adopted capital budget and program, and other developments in the Town, will place an unreasonable burden on the ability of the local governmental units to provide municipal or governmental services or facilities;
(8)	Whether there is a sufficient potable water supply and adequate area for wastewater disposal;
(9)	That the wastewater disposal system(s) and potable water supply will not impair or pollute surface water and groundwater;
(10)	Whether the proposed SUBDIVISION will cause unreasonable highway congestion or unsafe conditions with respect to the use of roads and highways in the Town;
(11)	Whether the proposed development avoids UNDUE ADVERSE IMPACT on established LARGE ANIMAL HABITAT and prevents UNDUE ADVERSE IMPACT to, or provides adequate protection for, such habitat, and retains unrestricted animal access to the identified habitat; and,
(12)	Whether the proposed development would cause undue air, water, noise or light pollution.
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009



ARTICLE	VI	REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS

SECTION	600	Roads and Other Facilities


All roads, sidewalks, recreation paths, water and sewer lines, stormwater facilitites, utilities, and related facilities in a SUBDIVISION (each a “Facility”) shall remain private until formally accepted by vote of the Town Selectboard. If the Applicant intends to offer any Facility to the Town, then, with the application for FINAL SUBDIVISION approval, the Applicant shall submit the following:
(1)	A draft irrevocable offer of dedication;
(2)	A draft warranty deed conveying to the Town:
a.	For a road Facility, fee simple title to a 60 foot wide area of land, 30 feet on either side of the road centerline; and
b.	For any other Facility, either fee simple title to an area where the Facility will be located, or an easement for the Facility’s use, maintenance, repair, enlargement, and replacement. The warranty deed shall not be subject to any encumbrances, including but not limited to mortgages, liens and easements (including utility easements), restrictions, and common area declarations.

FINAL SUBDIVISION approval shall not constitute acceptance of the facility as a public facility, as acceptance can only occur by vote of the Selectboard. Nothing in this Section shall obligate the Town to accept any Facility as a municipal Facility. FINAL SUBDIVISION approval shall not be deemed to prevent the Town Selectboard from requiring any modifications to the irrevocable offer or any instruments or the deed that the Selectboard deems appropriate prior to acceptance.

600.1	CONSTRUCTION: The SUBDIVIDER shall construct all roads to meet the of the Town of Richmond Public Works Specifications standards and specifications for public infrastructure, including roads. Specifications for driveways must meet the requirements established in the ZONING REGULATIONS.

600.2	ARRANGEMENT: The arrangement of roads in the SUBDIVISION shall provide for continuation of roads within adjacent SUBDIVISIONS and, at suitable locations, shall continue to the boundary of the SUBDIVISION in order to facilitate access to adjacent land if and when it may be developed. The DRB may modify this requirement where topographic or other conditions make it impractical to comply, or where the DRB determines that compliance is not in the public interest.

600.3	TOPOGRAPHY: Roads shall be logically related to the topography so that they have reasonable grades and safe intersections, and create reasonable LOTS.  Roads shall not have any UNDUE ADVERSE IMPACT on streams, woodlands, slopes and other natural features.

600.4	CURB CUTS: Access points to public or private rights-of-way shall be consolidated to minimize multiple curb cuts.
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009



600.5	RESERVED STRIPS:  There shall be no reserved strips which deny access to a proposed road from a property adjacent to that road.

600.6	DEAD END ROADS: Dead end roads shall terminate in a circular turnaround with an outside radius of not less than sixty feet approved by the DRB or in a hammerhead approved by the Selectboard
600.7	INTERSECTIONS: There shall be no “jog” intersections, i.e., where opposing roads have centerlines separated by less than two hundred (200) feet. All road intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as feasible.

600.8	ACCESSIBILITY: Emergency and service vehicles must have access to all LOTS and buildings.

600.9	SIGHT DISTANCES: Sight distances at all intersections should be consistent with anticipated traffic speeds, terrain, alignments and climatic extremes.

600.10	DRAINAGE: All roads shall be adequately shaped and drained, with adequate ditches or other storm water system.

600.11	ROAD NAMES: Road names shall be approved by the Selectboard prior to the submittal of the FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT applicaton.

600.12	DEDICATION FOR ROAD REALIGNMENT OR WIDENING: Where the
proposed SUBDIVISION borders on an existing road, and where the DRB determines that the SUBDIVISION creates a need for realignment or widening of said road, the DRB may require that the SUBDIVIDER reserve a right-of-way for such realignment or widening. The FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT shall depict this area, identified as "Reserved for Future Road Realignment and/or Widening Purposes," under Section 600.13.

600.13	CONSTRUCTION OF STRUCTURES IN THE ABSENCE OF SECURITY:
Unless Security is required pursuant to Section 708.1(3), no ZONING PERMIT shall issue for construction of a STRUCTURE until: (i) all FACILITIES as defined in Section 600 are in place to service the STRUCTURE (excepting road top course); (ii) as-built drawings for the FACILITIES prepared by a registered professional engineer and approved by the Town engineer are submitted to the Administrative Officer. For purposes herein, STRUCTURE means an assembly of materials for occupancy or use, excepting the FACILITIES themselves.”
600.14	SIDEWALKS: The DRB may require sidewalks, bicycle paths and/or recreational paths to safely accommodate pedestrian, bicycle and/or other recreational circulation within the SUBDIVISION or from the SUBDIVISION to other points of interest such as a village areas, higher density neighborhoods, parks, or shopping areas. Construction of sidewalks shall meet the Public Works Specifications. If the Town has an adopted recreation plan or sidewalk plan, the SUBDIVIDER shall be required to construct and dedicate such amenities within the SUBDIVISION required by those plans.
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009


SECTION	610	Lot Layout
	
610.1


















610.2	
ZONING REGULATIONS: The layout of all LOTS and their setback requirements shall conform to the requirements of the ZONING REGULATIONS and these Subdivision Regulations to achieve the desired settlement pattern for the zoning district, area, and neighborhood in which  the SUBDIVISION is located, including associated overlay districts. All  LOTS must have the required frontage. If the SUBDIVISION meets the requirements and is approved as a Planned Unit Development or as a Planned Residential Development, the DRB may waive or modify specific requirements of the ZONING REGULATIONS as provided in the PUD or Residential PUD sections of the ZONING REGULATIONS. For any portion of the parcel or LOT not proposed for LAND DEVELOPMENT in the SUBDIVISION as of the application date, a master development plan is required. The master development plan shall conceptually show future roads, future stormwater infrastructure, future building areas, future open areas, and future uses on such remaining land, including those that the SUBDIVIDER expects to offer to the Town of Richmond.
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS: The SUBDIVIDER shall design LOTS and
		building envelopes consistent with topography, existing vegetation, drainage,
soil conditions, and aesthetic considerations.

SECTION	
620	
Pedestrian and Bicycle Access
		
To facilitate pedestrian, bicycle and/or other recreational access from or across the proposed SUBDIVISION, the DRB may require the dedication of easements at least ten (10) feet in width. Such easements shall be indicated on the FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT.

SECTION	
630	
Outdoor Lighting
		
Lighting shall comply with the Richmond ZONING REGULATIONS.

SECTION	
640	
Trees, Shrubs and Landscaping
	
640.1	
NEW TREES OR SHRUBS: The DRB may require the permanent planting of new trees and shrubs in SUBDIVISIONS which are lacking in trees or shrubs or in which substantial loss of trees or shrubs will result from road construction and development of the SUBDIVISION. Such trees or shrubs shall be of a type indigenous to Vermont, preferably of high wildlife conservation value, shall be planted in fertile and fertilized ground in accord with standard horticultural practices, and shall be watered and nurtured until growth is assured. Trees shall have a minimum trunk diameter at a point six
(6) inches above the ground level of two (2) inches, shall be planted close to the right-of-way line at average intervals of no more than sixty (60) feet, and shall be free of branches between ground level and a point six (6) feet above ground level.


640.2   LANDSCAPING: The DRB may require a detailed landscaping plan which shows suitable vegetation or earth buffers to minimi+ze noise or visual
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009


	impacts, to conserve existing vegetation, or to otherwise implement the standards of these Subdivision Regulations.

SECTION	
650	
Drainage and Fill
	
650.1	
DESIGN OF DRAINAGE SYSTEM: The SUBDIVIDER shall provide a design for a drainage system which will remove any water and storm run-off which may traverse the site. The drainage system may include pipes or open drainage ways, and shall be located in road rights-of-way or in unobstructed easements not less than twenty (20) feet in width. The design of the drainage system shall utilize natural waterways and drainage ways to the extent possible. The drainage system shall identify all waterways into which water exiting the site will flow.
	
650.2	
ACCOMMODATION OF ANTICIPATED FLOWS: Drainage facilities shall accommodate all existing surface water and run-off, plus run-off anticipated from the proposed development.
	
650.3	
DOWNSTREAM DRAINAGE FACILITIES: The SUBDIVIDER shall
demonstrate that existing drainage facilities below the grade of the SUBDIVISION will accommodate the anticipated additional run-off from the proposed SUBDIVISION. If the additional run-off will overload down gradient facilities so that there will be undue drainage onto other property, or an increase in expenditure of public funds, the DRB shall require the SUBDIVIDER to design and implement facilities to correct such overloads within the SUBDIVISION or offsite with associated easements or agreements with one or more ADJOINING PROPERTY OWNER.
	
650.4	
TWENTY-FIVE YEAR STORM: The drainage system and all easements shall be designed to accommodate water from a twenty-five (25) year storm.
	
650.5	
EROSION CONTROL: The smallest practical area of land shall be bare at any one time during development. Any exposure shall be kept to the shortest practical period of time. The DRB may require temporary vegetation, mulching, and/or structural measures to protect exposed areas. The SUBDIVIDER shall install and maintain appropriate sediment basins during development to remove silt and to control runoff. The SUBDIVIDER shall install permanent vegetation and erosion/runoff control measures as soon as practical. There shall be adequate permanent measures at culvert outfalls to prevent erosion and disruption of drainage ways.
	
650.6	
FILL: The SUBDIVIDER shall not use stumps, wood, roots or other fibrous materials or refuse as fill, except in areas stipulated for no development. The DRB shall require the SUBDIVIDER to submit evidence of boring and/or other soil investigations to determine the depth, composition and stability of the subgrade within road sections or on the site of structures.

SECTION	
660	
Water Supply and Wastewater Disposal Systems

All LAND DEVELOPMENT shall be located to prevent contamination of any water supply or water resource by run-off or leachate from wastewater disposal systems.
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009



LAND DEVELOPMENT may be serviced by private or community potable water supply and/or wastewater systems which shall be designed, installed, and maintained in accordance with all applicable State of Vermont regulations and standards. The SUBDIVIDER shall provide the Town of Richmond with a copy of any required state or federal permits, including a Wastewater System and Potable Water Supply Permit, before any zoning permit for LAND DEVELOPMENT will be granted.

SECTION	670	Utilities

670.1	GENERAL:	The FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT shall show all utility systems, existing and proposed. The SUBDIVIDER shall coordinate SUBDIVISION design with the utility companies to ensure adequate and suitable areas for installation, both for proposed SUBDIVISION and for areas adjacent to the SUBDIVISION.

670.2	UNDERGROUND INSTALLATION:	All utility systems, including but not limited to electric, gas, telephone and cable television, shall be located
	

670.3	underground throughout the SUBDIVISION.

EASEMENTS: All easements shall be of sufficient width to serve the
		proposed SUBDIVISION, existing development and planned development
outside of the SUBDIVISION. The FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT shall show all easements.

SECTION	
680	
Phasing
		
The DRB may require that a SUBDIVISION creating six or more LOTS be divided into two or more phases to ameliorate, avoid or mitigate any UNDUE ADVERSE IMPACTS of the SUBDIVISION on existing or planned community facilities or services, in accordance with the Town’s adopted capital budget and improvement program. Any phasing decision shall be based on the timing of construction or implementation of planned facilities and services, but shall allow at a minimum the development of five LOTS per year. The DRB may require phasing to avoid or mitigate undue, adverse impacts on the community’s schools, roads, bridges, transportation infrastructure, police, fire, rescue, municipal services or the local economy. Any DRB decision requiring phasing shall describe the specific circumstances that warrant phasing under these standards.



ARTICLE	VII	GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

SECTION	
700	
Application Fees
		
The SUBDIVIDER shall pay the fees established by the Selectboard. The fees shall be due with the filing of the PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION application.
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009


SECTION	701	Legal Data

The SUBDIVIDER shall provide a draft of all restrictions which will run with
		the land and become covenants with the final application. The DRB may
require the SUBDIVIDER to provide a certificate of title for all property to be conveyed to the Town as part of the SUBDIVISION. The DRB may require the filing of such other legal data (including rights-of way, easements, road agreements, etc.) as it deems appropriate to enforce these Subdivision Regulations.

SECTION	
702	
Continuing Maintenance Requirements
		
The SUBDIVIDER, and the SUBDIVIDER’s successors and assigns, including the organization or trust required by Section 703, shall continuously maintain to the condition when originally installed, all Facilities (as defined in Section 600) and other improvements (as defined in Article VI), including all required SUBDIVISION landscaping. Diseased, dying, or dead landscaping shall be replaced with landscaping of a size equal to that as of the time of replacement, but in no event to exceed the size the landscaping would have reached by ten years after installation. The obligations of this Section 702:
(1)	shall not apply to Facilities or landscaping which have been accepted by the Town: and
(2)	shall only apply to an individual LOT owner as to landscaping on the owner’s LOT.

SECTION	
703	
Association of Owners
		
The SUBDIVIDER shall provide for and establish an organization or trust for the ownership and maintenance of any common facilities or open space: the organization or trust shall not be dissolved or revoked nor shall it dispose of any common facilities or open space, by sale or otherwise, except to an organization or trust conceived and established to own and maintain the common facilities or open space, without first offering to dedicate the same to the Town or other government agency to maintain those common facilities or that open space.

SECTION	
704	
Waivers
		
No public road or public infrastructure requirement may be waived. In accordance with the ACT (24 V.S.A. §4418), the DRB may waive ormodify, subject to appropriate conditions, the provisions of any other improvements and requirements in these Subdivision Regulations provided that, in its judgment of the special circumstances of a particular plat or plats, the requirements are not requisite in the interest of the public health, safety or general welfare or, in its judgment, are inappropriate because of inadequacy or lack of connecting facilities adjacent or in proximity to the SUBDIVISION.
		
In granting waivers, the DRB shall require any conditions that will secure substantially the objectives of the requirements so waived. No such waiver will be granted if it would have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the ACT, any provisions of the ZONING REGULATIONS, these Subdivision Regulations, or other Town bylaws.
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009




SECTION	705	Filing of Final Plat and Expiration Dates

Upon final approval of a FINAL SUBDIVISION application by the DRB, the
	SUBDIVIDER shall prepare a copy of the FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT for
	recording in the Town Land Records in accordance with the requirements of
	27 V.S.A., Chapter 17 and Chapter 117, Section 4463 of the ACT, plus all
	other associated materials required by the DRB for inclusion in the DRB’s
	records. No plat shall be recorded in the Town Land Records until it has
	received final approval by the DRB, as endorsed in writing on the plat. The
	wording on the plat shall be:
“Approved for recording in the Town of Richmond Land Records by
decision of the Richmond Development Review Board on [add date], with permit number [add permit number] and signed this [add date].”

The plat shall be recorded within 180 days of the date of DRB approval, or, as extended by Section 4463(b)(1) of the ACT, the approval shall expire. In accordance with the Act (§4463), after an approved plat or certification by the clerk is filed, the approval or certification shall not expire. It shall be the SUBDIVIDER’s responsibility to timely record the plat.


SECTION	706	Revisions

No changes, modifications, or revisions shall be made on any FINAL
		SUBDIVISION after final approval, unless said FINAL SUBDIVISION is first
resubmitted to the DRB and the DRB has approved the modifications, except as provided in Section 800.1.

SECTION	
707	
Effect of Final Approval
		
Final approval by the DRB under these Subdivision Regulations shall not be deemed to constitute, or be evidence of, any acceptance by the Town of any road, easement, utilities, park, recreation area or open space shown upon the final plat. Such acceptance may only be accomplished by formal resolution of the Selectboard. In addition, FINAL SUBDIVISION approval by the DRB shall not imply approval under any other regulations or bylaws in effect in the Town. Approval of a SUBDIVISION plat and a review and acceptance of any other written materials shall not imply that the DRB has independently ascertained the accuracy, completeness, effectiveness or suitability of the plans, designs and documents. Neither the DRB nor the Town shall incur any liability for SUBDIVISION approval.


SECTION	708	Conditions to All Final Approvals

In granting FINAL SUBDIVISION approval, the DRB may attach reasonable
	conditions and safeguards as it deems necessary to implement the purposes
	of these Subdivision Regulations, the ZONING REGULATIONS, or any other
	Town bylaws or standards and to mitigate any UNDUE ADVERSE EFFECT
	associated with the SUBDIVISION. In addition to required modifications or
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009


improvements, such conditions may include but are not limited to SUBDIVISION general standards, project phasing, and Security options.

708.1	Security – In lieu of the completion of public roads or infrastructure, private roads, and any other infrastructure improvements, the DRB may condition the SUBDIVISION permit on the submission of a bond, escrow account, or other surety to assure the completion of the SUBDIVISION, provision of adequate land stabilization measures, or protection of public facilities that may be affected by the SUBDIVISION.
(1)	For the purpose of this Section, the Term “Security” shall mean a performance bond issued by either a bonding or surety company approved by the Town’s Selectboard or issued by the owner with security acceptable to the Town’s Selectboard or an escrow or letter of credit arrangement acceptable to the Town’s Selectboard, in each case securing to the Town the completion of the required improvements for which the Security is supplied, their required maintenance and site restoration or remediation, as provided below in(3). In the event of non- performance, the bonding or surety company, or the Town, as the case may be, may complete the required improvements and perform the maintenance, to the extent of the Security, and may enter onto the owner’s property for such purposes.
(2)	The DRB may require that no zoning permit, except for any permits that may be required for infrastructure construction, may be issued for approved land development unless the required streets and improvements on or in those streets, parking areas, stormwater facilities, sewer and water systems, and other required infrastructure improvements (including those anticipated to be dedicated to the Town and those anticipated to remain private) have been satisfactorily installed in accordance with the approval decision, and these regulations, and as-built plans submitted by a registered professional engineer.
(3)	In lieu of the condition in (2) above, the DRB may require, prior to commencement of any Land Development, Security in an amount sufficient to cover the full cost of required streets, improvements on or in those streets, parking areas, stormwater facilities, water and sewer systems, and other required infrastructure improvements, submission of as-built plans by a registered professional engineer, the maintenance of all forgoing improvements for a period of two years after submission to and approval by the Administrative Officer of as-built plans, and also including restoration or remediation in the event the applicant abandons or otherwise fails to complete the project or required infrastructure improvements, as such full cost is estimated by the DRB or by such Town departments or officials as the DRB may designate. Such  security shall secure to the Town completion of such required improvements within three years of the start of construction of the first of such required improvements and the maintenance of such required improvements for such period of two years after completion of the last of such required improvements.
(4)	The DRB may also require, prior to commencement of any Land Development, Security in an amount sufficient to cover the full cost of any required landscaping, screening, buffers, and site restoration, adequate stabilization, and protection of public facilities that may be
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009


affected by the project, and maintenance of all the foregoing for a period of two years after completion, as such full cost is estimated by the DRB or such municipal departments or officials as the DRB may designate. Such security shall secure the Town the completion of all such required improvements within three years from the start of installation of the first such required improvements and their maintenance for a period of two years after completion of the last of sucha required improvements.
(5)	The time periods for completion in (3) and (4) above may be extended by the DRB for an additional 3 years with the consent of the land owner.
(6)	The Security required by (3) and (4) above may be by one consolidated instrument, or by separate instruments.
(7)	Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any required improvements, the applicant shall reimburse the Town within 30 days of invoice for the Town’s engineering, legal, and other professional fees related to the inspection of the work, preparing reports to the Town, and other related activities. This provision shall be deemed a condition of every approval whether or not expressly stated in the approval.





ARTICLE

SECTION	VIII

800	MISCELLANEOUS

Decisions and Administration

The DRB shall decide matters regarding these Subdivision Regulations and
		the Administrative Officer shall administer these Subdivision Regulations in
accordance with the ACT, ZONING REGULATIONS, and all state or Town ordinances and the DRB’s adopted rules of procedure with respect to conflicts of interest.
		
The DRB shall conduct site visits for each proposed SUBDIVISION, unless, in the DRB’s judgement, such a visit is not necessary for a specific application.
	
800.1	
MINOR REVISION: The Administrative Officer may approve a permit for a revision to an approved SUBDIVISION for the following modifications only:
(1)	Adjust a LOT boundary, provided that no LOT is diminished in
total area by more than ten (10) percent;
(2)	Change a road location, provided that the centerline is moved by no more than twenty (20) feet and/or no more than one hundred
(100) feet of the length of the road segment is moved and provided that the Town engineer approves any such changes.
(3)	Modify the location of a wastewater system leach field, provided that the State of Vermont has issued an amended Wastewater and Potable Water Supply permit for the leach field as relocated;
(4)	Move a building envelope by no more than twenty (20) feet in any direction, provided that no ADJOINING PROPERTY OWNER or an INTERESTED PERSON has requested a public hearing before
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009


the DRB. If a public hearing is requested with the DRB, the procedure in Sections 800.2, 800.3, and 800.4 shall apply;
a.	To determine whether a public hearing shall be required under this subsection (4), the Administrative Officer shall send notice to ADJOINING PROPERTY OWNERS or any INTERESTED PERSON. As part of the request for a MINOR REVISION, the SUBDIVIDER shall submit to the Administrative Officer one set of stamped envelopes addressed to each current ADJOINING PROPERTY OWNER to the proposed SUBDIVISION. For addresses for any INTERESTED PERSON, the Applicant shall provide an updated list of INTERESTED PERSONS who participated at the previous public hearing(s) for the approved SUBDIVISION. Along with a letter of notice, the Administrative Officer shall send the following information:
i.	Copy of proposed draft permit;
ii.	Specified date by which written request must be received (15 calendar days from the date of the notice mailing); and
iii.	Contact information for making the request.

Any MINOR REVISION must comply with requirements for approval and notice and must receive a zoning permit as part of the Richmond ZONING REGULATIONS and requirements for RECORDING in Section
800.6 below.




800.2	APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS: Any SUBDIVIDER shall submit to the Administrative Officer at least twenty one (21) days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the DRB, a COMPLETE APPLICATION and all associated application fees for a SKETCH PLAN, PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION, or FINAL SUBDIVISION.


800.3	NOTICE: In accordance with the ACT (§§4463, 4464), notice for public hearings, as required for PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION applications and FINAL SUBDIVISION applications, shall be given not less than 15 days in advance of the hearing date by all of the following:
(1)	Publication of the date, place and purpose of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town;
(2)	Posting the same information in three (3) or more public places in Town, including posting by the SUBDIVIDER on the subject property within view of the nearest public right-of-way;
(3)	Written notification to the SUBDIVIDER and to all ADJOINING PROPERTY OWNERS. The SUBDIVIDER shall submit to the Town of Richmond a list of all adjoining property owners and one set of stamped envelopes addressed for each ADJOINING PROPERTY OWNER to the proposed SUBDIVISION. These envelopes shall be used by the Administrative Officer to send notice of the public hearing;
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009



(4)	For proposed subdivisions located within 500 feet of a Town boundary, a copy of the notice shall be sent to the clerk of the adjoining municipality;
(5)	The notification for a public hearing shall include a description of the proposed project, and shall be accompanied by information that clearly informs the recipient where additional information may be obtained, and that participation in the hearing process is a prerequisite to the right to take any subsequent appeal. The DRB may also direct that written notice be provided to any other person;
(6)	The SUBDIVIDER shall be required to bear the cost of public warning, and the cost of notifying each ADJOINING PROPERTY OWNER; and,
(7)	No defect in the form or substance of any public notice required under this section shall invalidate the action of the DRB where reasonable efforts have been made to provide adequate posting and notice. However, the action shall be invalid when the defective posting or notice was materially misleading in content.


800.4	HEARINGS: All public hearings of the DRB shall be conducted in accordance with the ACT (§§4461, 4464). All provisions of §4464(b)(1) of the ACT shall apply :

(1)	The DRB may examine or cause to be examined any property, maps, books or records bearing upon the matters concerned in the proceeding, may require the attendance of any person having knowledge of the premises, and may administer oaths, take testimony and require proof material for its information;
(2)	The DRB may require an independent technical review of one or more aspects of an application, the reasonable cost of which shall be paid by the SUBDIVIDER, in accordance with procedures and standards for such reviews established by the Selectboard;

(3)	Any person may comment during the public hearing at times provided by the DRB. Opportunity shall be provided for each person wishing to achieve status as an INTERESTED PERSON, for purposes of appeal under Section 840, to demonstrate that the criteria for achieving such status are met. The DRB shall keep a written record of the name, address and participation of each of these persons; and,

(4)	The DRB may recess the public hearing proceedings on any application pending submission of additional information for a time and date certain within six months of the hearing date.

800.5	DECISIONS: In accordance with the ACT (§4464), all decisions of the DRB shall be issued within 45 days after the date of the hearing adjournment. Failure to issue a decision within this period shall be deemed approval and shall be effective on the 46th day , provided, however, that for a “deemed approval” to be effective, the SUBDIVIDER must seek court affirmation of the applicability of this remedy by direct appeal of the DRB’s decision or lack
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009


thereof to the Environmental Court. All provisions of §4464(b)(1) of the ACT shall apply.
(1)	All decisions of the DRB shall be sent by certified mail to the applicant, or appellant. Copies of the decision shall also be mailed to every person or body appearing and having been heard at the hearing, and shall be filed with the Administrative Officer and the approval or notice of approval filed with the Richmond Town Clerk as part of the public records of the municipality.
(2)	Any SUBDIVISION approval granted by the DRB shall not be personal to the applicant, but shall run with the land.


800.6	RECORDING: Within 30 days of the issuance of a FINAL SUBDIVISION approval or notice of violation, the SUBDIVIDER shall deliver either the original, a legible copy, or a notice of the approval to the Town Clerk for recording in the Town Land Records, as required in §4449(c) of the ACT.

800.7	OTHER REQUIREMENTS:
The SUBDIVIDER shall comply with the the following required actions to comply with the FINAL SUBDIVISION approval before ZONING PERMITS for LAND DEVELOPMENT for infrastructure construction are issued:
(1)	Comply with the written FINAL SUBDIVISION approval for plat and plans:

(2)	Set in place all MONUMENTS after all road improvements are completed and before the commencement of construction of any structures. Each MONUMENT shall have an identification on the top, so that the marked center shall be the point of reference. The tops of all MONUMENTS shall be flush with finished grades. In addition, MONUMENTS shall be shown on all corners of the boundary.

SECTION	810	Severability

The invalidity of any provision of these Subdivision Regulations shall not
		invalidate any other part.
		
`
SECTION	820	Enforcement and Penalties
		
§ 4451 and § of the ACT shall control any violation of these Subdivision Regulations.
SECTION	830	Saving Provision
		
No one shall construe these Subdivision Regulations to impair any actions now pending under prior regulations.

SECTION	
840	
Appeals
		
Appeals are conducted in accordance with the provisions of the ACT, §4471 and §4475.
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009




SECTION	850	Amendments of Statutes Referenced Herein
	Certain provisions of the Act and specific Town of Richmond regulations are
	incorporated in substance or verbatim as sections or subsections of these
	Subdivision Regulations. If any such regulatory or statutory referenced
	provision is amended after the effective date of these regulations, the
	corresponding section or subsection of these Subdivision Regulations shall
	be deemed automatically amended to conform with the language of such
	amendment.



ARTICLE	IX	DEFINITIONS

Unless otherwise defined herein, definitions contained in the Title 24 V.S.A. Annotated, Chapter 117 shall be applicable throughout these Subdivision Regulations.

ACT:	The Vermont Planning and Development ACT, Title 24, Chapter 117, Vermont Statutes Annotated, as subsequently amended. If any provision of these Subdivision Regulations are or become inconsistent with the Act, the Act shall control.

ADJOINING PROPERTY OWNER: Owners of properties adjoining the property subject to LAND DEVELOPMENT, including the owners of properties which would be contiguous to the property subject to LAND DEVELOPMENT but for the interposition of a highway or other public right-of-way.

AFFILIATED OWNERSHIP: Any legal or equitable title interest to lands held by individuals or entities affiliated with each other for profit or other consideration. A legal or equitable title interest held by an individual’s spouse, civil union partner, natural or adopted children, parents, or siblings, and the spouse or civil union partner of an individual’s parents, children or siblings, shall be presumed to be affiliated ownership unless satisfactory evidence is provided that such person will not derive any profit or other consideration from the contiguous lands.

The following rules shall apply in determination of whether certain types of ownership interests are affiliated:

a)	a stockholder in a corporation which holds the legal or equitable title interest shall be presumed to be affiliated if the stockholder and the stockholder’s spouse, civil union partner, natural or adopted children, parents, and siblings own, control or have a beneficial interest in more than five percent (5%) of the outstanding shares in the corporation
b)	an individual who owns the legal or equitable interest solely as an agent of another, such as a court appointed guardian, a licensed attorney, or similar agency relationship, shall not be deemed affiliated unless the compensation received or other consideration obtained as a result of those duties indicates more than an agency relationship;
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009


c)	a seller or chartered lending institution holding a legal or equitable title interest as security for money loaned to the individual shall not be deemed to be affiliated.



BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENT:  Adjustment of a boundary line between only two adjacent LOTS such that the adjustment does not substantially change the nature of any previous SUBDIVISION, does not create any new LOTS, does not change the land use, and does not make any existing LOT non- conforming. All boundary adjustments shall have accurate field measurements or be surveyed, if deemed necessary by the Administrative Officer, and recorded in the Town Land Records. Any BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENT must meet all requirements as specified in the Richmond Zoning Regulations, Section 5.8.

.COMMUNITY WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM: Any wastewater disposal system, other than a municipal system, that disposes of wastewater from two
(2)	or more DWELLINGS or establishments.

COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM:  Any water system that supplies potable water for domestic, general commercial or industrial uses to two (2) or more DWELLINGS or establishments.

COMPLETE APPLICATION: All required elements, materials, documentation, maps, site plans, etc. are determined to be complete. The Administrative Officer makes the determination prior to scheduling a PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION hearing or FINAL SUBDIVISION hearing.

DRB: Development Review Board of the Town of Richmond.

DWELLING:	A structure or portion thereof, containing sleeping, kitchen and bathroom facilities, designed or used for occupancy by one or more individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit.

FINAL SUBDIVISION: The final drawings and associated materials for the SUBDIVISION which is approved by the DRB.

FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT: The final survey of the SUBDIVISION which is approved by the DRB for recording in the Town Land Records.

INTERESTED PERSON: An interested person, for purposes of participation in DRB hearings and appeal, includes any one of the following, as defined under the ACT (§4465):
a)	A person owning title to property, a municipality, or a solid waste management district empowered to condemn it or an interest in it, affected by these Subdivision Regulations, who alleges that these Subdivision Regulations impose on the property unreasonable or inappropriate restrictions of present or potential use under the particular circumstances of the case;
b)	The Town of Richmond or any adjoining municipality;
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009


c)	A person owning or occupying property in the immediate neighborhood of a property that is subject of any decision or act taken under these Subdivision Regulations, who can demonstrate a physical or environmental impact on the person’s interest under the criteria reviewed, and who alleges that the decision or act, if confirmed, will not be in accord with the policies, purposes, or terms of these Subdivision Regulations or any bylaws of the Town of Richmond;
d)	Any ten persons who may be any combination of voters or real property owners within the Town of Richmond who, by signed petition to the DRB, allege that any relief requested by a person under these Subdivision Regulations, if granted, will not be in accord with the policies, purposes or terms of these Subdivision Regulations or ZONING REGULATIONS. The petition to the DRB must designate one person to serve as the representative of the petitioners regarding all matters related to an appeal; and,
e)	Any department or administrative subdivision of the state owning property or any interest in property within the municipality, and the Vermont Agency of Commerce and Community Development.

LAND DEVELOPMENT: The construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or any other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any change in the use of any building or other structure, or land, or extension of use of land. LAND DEVELOPMENT shall not include maintenance or interior re-modeling projects. This exemption does not apply to a structural alteration which results in an exterior addition or enlargement. LAND DEVELOPMENT shall not include any stairway landings or ramps up to 50 square feet in size providing external access to a building which is built in the agricultural- residential district, provided that the entry ways must be in compliance with all other elements of the ZONING REGULATIONS.

LARGE ANIMAL HABITAT: An area which has been identified as a seasonal or permanent congregating place for large animals (such as bear, deer, moose, coyote or felines) for extended feeding, breeding or wintering purposes. Sources for identifying such habitat include but are not limited to Vermont Heritage survey of natural features (on file at the Regional Planning Commission), the Agency of Natural Resources, and/or local knowledge.

LOT: Any contiguous land in AFFILIATED OWNERSHIP or control on the effective date of this Ordinance. Land which has a common boundary is contiguous, regardless of whether it is separated by an easement. Land which is separated by a state or municipal highway right-of-way, or surface water with a drainage area of greater than ten square miles is not contiguous. If a LOT is approved for SUBDIVISION or re-SUBDIVISION, and a FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT is recorded in the Town land records, each area of land approved for division shall also be a LOT. Land which has been previously identified and properly recorded in surveys or through deeds prior to the effective date of the ZONING REGULATIONS and Subdivision Regulations shall also be deemed to be LOTS.
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009



MINOR REVISIONS:   A revision to an approved subdivision that meets the specifications as laid out in Section 800.1.

MONUMENTS: MONUMENTS are granite or reinforced concrete markers constructed of at least 3,000 p.s.i. concrete and containing four (4) number 3 reinforcing bars set one in each corner. The MONUMENTS shall be a minimum of four (4) inches square and thirty six (36) inches long.

PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION: The first required step in SUBDIVISION approval process, where major issues are addressed, and potential solutions explored.

RESUBDIVISION OR AMENDED SUBDIVISION: Any change in a recorded SUBDIVISION plat, other than a MINOR REVISION as defined above, or a change that affects any area to be reserved for public use, or a change that affects any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any SUBDIVISION regulations by the Town of Richmond.

SELECTBOARD: The Selectboard of the Town of Richmond.
SKETCH PLAN: An informal review of a sketch of the proposed SUBDIVISION. STRUCTURE: An assembly of materials for occupancy or use, including a building,
mobile home or trailer, sign, wall, or fence.

SUBDIVIDER: Any person who shall lay out for the purpose of sale, development or other purpose, any subdivision or part thereof as defined in this ordinance, either for him/herself or others. The term shall include an applicant for subdivision approval.

SUBDIVISION: Any LOT or parcel, vacant or improved, which is divided into two (2) or more LOTS and any other division of land, for , sale, development, lease, or any other purpose. The term includes AMENDED SUBDIVISIONS, RESUBDIVISIONS., , Planned Unit Developments or Residential Planned Unit Developments as defined in the ZONING REGULATIONS, and condominiums and other common interest communities as defined in 27A VSA 1-103. BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENTS shall not be considered to be SUBDIVISIONS. SUBDIVISION does not include administratively created LOTS, which are defined in Section 2.6 of the ZONING REGULATIONS.

TOWN PLAN: The Richmond Town Plan, including any subsequent amendments, which is adopted under subchapter five of Chapter 117 in Title 24 of Vermont Statutes Annotated.

UNDUE ADVERSE EFFECT or UNDUE ADVERSE IMPACT: An effect or impact which is substantial or material. In making a determination of undue adverse impact or effect, the DRB may consider any factors it deems relevant under the applicable section of these regulations where the term is being used, including but not limited to, the nature of the project’s surroundings, compatibility with the project’s surroundings, whether the project violates a clear written community standard in a Town bylaw or regulation, or in the
 
Richmond Subdivision Regulations	Effective Date: April 27, 2009


Town Plan, whether the project’s applicant has failed to take generally available mitigating steps which a reasonable person would take to minimize the impact, the purpose or purposes of the zoning district in which the project is located and the specifically stated policies and standards of the Town Plan and, in the case of traffic issues, safety considerations and resulting levels of service.


ZONING PERMIT: Officially known as “Zoning and Construction Permit” issued by the Administrative Officer for construction, LAND DEVELOPMENT, building, change in use, etc.

ZONING REGULATIONS: The Richmond Town Zoning Regulations, including any subsequent amendments or interim regulations, which is adopted under the ACT (24 V.S.A. Chapter 117).
 
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT FEES (per Development Fee Ordinance 2015-3)

This schedule of fees, effective applies to zoning, subdivision and public works fees. Adopted by the Se- lectboard on September 5, 2017. Effective November 11, 2017.

Please note: Subsequent to receiving Development Review Board Approval (DRB), in most cases appli- cants are required to obtain a Zoning Permit to implement the approved project.

Zoning	
Minimum permit fee, includes fences, signs and etc. (include permit recording fee)	$  40.00
Residential Construction per square foot (including decks, porches and etc.) or $30.00 whichever is
greater *	$  0.20 + $10
recording fee
Commercial Construction per square foot, or $30.00 whichever is greater *	$  0.30 + $10
recording fee
Boundary Adjustment (includes permit recording fee)	$  80.00
Certificate of Occupancy  (includes permit recording fee)	$ 10.00
Conditional Use and Site Plan Review Application ( includes DRB Decision recording fee) ‡	$340.00
Site Plan Review Application  ( includes DRB Decision recording fee) ‡	$ 140.00
Site Plan Review – Administrative Amendment (includes permit recording fee)	$60.00
Appeal of Zoning Administrative Officer Decision (includes DRB Decision recording fee)	$150.00
As-built Zoning Permits	Double regular fee

Subdivision Approvals (does not include Mylar / Final Plat recording fee)	Fee
Subdivision Review – Administrative (include permit recording fee)	$80.00
Sketch Plan Review	No Fee
Preliminary Subdivision Review (3 or less lots) (includes DRB Decision recording fee)	$340.00
Preliminary Subdivision Review (4 or more lots) (includes DRB Decision recording fee)‡	$440.00 for 4 lots plus $50.00
per each additional lot
Final Subdivision Review (3 or less lots) (includes DRB Decision recording fee)	$340.00
Final Subdivision Review (4 or more lots) (includes DRB Decision recording fee)	$340.00
Preliminary & Final Subdivision Review (concurrent reviews) (3 or less lots)	$540.00
Preliminary & Final Subdivision Review (concurrent reviews) (4 or more lots) ‡	$640.00 for 4 lots plus $50.00
per each additional lot
Rural Road Plan Review (for the development of a road serving 4 – 9 houses)  ‡
(if required independent from a Subdivision Application)	$200.00
Subdivision Amendment - Administrative (includes permit recording fee)	$  80.00
Subdivision Amendment - DRB	$140.00

Public Works	Residential	Commercial
Town Highway Access (includes recording fee)	$ 110.00	$110.00
Use of Public Right-of-Way (includes inspection fee applications/no recording fee applies)	$200.00	$200.00

Impact Fees	Single-Family	Multi-Family/unit	Mobile Home	Non-Residential
* Fire	$	218.70	$	153.09	$	153.09	$	0.11 per s.f.

Other Fees		
Water and Sewer
Allocation and Service Fees	For development on the municipal water and sewer system additional fees
apply for new development and changes of use.	Contact Municipal Manager
for rates and approvals.
‡ Technical Review
Fees	Some development projects may require the submission of an additional
fee. See Procedures and Standards for Technical Review Fees for more info.	Minimum Fee $500
 
C-	1' l\L	<t,-S--- 1.S-
No	s c,l-\"" f   -(. "2-
Town of Richmond	() '1 l'1
Development  Permit Fees	firt...	I M f C\...4-{"'(_L.
(per Development Fee Ordinance 2015-3)	5	I ,,nj
This schedule of fees, effective June 5, 2015 applies to zoning , sub d ivision and p c wor	s.


Zoning and Construction
Zoning -- Minimum permit fee (includes recording fee)                                                                                 $ 40.00
Zoning -- Per Square Foot, Residential (includes recording fee)                                                                      $ 0.20
Zoning-- Per Square Foot, Commercial (includes recording fee)                                                                     $ 0.30
Request for Permit Information (includes site visit)                                                                                  $ 50.00
Boundary Adjustment (includes recording fee)                                                                                         $ 75.00
Certificate of Occupancy (includes recording fee)                                                                              $10.00 DRB Conditional Use Hearing (except Subdivision)( does not include recording fee)                       $300.00 Site Plan Review (Administrative)( does not include recording fee)                                                         $ 50.00
Site Plan Review Hearing (DRB) (does not include recordin g fee)                                                          $100.00


Subdivision (does not include recording fee)		
Sketch Plan Review	No fee
Preliminary Subdivision (4- or less lots)	$200.00 plus $100.00/new unit
Preliminary Subdivision (5 or more lots)	$400.00 plus $100.00/new unit
Administrativ ely Created Lots	$  100.00
Subdivision Amendment (Administrative)	$ 60.00
'"   'idivision Amendment (DRB)	$200.00

Public Works	Residential	Com ercial
Town Highway Access [includes recording fee]	$    100.00	$100.00
Use of Public Right-of-Way [separate inspection fee applications/no recording fee
applies]	$100.00	$100.00
		

Im  act Fees
Fire

Recording Fees	Cost pe	r page
All p er·mits and DRB Decisions are recorded within the land records	$10
All Subdivision Final Plats (Mylar) are recorded within the land records	$15	

Other Fees
 

AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF RICHMOND 2012-04

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING CERTAIN FEES IN THE TOWN OF RICHMOND

The Selectboard of the Town of Richmond hereby ordains that the following shall serve as the fee schedule for certain zoning and land development services:

Section I.	Fee Schedule

This schedule of fees, effective September 4, 2012, applies to zoning, subdivision and public works fees.
 
Zonin  and Construction
Zoning -- Minimum permit fee	  includes recordin	fee
Zoning -- Per Square Foot, Residential includes recordin	fee
Zoning -- Per Square Foot, Commercial includes record in    fee





Temporary Certificate of Occupancy  (includes recording fee
ORB Conditional Use Hearing or Appeal of Zoning Decision
does not include recordin	fee
Site Plan Review (Administrative) does not include recordin	fee Site Plan Review Hearing (ORB) does not include recordin   fee
For development within the Flood Hazard Overlay District for development or repairs that would not require ORB or zoning approval outside of the Flood Hazard Overla District
 


$ 40.00


$ 0.20


$ 0.30


$50.00
$ 75.00
$10.00
$ 60.00


$150.00



$ 50.00


$ 100.00


$10 per recorded page
 

Subdivision (does not include recording fee)
Sketch Plan Review                                                                  No fee          ...    ,    '
Preliminary Subdivision (4 or less lots) $200.00 plus $100.00/new unit Preliminairy Subdivision f5 or more lots) $400.00 plus $100.00/new unit Administratively Created Lots                                           $  100.00
 
Subdivision Amendment (Administrative)
 

·- r.
 
$ 60.00
 
)	Subdivision Amendment (ORB)	$200.00
 
I hereby certify that the Richmond Selectboard adopted the above ordinance on the 1st day of October, 2012 and that.no voter petition was filed within the time period thereafter prescribed
24   VSA   1973.	J	_	(}
12/03/2012	fvv\At(!,r,.r._  pV\ (	Town Clerk

Public Works	Residential	Commercial
.,
 
Use of Public Right-of-Way  (separate
inspection fee applies/no recording fee
 
$	100.00	$	100.00	'
"
 

applies)
 
j.  I	'
 
Town Highway Access [includes recording	$	100.00	$	100.00
fee]
Technical Review Fee (4 or less lots)*	.,.-,	$	600.00	$ 1,200.00 Technical Review Fee (5 to 9 lots)*		$1,800.00	$2,000.00 Technical Review Fee (10 to 50 lots)*			$2,800.00	$3,800.00 Technical Review Fee (more than 50 lots)*		$3,600.00	$5,200.00

Impact Fees	Single-Family	Multi-Family /unit	Mobile Home	Non-Residential
School	$ 2,828.00	$	1,228.00	$	1,776.00	$	0.00
F	ire	$	218.70	$	153.09	$	153.09	$ s.f.	0.11 per



Section II.	Severability.
If any section or part of this ordinance is deemed to be invalid or unenforceable, the remaining sections or parts of this Ordinance shall remain valid and enforceable.

Adopted by the Richmond  Selectboard this _1_   f!Y of   Ocf-ob-e Y"", 2   H2

RICHMOND, VT TOWN CLERK'S OFFICE
.	RECEIVED.FOR RECORD
 
Bool< ze
 



( 6-II	Lond Re<....t,
 
D3	A.o.ZPI(
Ar	8 o'clock ro minutes  A" M. and recorded in .rl>
Pago
Att est:	\.A.lf!CA.. M/?ttJi	Town Clef!.:     ':-\






Unless a petition is filed in accordance with Section 1973 of Title 24 Vermont Statutes Annotated, this ordinance shall become effective sixty days after the date of its adoption.  If a petition is filed in accordance with Section 1973 of Title 24 Vermont
Statutes Annotated, the taking effect of this ordinance shall be governed by Section
)
1973(e) of Title 24 Vermont Statutes Annotated.
 


,..
 
Wastewater Reserve - Capacity Allocation


ownership & Permit

The Town of Richmond, Vermont, owns and operates a sewage treatment and disposal plant (PLANT) and a sewage collection and transmission system (SEWERS) as defined in 24 V.S.A., Section 3501(6) and 3601. The PLANT has a permitted capacity, and is operated in accord with a discharge permit issued by the  Vermont  Department  of  Environmental  Conservation
(DEPARTMENT) under authority granted in 10 V.s.A. , Chapter 47.
The	board of sewage disposal commissioners (BOARD) is obligated by law to comply with conditions of that permit, and to operate and manage the PLANT and SEWERS as governmental functions under and pursuant to 24 V.S.A., Chapters 97 and
101.


2.	Introduction to Reserve Capacity Allocation

The permitted capacity of the PLANT and SEWERS is the property of the Town of Richmond. The uncommitted reserve capacity of the PLANT and SEWERS shall be allocated by the BOARD in the manner described below. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the provisions of 24 V.S.A., Section 3625, in the manner provided in 24 V.S.A., Chapter 59 (or in the manner provided for in 24 V.S.A., Chapter 117), and shall not be construed as an abandonment or relinquishment of the authority or responsibility of the BOARD to regulate, control and supervise all means and methods of sewage collection, treatment and disposal within the Town of Richmond, nor shall it be construed to impair or inhibit the ability of the Town of Richmond to contract with persons for the collection, transmission and treatment of sewerage.

The Town of Richmond has a design treatment capacity of 222,000 gallons per day and currently operates the treatment PLANT at an average of 68,250 gallons per day from "current users". At the time of the adoption of this ordinance committed reserve capacity equals O gallons and the uncommitted reserve capacity equals 153,750 gallons, these amounts are subject to change.


3.	Definitions

The following words will have the meanings below when used in this Article.

a)	"Person" shall have the meaning prescribed in 1 V.S.A., Section 128.

b)	"Department"	shall	mean	the	Vermont	Department	of Environmental Conservation.



...
 



:..,
·-
 

c) "Discharge Permit" shall mean a permit issued by the Department pursuant to authority granted in 10 V.S.A., Chapter 47.

d)	"BOARD" shall mean the Board of Selectmen of a Town, the Trustees of a Village, City Council of a City or the Prudential Committee of a Fire District acting as a Board of Sewage Disposal Commissioners under 24 V.S.A., Section 3614.

e)	"Impact Fee" shall mean a fee imposed on applicants for capacity allocation equal to the capital cost per gallon of sewage treatment and disposal capacity attributable to the project or development. This fee shall be consistent with the intent of impact fees authorized under 24 V.S.A. Chapter 131.

f)	"Connection Fee" shall mean a fee imposed on applicants for the municipality's cost of performing, supplying materials, supervising, inspecting and administering a connection to the sewage system including any necessary sewer service extension, upgrading sewers or for any portion of these activities.

g)	"Plant Wastewater Flow" is the ·wastewater passing through the treatment plant in gallons per day on an annual average basis (365 day average) except where flows vary significantly from seasonal development. In the latter case, plant wastewater flow is determined as the average throughout the high seasonal use period, as determined by the BOARD.

h)	"Permitted Wastewater Flow" is the maximum plant wastewater flow authorized in the Discharge Permit on an annual average (365 day average) basis, or on the high seasonal use period as defined in the discharge permit.

i)	"Development Wastewater Flow" is the flow resulting from full use of the development at its peak capacity, which flow shall be calculated using flow quantities, adopted as rules by the DEPARTMENT, as promulgated at the time a connection	permit application is made. The flow quantities in State regulation at the time of adoption of this ordinance are shown on Table 7a (Attachment A) .

j)	"Reserve Capacity" is the permitted wastewater flow minus the actual plant wastewater flow during the preceding 12 months.

k)	"Uncommitted Reserve Capacity" is that portion of the reserve	capacity remaining after subtracting the development wastewater flow of all projects approved by the DEPARTMENT but not yet discharging to the SEWER.
 
..   !	.·	.·
,.

 


. .;..      ..  ·.
·:··































































....·
 
1)	"Committed Reserve Capacity" is the total amount of development wastewater flow (gallons per day) from all projects/buildings	approved by the BOARD and the DEPARTMENT for discharge to the treatment PLANT, but not yet discharging at the time of the calculation.

m)	"Sanitary Wastewater" is wastewater of the same character and range of strength as expected from homes.

n)	"Sewer Service Area" is that area of the municipality that	is within the existing municipal main service collection lines and manholes.

o)	"PLANT" - The municipal sewage treatment plant owned by the Town of Richmond.

p)	"SEWERS" - The sewage collection and transmission system owned by the Town of Richmond.

q)	"Development" - The construction of improvements on a tract of land for any purpose, including, but not limited to,	residential, commercial, industrial activity, subdivisions and the intent to subdivide.

r)	"Initiate Construction" -

1)	For building development; the completion of the foundation.

2)	For subdivision development;  the sale of the individual	lots, or other, sale or the intent to subdivide.

s)	"Completed Construction" -

1)	For building development completion of construction of all foundations, framing, siding and roofs.

2)	For subdivision development; the sale of the individual lots.


4.	Reserve Capacity Allocation

A)	Allocation Flow Basis

All allocations to projects shall be based on the development wastewater flow. Any differential between actual flows and development wastewater flows that occurs is not available to the development owner for reallotment to another project or a project expansion .






..
 
...
 
.    •.I	. '·
 

• •   ...4
 


B)	Allocation	Priorities
	Allocation	of uncommitted reserve capacity shall comply
with the following priority intended to govern the gross
allocation of reserve capacity before the allocation
principles are applied to specific projects.

Residential, commercial, institutional and industrial facilities existing within the sewer service area.on the date of adoption of this ordinance which are required to be connected to the municipal sewer by the municipal sewer use ordinance, or by virtue of existing pollution from the facilities to waters of the State, or existing health hazard shall be entitled to first priority in allocation of uncommitted reserve capacity. New development within or outside the sewer service area will have second priority of uncommitted reserve capacity provided that the development is in the best interest of the Town of Richmond as determined by the BOARD.

C)	Allocation Principles

Subsequent to application of the allocation priority, uncommitted reserve capacity in the wastewater treatment facility may be allocated to specific projects according to the following procedure.

a)	Once sewer permit applications have been returned to the municipality) office and marked with the time	and date by the person receiving the application, the BOARD may review the applications on a first come, first serve basis. The total remaining uncommitted wastewater reserve capacity shall be allocated by the BOARD in such a way that there	are no limitations on what total reserve amounts can be allocated in any one year as long as uncommitted capacity exists, and no limitation of the type of development receiving the allocation. The total reserve capacity will be determined each (suggested 6) months and committed reserve will be continuously	recorded for use in allocation decisions.

b)	The BOARD retains the right to review applications and make allocations on other than a first come first serve basis if they find such action is in the municipality's best interest.

5.	Cost Recovery for SEWERS Expansion

A) Any extension of the sewer service area to provide for new users shall be funded in the following way.
 
·.• •




The proposed users to be served by the expansion pay the entire cost of the expansion and upgrading of the SEWERS and wastewater facility determined necessary and adequate by the BOARD.

B)    Any payments made as required by Section S(A) shall not be construed as payments towards treatment capacity that may be provided for the development.

6.	Application Requirement

Persons wishing to use the PLANT and SEWERS shall apply to the BOARD on a form prescribed by the BOARD (Attachment B) . Such application shall:

 
a)	Be accompanied by · a calculation of the wastewater	flow to be generated project/development;
 

development by	the
 


b)	Include calculations for the volume, flow rate, strength and any other characteristics determined appropriate by the BOARD;

c)	Unless waived by the BOARD all calculations required in
(a)	and (b) above for developments generating over 1000 gpd shall be certified by a Vermont registered engineer.

d)	Be accompanied by plans and specifications for the construction of building sewers (from the buildings to municipal sewers) and any municipal sewer extensions, including	pump stations, required to service the development prepared by a Vermont registered engineer. This requirement to submit plans and specs may be waived by the BOARD until final connection approval.

7.	Preliminary Connection Approval Findings

Upon receipt of the connection application and supportive documents, the BOARD may make preliminary approval of uncommitted reserve capacity upon making affirmative findings that:

a)	The proposed wastewater is of domestic, sanitary origin and that there is sufficient uncommitted reserve capacity to accommodate the volume and strength of the proposed connection;

b)	The proposed wastewater is not of domestic sanitary origin and that sufficient evidence has been presented by the applicant to demonstrate that the flow and character of the wastewater is compatible with the proper operation of the PLANT and SEWERS and that the proposed wastewater will not alone or in combination with other wastes cause a violation of the discharge permit, pass through the PLANT without treatment, interfere or otherwise disrupt the proper quality and disposal of PLANT sludge or be
 
inJurious in any other manner to the PLANT or SEWERS and that there is sufficient uncommitted reserve capacity to accommodate the strength and volume of the proposed development;

c) The proposed use of wastewater capacity complies with the allocation	priorities and principles and is not in conflict with any other enactment adopted by the BOARD or municipality.

8.	Conditions of Preliminary Connection Approval

The BOARD, after making the approval findings above, may issue a preliminary connection approval, which approval shall be a binding commitment of capacity ·to· the project contingent on compliance with any conditions attached to the preliminary approval and the subsequent issuance of a final connection approval (Attachment C). The preliminary approval conditions may include:

a)	Specification of the period of time during which the interim connection approval shall remain valid 120 days. Provisions for time extensions if approved by the BOARD.

b)	Incorporation	of	specific	conditions	which	must	be
	fulfilled by the applicant to maintain preliminary connection approval.	validity of the

c)	
Provision for revocation by the action	
of the BOARD on
failure of the applicant to fulfill requirements of the
preliminary connection approval.

d) Specification that the recipient of the preliminary connection approval may not transfer, by any means, the preliminary connection approval to any other person or connect to the SEWERS.

PRIOR TO FINAL CONNECTION APPROVAL THE FOLLOWING COMMITMENTS SHALL BE MET BY THE APPLICANT:

a)	Applicable local, State and Federal permits have been secured for the development/project;

b)	Connection fees, impact fees, permit fees and other local fees or taxes all set by the BOARD, have been paid in full to the Town of Richmond. Impact fees will be partially	based on the volume and strength of the proposed wastewater flow.

c)	The plans and specs for connection to and, if necessary, extension of the municipal SEWERS are acceptable to the BOARD.
 
..


9.	Final Connection Approval Requirements

The BOARD on making affirmative findings that all conditions of the preliminary connection approval and final connection approval prerequisites in Section 8 have been fulfilled shall issue the final connection approval permit which approval may be conditioned as follows:

a)	The permit shall specify the allowed volume, flow rate, strength frequency and any other characteristics of the proposed discharge determined appropriate by the BOARD.

b)	The capacity allocation is not transferable to any other person or project unless requested by the original owner and approved by the BOARD.

c)	The construction of the connection and, if necessary, the municipal SEWER extension, must be overseen to assure compliance with the plans and specs and good construction practice in a manner acceptable to the BOARD.

d)	Capacity allocated in conjunction with the final connection permit for building development shall revert to the Town of Richmond if the permit recipient has failed to initiate construction within one year of the issued date on the permit.

e)	The permit shall expire (three) years from the date of issuance.	A revised development plan and ·connection application may be approved by the BOARD in the same manner as the original. Such revised plans must also be approved under local bylaws and by the applicable State Laws and Regulations. If the BOARD approves a revised development plan and connection with reduced or increased capacity	allocation determined in accord with the allocation priorities and principles. Where reduced capacity is granted in a revised connection permit, the unused capacity shall revert to the Town of Richmond and the Town of Richmond will pay to the applicant, a proportional	refund of impact fees and, where appropriate, a portion of the connection fees. With any approval of a revised development plan and connection permit the BOARD may consider extension of the original (three) year permit expiration date.

If a permit expires after (three) years or after any extension of time provided by the BOARD, the unused portion of the committed capacity allocation at the time of expiration shall revert to the Town of Richmond and there will be no refund of connection, impact, permit or other fees paid. The BOARD will determine the amount of unused capacity returned. Generally, the unused capacity reverting to the municipality is associated with buildings that do not at least have foundations, framing and roofs.

..
 
.·
Regardless of the permit expiration period above the BOARD may order construction of the development over a longer period if this action is in the municipality's best interest.    ·

f)	For subdivision projects the permit holder (developer) of a proposed subdivided parcel must indicate the development planned for each lot.	If all prerequisites defined for final connection approval herein are met, final connection permits will be issued to the	· subdivision owner for each lot with a specific reserve capacity allocation associated with the proposed development.	These final connection permits will expire after (three) years from the date of initial issuance unless the developer has sold the lot for development or has completed construction in accord
with the approved development plan.	The expiration at three years from original issuance will not be modified
by any revisions to the subdivision or development plan subsequent to the initial approval.	The BOARD shall then notify the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources of the expired subdivision Sewer Permit.

The reserve capacity allotted to lots that are either unsold or do not have building construction completed at the time of permit expiration (three) years shall revert to the municipality without refund of any fees paid.	Reserve capacity shall also revert to the municipality from any reductions made to the development wastewater flow planned for each lot subsequent to initial approval.

The subdivision owner shall file the final connection permits in the land records of the Town of Richmond along with copies of all fees paid and reference to the location of the approved connection plans and specifications.	When the owner/developer of a subdivision sells individual lots within the (three) year time frame, the firial connection permit shall transfer when the property transfers and the new owner becomes bound to comply with all permits issued and the plans and specifications for connecting the municipal SEWERS.	The transferred permit will be considered a
new permit issued on the date of property transfer and the constraints of 9(e) will apply to this permit.	The permit will expire as provided in 9(e).

g)	In cases where a final connection permit expires and a new person applies for capacity on the same or a different project, the BOARD may consider previous fees paid by the original person when setting fees for the new person applying for capacity.

h)	The chief wastewater treatment plant operator or other designated municipal official shall be notified one week in advance of any proposed sewer connection
 
'.

authorized by a final connection permit.	The connection to the municipal sewer shall not be
performed unless the municipal official is present and
·:,:·	shall not be covered until approved by the official.
Additional constraints may be found in the Sewer Use Ordinance.

10.	Transfer of Allocation

a)	Initially reserve capacity is allocated by the BOARD to a specific person, project and parcel of land.	The allocation is not made solely to a parcel of land and therefore does not run with the land during project completion.	After completion of the project or permit expiration, however, the allocation (adjusted to the actual development constructed, if necessary) will run with the land.

b)	The transfer of the capacity allocation is prohibited unless approved in writing by the BOARD at the original owners request.

c)	The BOARD may approve transfer of capacity from one project to another and one owner to another provided the new project and owner meets all the requirements
for the final connection approval originally is ued and the original owner requests such transfer.

11.	Authority to Require Connection

Nothing herein shall be construed as limiting or impairing the authority of the Town of Richmond or its BOARD to require connections to the PLANT and SEWERS under the general laws of the state or local ordinances.

12.	Adoption of Ordinance
This ordinance shall become effective at midnight,	1J./¥/1:J_	.
To the extent that any provision herein shall be	1
'
inconsistent with or contrary to any provision of Town of Richmond ordinance {Sewer Use Ordinance) adopted	q/2ah4, then the provisions of this ordinance shall apply.		The adoption of this allocation Ordinance shall not interfere with the authority and responsibility of the legislative body as Sewer Commissioners, in matters relating to the management and operation of the Public Sewer System as provided in Chapter 97 and 101 of 24	S.A

BOARD OF SELECTMEN:











..
 
Water Supply Source Protection Ordinance










Printed hearing notice required by Charter in Burlington Free Press:  June 14 1996




Adopted and Passed by the Richmond Selectboard on June 17, 1996.




Posted  in five public places on June 19, 1996.




Received by Richmond Town Clerk on June 20, 1996 and filed in the "Book of Ordinances" in the Richmond Town Clerk's Office.




VelmaE.













EFFECTIVE DATE:	AUGUST 17  1996
 
\V11tcr Supply Protection Ordinuncc	.June 13, 1996


TOWN OF RICHMOND, VERMONT

WATER SUPPLY SOURCE PROTECTION ORDINANCE


The Richmond Town Selectboard, acting in that capacity and as the Board of Water Commissioners of the Town, hereby adopts the following ordinance pursuant to 24 V.S.A. §3315, 24 V.S.A. §2291, 24 V.S.A. §1972, and such other statutes as may be applicable to the subject matter hereof:


Article 1 Purpose; Title
1.1	Title:  This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Town of Richmond Water Supply Source

Protection Ordinance".


1.2	Purpose:  The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of users of the Town's public water supply, by prohibiting certain uses and contaminants which are reasonably likely to reach and adversely affect the Town's Public Water Supply Source.


Article 2 Definitions
2.1	As used in this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

a.	"Hazardous Waste" means any material or substance which, by reason of its composition or characteristics,  is from time to time defined as hazardous either by 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., or by 15 U.S.C. § 2605(e), or by 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 et seq., or by 10 V.S.A. Chapter 159, or by any laws of similar purpose or effect, or by any regulations promulgated under any of the foregoing, and any other material which the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources or its Secretary, or the Vermont  Department of Environmental  Conservation, or any similar governmental agency or unit having jurisdiction,  shall determine from time to time is ineligible for disposal in landfills, whether by reasons of being toxic, reactive, ignitable, corrosive or otherwise.   For example only, and without  limitation, the following
materials are hazardous: waste gasoline, used motor oil, paint thinner, film processing fluids and similar materials.
b.	"Impervious Area" means an area with an impervious surface which is enclosed on all sides by

impervious barriers, so that leachate from any stored materials will be contained and will not enter groundwater.
c.	"Lot" means any contiguous land in the Source Protection Area owned by a person on the

effective date of this ordinance.   If a Lot (as so defined) is further lawfully divided, each area of land in the Source Protection Area created by such division shall also be a "Lot".
d.	"Officer" shall mean the officer designated by the Selectboard under Rule 8.6 of the District Court Civil Rules, to issue complaints for violation of this Ordinance.
 
\Vnter Supply Protection Ordinance	.June 13, 1996



e.	"Person" means an individual, partnership, corporation, association, and any other incorporated or unincorporated entity, excluding the Town.
f.	"Public Water Supply Source" means the Town's water well located on the easterly side of Bridge Street and southerly of the Winooski River, and any additional wells which may in the future be installed for supplying public water to properties in the Town.
g.	"Remedial Action" with regard to an underground or above ground storage tank shall mean removal from the Source Protection Area of the tank, removal of any soils contaminated by leakage from the tank, and clean up and removal from the Source Protection Area of any gasoline products, petroleum products or other Hazardous Waste which has leaked into an Impervious  Area.
h.	"Source Protection Area" means a certain contiguous area of land within the Town which is located generally northerly and southerly of Cochran Road, and easterly and westerly of Bridge Street and easterly of Thompson Road.  This area is depicted on a Plan (the "Plan") entitled "Public Water Supply Source Protection Areas, Richmond, Vermont", dated August 15, 1995.   A copy of the legend of the Plan, and the portion of the Plan depicting this area, is attached to this ordinance.  The original of the Plan is on file in the Town Clerk's office.
i.	"Structure" shall mean an assembly of materials for occupancy or use.

j.	"Town" means the Town of Richmond, Vermont.

k.	"Use" includes the words "arranged", "designed", or "intended to be used".

I.	"Written Notice" means written notice to a person by certified mail, return receipt requested.

Notice shall be deemed given when deposited in the United States mails by this method. Any notice to a property owner shall be sufficient if addressed to the property owner at the property owner's address as shown in the Town Grand List book completed next preceding the date of the notice, or to such other address as a person may designate by notice in writing by the aforesaid method to the Town Listers.


Article 3

Prohibited Uses and Activities

3.1	The following uses and activities are prohibited in the Source Protection Area.  No person shall use, or suffer or allow the use of, any property within the Source Protection Area for any of the uses described below. No person shall engage in or carry on, or suffer or allow any person to engage in or carry on, any of the activities described below within the Source Protection area:
a.	Construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, enlargement,  or occupancy of any Structure used in whole or in part for human habitation unless:
i.	the Structure is connected to the Town public sewer system in compliance with all

applicable laws and regulations; or
 
\\'uter Supply Protection Ordinance	,June 13, 1996



ii.	the Structure is connected to a sewage disposal area, and the entirety of the sewage disposal area servicing the Structure lies outside the Source Protection Area, and a Vermont  licensed sanitary engineer satisfactory to the Officer provides the following to the  Officer:
(a)	before installation: a design of the entire sewage disposal system, prepared by the engineer and bearing the engineer's stamp, and the engineer's certification to the Officer that any wastewater (regardless of the degree of treatment) from the sewage disposal area and its associated facilities, including but not limited to septic tanks, pump stations, and piping, will not enterthe ground beneath the surface of the Source Protection Area, and


(b)	after installation and before use:  an "as built" design of the entire sewage disposal system prepared and stamped by the engineer, locating the sewage disposal area and such associated facilities by surveyed metes and bounds, and the engineer's certification to the Officer that the sewage disposal area and all such associated facilities, as installed, are consistent with the pre-construction design, and, further, that wastewater (regardless of the degree of treatment) from the sewage disposal area and such associated facilities will not enter the ground beneath the surface of the Source Protection Area.
b.	Any use in which the manufacture, use, processing, storage or disposal of Hazardous Waste is a

principal activity, including, but not limited to metal plating, chemical manufacturing, wood preserving, furniture stripping, and dry-cleaning.
c.	Trucking or bus terminals, motor vehicle gasoline sales and service, and auto body repairing.

d.	The installation in any Structure of any floor drain or sump by which any liquid or material whatsoever may pass into the ground.
e.	Solid waste disposal areas, dumps, junk and salvage yards, and cemeteries, and the burial of dead animals.
f.	Underground storage tanks for gasoline products, petroleum products, or any other Hazardous Waste.  Provided, however, that any underground storage tank used as a supply of home heating oil and existing as of the effective date of this Ordinance may continue to exist.
However, the owner of property where any existing underground home heating oil tank is located shall take Remedial Action (i) immediately upon the tank ceasing to be used as a supply of home heating oil, (ii) if the tank leaks, and (iii) in any event within thirty (30) days of Written Notice
from the officer that the tank is leaking.  Any replacement tank shall be an above ground tank complying with subsection (g) below.
 
\Vnter Supply Protection Ordintmce	.June 13, 1996



g.	Above ground storage tanks for gasoline products, petroleum products or any other Hazardous Waste, except within a building or on an Impervious Area. Provided, however, that any above ground outdoor storage tank used as a supply of home heating oil and existing on the effective date of this Ordinance may continue to exist, even if not on an Impervious Area.  However, the owner of property where any existing above ground home heating oil tank is located shall take Remedial Action (i) immediately upon the tank ceasing to be used as a supply of home heating oil, (ii) if the tank leaks, and (iii) in any event within thirty (30) days of Written Notice from the Officer that the tank is leaking. Any replacement tank shall comply with the first sentence of this subsection (g). This subsection (g) shall not be construed as allowing uses and activities otherwise prohibited by this Section 3.1.
h.	Outdoor storage of  salt, de-icing materials, pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers.   Storage of these items when incidental to a residential use and on an Impervious Area which is indoors (covered on top and all sides) is allowed.
i.	The rendering impervious of more than fifteen percent (15%) of  the area of any Lot.

j.	The storage or keeping of any unregistered motor vehicle unless stored in an enclosed structure and parked on an impervious surface.
k.	The extraction of earth, sand, gravel, or any other material, except as necessary for the

construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of a Structure for a use and/or activity not prohibited by this Ordinance.
I.	Any septic tank or sewage disposal field servicing a use or Structure located outside of the Source Protection Area.
m.	The use of salt or other de-icing materials on any private roadway, parking area, or other area.

n.	The following uses and activities within two-hundred feet (200') of the Public Water Supply Source:
i.	the spreading or storage of any human waste or animal waste. This does not prohibit use of the land for non-commercial household pet activities nor the grazing of livestock per the then current standards for grazing established by the Vermont Department of Agriculture.
ii.	the spreading or storage of any pesticides, herbicides, or fertilizers.

o.	The following   uses and activities in the Source Protection Area but outside of a two-hundred foot (200') radius from the Public Water Supply Source:
i.	The storage of human waste or animal waste, except on an Impervious Area, which is covered so that rain water will not enter the waste or the Impervious Area. Any storage area for human waste or animal waste in existence on the effective date of this ordinance may continue to be used for a period of sixty (60) days from such effective date, and thereafter shall cease to be used and shall be properly cleaned and all human waste and animal waste removed.
 
\Vater Supply Protection Ordinance	.June 13, 1996



ii.	The spreading of animal waste or human waste, except for application to garden areas of 1,500 square feet or less, provided that there shall not be more than one such garden area on any Lot.  This does not prohibit use of the land for non-commercial household pet activities nor the grazing of livestock per the then current standards for grazing established by the Vermont  Department of Agriculture.
iii.	The spreading of pesticides, herbicides, or fertilizers.

p.	Construction, reconstruction, or enlargement of any roadway, parking area, roof, or other impervious surface which is not designed so that all rain water run-off is diverted toward surface areas covered with vegetation for surface infiltration.
q.	Any other activity which is likely to pollute, contaminate, or otherwise render impure the Public Water Supply Source.
Article 4 Enforcement and Remedies
4.1	Inspection. The Officer, accompanied by any person from whom the Officer may require assistance,

shall have the right, at reasonable times to enter any property or Structure within the Source Protection Area and in the area of a sewage disposal field described in 3.1(a)(ii) for the purpose of conducting such inspections and testing as may be necessary to determine whether a violation of this Ordinance exists.
A person shall not prohibit or impair the Officer and such person accompanying the Officer from conducting any such inspection or testing. The Officer shall make a reasonable attempt to contact the landowner except in cases of emergency prior to entering property.
4.2	Payment to Town for Clean-up Casis. If any owner of (i) property in the Source Protection Area or (ii)

property containing a sewage disposal area described in 3.1(a){ii) shall not, within thirty (30) days of Written Notice from the Town of a violation of this Ordinance on such owner's property, take any and all actions necessary to correct and remedy the violation and bring the property into compliance with this Ordinance, then the Town, and its contractors, may enter onto such property for the purpose of taking all actions necessary to correct the violation and bring the property into compliance with this Ordinance.
The owner of the property shall pay the Town all of ils costs and expenses for such remedial work,

regardless of whether the violation was caused by such property owner or Persons occupying under the property  owner.
4.3	Injunction.  In addition to any other remedy provided in this Ordinance or available at law or in equity, the Town may institute a suit in equity for an injunction to prevent, restrain, or abate a violation.
4.4	Attorneys Fees and Expenses.  In the event the Town is required to institute suit against any Person under section 4.2 or 4.3 above, such Person shall pay the Town its reasonable costs and expenses related to such suit in the event the Town prevails.
4.5	Civil Ordinance.  This Ordinance is designated as a civil ordinance pursuant to 24 V.S.A. §1971 (b).

4.6	Penalties.  The following civil penalties are hereby imposed for violation of this Ordinance:   $500.00 for any violation.  Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
 
\\'utcr Supply Protection Ordinnncc	.June 13, 1996



4.7	Waiver Penalties.   In cases where violations of this Ordinance are brought in the Traffic and Municipal Ordinance Bureau, and where the violation is admitted and not contested, in lieu of the above, the following waiver penalties are imposed:  $250.00 for each violation.  Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
4.8	Construction.  The terms and provisions of this Ordinance are to be liberally construed so as to best achieve and promote the goals and purposes hereof.  The captions and headings in this Ordinance are inserted for purposes of convenience and reference only, and shall not be used in any way for the construction or interpretation of this Ordinance.
4.9	Severability. The provisions of this Ordinance are severable. If any provision of this Ordinance, or its application to any Person or circumstances is held to be invalid, illegal, or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity shall not apply to any other portion of this Ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application hereof.
4.10	Determination of Source Protection Area Boundaries. Source Protection Area Boundaries shall be determined by using the scale of the Source Protection Area Plan on the original of the Plan in the Town Clerk's office.
4.11	Conflicting Ordinances or Regulations.  In case of any inconsistency between a provision of this

Ordinance and a provision of any other applicable ordinance or regulation of the Town, including but not limited to the Town's Zoning Bylaws, the provision of this Ordinance shall control.
4.12	Effective Date.  This Ordinance shall be effective sixty (60) days after its adoption pursuant to 24 V.S.A.

§1972, provided, however, that if a petition is filed in accordance with 24 V.S.A. §1973, the taking effect of this ordinance shall be governed by 24 V.S.A. §1973(e).


ADOPTED by the Richmond Town Selectboard this 17'h day of June, 1996

 	Vt?4
Frances F. Thomas, Chair
 
()	Wright c. Preston
!floicj)(}	c--
David c. Johnson
_..,,) .. ,		c	L
 
v'11"'.211  ..
I
 
-nl  .	Ca 1'"u.  _

Virginia M. Clarke
 
£t: ·;Z't\
.,, ;c. .,·,.,,.
 
Richmond Village Water System Rules

I.	The following definitions will be observed in all references herein:

Village Main Lines—primary distributing lines servicing entire area of the village, owned by the Village.

Village Service Lines – these few branch distributing lines, serving a small number of consumers, owned by the village.

Private Service Lines—those lines used by rate consumers not owned by the Village

II.	Main Extension

No further extension of the village main lines shall be undertaken without express vote, upon proper warning of Village Taxpayers.

III.	Improvement of Service—Private Repair
1.	Upon request of a consumer rate payers, improvement may, in the opinion of the Water commissioner, be undertaken on Village Main Lines and Village owned Service Lines. However, if in the opinion of the Water commissioners the improvement was unnecessary and the true fault of improper service was in the line of the consumer rate payer, the Commissioners may assess the entire charge of the improvement upon the complaining consumer rate payer.
a)	In the even fault is discovered in both lines, the Water Commissioners shall determine the percentage of fault and assess the charge accordingly
b)	Upon such improvement, the Water Commissioners may order that a
curb stop and curb box shall be installed, if not already installed, at the expense of each consumer rate payer.
2.	Upon any repair of private lines undertaken by the consumer rate payer, the Water
Commissioners may require a new Curb Stop and Curb Box to be installed. Five days repair notice is required.
3.	Charge for Curb Stop and Curb Box shall be $35.00 for the year 1961, if installed by the
Village. This charge may be increased by actual expense incurred if the consumer rate payer makes [private service line repair without notice. Charge for Curb Stop and Curb Box shall be $70.00 for the year 1970, if installed by the Village. This charge may be increased by actual expenses incurred if the consumer rate payer makes private service line repair without notice. [5/11/1970 amendment]
4.	Curb Stop and Curb Box shall meet minimum standards set by the Water
Commissioners.
IV.	New Installation
1.	The present consumer rate payer desiring an entire new Service Line or Main Line access and a potential consumer rate payer desiring a new main line or service access
 
may request the same from the Village Water Commissions, who then will, as they see fit, determine the proper point of service for the new installation.
2.	A resolution was made by Orra Marshall and passed by legal vote of trustees: all new
applications for water shall consist of a letter applying for connection and this to be accompanied by $60.00; this to be done before any connection to be installed [9/8/1965 amendment]
3.	The Water Commissioners may assess a new installation charge against the petitioning present consumer rate payer or proposed consumer rate payers; said charge for the  year 1961 shall be $60.00. said charge for the year 1970, and, until further amended, shall be $120, in the place of previous charge of $60.00. Hookup fee payable in advance. [5/1/1970 amendment] This charge includes Curb Stop and Curb Box charge, if the same is installed at the expense of the Village and if Curb Box is installed by the consumer rate payers, this charge shall not be reduced by any alleged savings to the Village
4.	Where a new installation so requires, the Water Commissioners may extend at the expense of the Village the Main or Village Service Lines through Village property including rights of way and public thoroughfares such as roads and sidewalks, provided the extension of Village mains in incidental to the new installation or installations and not such a “MAIN EXTENSION” so as to be in conflict with Sec. II, hereof.
V.	Property Improvement Affecting Water Lines

For the purpose of this section “Property Improvements” represents excavation, land filling, land drainage, or any change in the topographical vertical or lateral support of the Village Main Lines or Village Service Lines.

1.	Written approval of the Water Commissioners shall be required of any private person or persons or any public agency or any corporation or company prior to any such property improvement
2.	Upon approval of the Water Commissioners such improvement may occur but any change made shall be actually mapped and blueprinted and copies of such maps and blueprints shall be delivered to the Water Commissioners within one (1) month of the change.
3.	Upon such improvements, any breaks or damage to the Village Water Lines may be
repaired under the supervision of the Water Commissioners and the expense of such repairs may be assessed against the property owner and the contractor or persons who made the property improvement. Provided, however, that if the said breaks and repairs were made after submission of improvement plans and improvement techniques to Water Commissioners and approved by them. provided also, the actual property improvement conformed to the approved plans and approved techniques, then the Water Commissioners may assume the costs of such repair provided it does not amount to a “Main Extension’ prohibited under Section II.
VI.	Notice Requirements – Joint Savings Costs
 
1.	Upon any “Improvement of Service,” “New Installation”, or “Property Improvement”, affecting water lines, as referred to in SECTIONS III, IV and V thereof, commenced or about to be commenced by a consumer rate purchaser or contractor, the Water Commissioners shall be given 15 days notice prior to the commencement date for the purpose of negotiating to utilize the same ditch contractor or plumber so that both the private and public lines may be serviced at a mutual saving in cost. In the even the land owner provides excavation of private lines by labor he has available to him from members of his family or from associates otherwise providing an extra-ordinary savings to the land owner, notice shall be given to the Water Commissioners 5 days prior to the anticipated completion date of the excavation so the Village may contract for excavation of its ditches in a manner to permit prompt resumption of service at reasonable cost.
2.	On the failure of consumer rate purchaser to provide the 15 days notice or the 5 days notice as set forth above and if this failure in fact prevents the Village from obtaining a savings in costs through a mutual arrangement with a contractor or plumber or requires the Village to pay emergency costs made necessary by the hazard of the open ditch completed by the consumer rate purchaser without notice, the Water Commissioners may assess the costs representing the savings not obtained and the costs above normal against the consumer rate purchaser.
VII.	Rates
1.	The Water Commissioners shall determine the rates payable for water service, improvement of service, new installation and other expenses assessable to the consumer rate payer.
2.	The water rates are payable by the title owner of the land. However, this section is not intended to alter or weaken the liability of occupant of the premises who is equally liable. Despite the foregoing, the Water Commissioners may, in their discretion, accept payment from tenants of the property to be credited against the land owner’s account. Submission of invoice for water service to the tenants shall be considered notice to the land owners of water rent due. Unpaid water rents shall be a lien on the land.
3.	Water rates shall be assessed quarterly.
4.	Upon the vacancy of any premises, the consumer rate payer, be the same owner or occupant, shall notify the Water Commissioners to permit immediate shut off of the water service. Failure to so notify will render liable the consumer rate payer and the owner for double shut off fee plus any costs attendant to repair or added maintenance paid out by the Water Commissioners.
5.	Unpaid water rents and assessments become delinquent thirty (30) days after mailing of
bill and subject to a penalty of 5% of bill. Also, water service may be shut off at the expense of the consumer rate payer. Unpaid water rents and assessments become delinquent thirty (30) days after mailing of bill and subject to a penalty of 5% of toal unpaid balance each quarter. Also, water service may be cut off at the expense of the consumer rate payer. [5/11/1970 amendment]
6.	Shut-off and Turn on fee- Rate Adjustment
 



















VIII.	Officers
 
a)	A shut off fee of one dollar ($1.00) shall be charged to the consumer rate payer and the owner. The same fee shall be assessed upon resumption of service. A shut-off fee of five ($5.00) dollars shall be charged to the consumer rate payer and the owner. The same fee shall be assessed upon resumption of service. [5/11/1970 amendment]
b)	Rate adjustment shall be pro-rated as follows
1.	The quarterly charge shall be reduced in segments of months, not by days of absence.
2.	Less than 30 days vacancy shall not be sufficient to permit rate
adjustment but may require vacancy notice
3.	Rate adjustment will be made only upon notification 5 days prior to end of the quarterly billing period.
 

The duly elected Village Officers shall constitute the Officers of the Village Water System and the Trustees of the Village shall constitute the Board of Water Commissioners.

IX.	Other laws
Incorporated herein by reference and made of full force and effect as if recited in full are chapters 73 and 74 of Title 24 of Vermont Statutes Annotated, as the same may be amended from time to time. In the event of conflict between these rules and said Chapters of VSA, the said Chapters are to prevail
X.	Authority
The rules are issued by authority of Chapter 73, Section 3313 of Title 24, VSA, and may be amended or altered from time to time, without notice.

Rules of the Water Commissioners Adopted March 11, 1961.

  /s/ Orra Marshall	/s/ Everett P. Barber	/s/ Thomas J. Kenney, Esq.

Resolutions made by Lyman Phelps and approved by trustees present: Perley G. Adams and Lyman Phelps.
Amendments of May 11, 1970 voted in by Trustees

  /s/ Perely G. Adams	/s/ Lyman Phelps

Amendment to: Richmond Water System Rules 6/10/1976

Any special hook-up for any unmetered separate service after July 1, 1976 will be assessed the minimum quarterly charge for water.

Amendment made by Lyman Phelps and approved by Trustees present; Neil Sherman, Lyman Phelps and Thomas Levesque
 
  /s/Neil A. Sherman	/s/ Lyman N. Phelps	/s/ Thomas A. Levesque

Amendment 5/10/1979

Any fees and expenses incurred in the collection of water assessments shall be added to the amount due.

Amendment made and passed May 10, 1979 at regular scheduled meeting and recorded on page 123 of the Trustees minutes book.
 


Village of Richmond Richmond, Vermont
The Village trustees, acting as the Board of Water Commissioners, 24 VSA 3311 and as the Board of
Sewage Disposal Commissioner, 24 VSA 10, wish to inform residents that on January 1, 1973, new wate and sewage rates for the Village of Richmond will become effective. The water and sewage bills released April 1, 1973 will reflect the new rates.

The proposed rates, set by the Village Trustees, are based upon anticipated water consumption and sewage service for the year 1973, maintenance and operating costs, and the funds needed to pay off the bonded debt. It is anticipated that the rates will eventually be reduced as the bonded debt decreases, taking into account however, the necessity of improving periodically the existing water and sewer mains in the Village.

The new rates are as follows:

Water-- $0.65 per 1000 gallons of water used—minimum quarterly bill of $10 Sewage-- $1.10 per 1000 gallons of metered water – minimum quarterly bill of $15
Beginning January 1, 1973, the Village will combine the present Water and Sewer Departments into one
department in order or reduce operating costs by duplication of records and handling of funds. Also on that date, the Village will assume the responsibility for service and repair of all sewer mains located within the Village rights-of-way or on Village property

The trustees welcome your questions. Please feel free to call on us at any time. In the event of meter failure or water sewer main service, please call Mr. Willard Conant.
 
ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE USE OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SEWERS AND DRAINS PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL, THE INSTALLATION AND CONNECTION OF BUILDING SEWERS, AND THE DISCHARGE OF WATERS AND WASTES INTO THE PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM(s):	AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS THEREOF:	IN THE VILLAGE OF RICHMOND, COUNTY OF CHITTENDEN, STATE OF VEill ONT.

The Legislative Body of the Village of Richmond hereby ordains:
ARTICLE 1 DEFINITIONS
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of
terms used in this ordinance shall be as follows:
Sec. 1.	"BOD" (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) shall mean the quantity of Oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organi matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at 200 C expressed min milligrams per liter.
Sec. 2. "Building Drain" shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which received the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and coveys it to the building sewer beginning five(5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
S "Building Sewer" -shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, including any portion thereof, within public rights-of-ways or easements, meaning im general the sewer line from the building to a collector or trunk sewer main.
Sec	4-.	"Combined Sewer shall mean a sewer receiving both surface runof'f and sewage.
Sec	5.	"Garbage" shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and comm­
ercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and the handling
storage, and sale of produce.
Sec. 6.	"Industrial Wastes" shall mean the liquid wastes from indust­ rial manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from sanit­ ary sewage.
Sec. 7.	"Natural Outlet" shall mean any oritlet into a water-course, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater.
Sec. 8.	"Person" shall mean an individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group.
Sec. 9.	"P.H." shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the v.ei­ ght of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
Sec.10. "Public Sewer" shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abut­ ting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public auth<§l­
rity.
Sec.11	"Sanitary Sewer" shall mean a sewer in which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
Sec.12	"Sewage" shall mean a combination of the water carried wast es from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and stormwaters as may be present.
Sec.13.	"Sewage Treatment Plant" shcill mean any arrangement of dev­
ices and structures used for treating sewage.
Sec. 14-	"Sewage Works" shall mean all facilites for collecting, pump­
ing, treating and disposing of sewage.
Sec. lt.	"Sewer" shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. Sec. 1 •	"Shall" is mandatory; 11Hay 11     is permissive.
Sec. 17.	11 Slug11     shall mean any discharge of water, sewage, or ind­ ustrial waste which in concentiation of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fift­
een (15) minutes more than five(5) times the average twenty-four (24-) hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
Sec. 18.	11 Storm Drain11      (sometimes termed"Storm sewer") shall mean a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but exclu des sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted coibling water.
Sec. 19.	"Legislative Body"shall mean the trustees of the Village
of Richmond.
Sec. 20:;;:	"Suspended Solids" shall mean solids that either float on
the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liq­ uids, and which are remOllable by laboratory filtering.
Sec. 21. 11 Watercourse 11     shall mean a channel in which a flow of water
occurs, either continuously or intermittently.

ARTICLE11
 

Sec. 1.	It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the area served by the public sewer of the Village of Richmond, or in any area under the jurisdicaion of said area served
by the public sewer of the Village of Hichmond, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
Sec. 2.	It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natunal outlet with in the area served by the public sewer of the Village of Richmond, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said area served by the public sewer of the Village of Richmond, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this ordinance.
Sec	Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to con­ struct or maintain any privy, privy vault, sGp'tic tank, cess pool or
other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
Sec. 4.	The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for
human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes	ituated w
within the area served by public sewer of the Village of Richmond and abutting any street, alley or right-of-way in which	here is now . located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the area served by the public sewer of the Village of Rich­ mond, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable t ilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilit e directly_with	he proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this ordin­ ance, within ninety(90) days after date of official notice	o do_ so, unless specifically exempted from this provision by the Legislative Body.

ARTICLE 111

Private Sewage Disposal
Sec. 1.	vJhere a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of Article 11, Section 4., the building	ewer. shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article.
Sec. 2.	The type, capacities, location and layout of a pr vate .
sewage disposal system shall comply with all 'recoillrren'da tions o'::tthe · bureau of Ennironmental  Sanitation of the Department  of Health.	No spptic tank or cesspool shall be permitted  to discharge to any nat­ ural  outlet.
Sec. 3. At such time as a public sewer becomes availabe to a prop­
erty served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in Article 111 5      Section 4, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this ordinance, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be
abandoned and filled with suitable material.
Sec. 4. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage dis­
posal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the Village.
SAr.•   5. No statement contained in this article shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by
the health officer.
Sec. 6. :,Jhen a public sewer becomes available 5     the building sewer shall be connected to said sewer within ninety (90) days and the private sewage disposal system shall .be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt.

ARTICLE 1V

Building Sewers and Connections
Sec. 1. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof, without first obtaining permission from the Legislative Body. Sec. 2.	All costs and expenses incident to the installation, conn­ ection, maintenance and repair of the building sewer shall be borne
by the oi;mer.	The owner shall indemnify the Village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the install­ ation, connection, maintenance and repair of trn building sewer.
Sec. 3. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided
for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of
another or an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one build­ ing sewer.
Sec. 4. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new
ui d ngs on y when they are;:_found, on exmmination and test by the
 

Sec. 5. The size, slope, location, alignment, materials  of construct­ imn of a building  sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing  of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling  the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the building  and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the Village and shall also con:fi'orm to the rules and requirements of the Legislative Body.	In the absence of code provisions  or in amplification thereof, the materials  and procedures  set forth in appropriate  specifications of the A.S.T.M. and	'/.P.C.F. i'1anual of Practice No. 9  shall apply,
and are hereby incorporated by reference.
Sec. 6. Jhenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor.	In all buildings in which any building drain is too 101'1  to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. Sec. 7. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior and interior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of
surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanit­ ary sewer.
J?ec.   8.	The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer
shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code
or other applicable rules and regulations of the Village, and shall also conform to the rules and requirements of the Legislative Body, or the procedures set forth in approprate specifications of the A.S.
T.H.	and the W.P.C.F. M9-nual of Practice no. 9, and such connections
shall be made gas tight and water tight.	Any deviation from the des­
cribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Legislative Body before installation.
Sec. 9. No sewer connection shall be opened, no pipe laid, and no joints made except under the inspection of the Legislative Body or their duly authorized representative.
Sec. 10. Any work not conforlfling to the provisions of Sec. 5 & 8 shalJ
be removed at the cost of the property owner.
Sec. 11. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lighs so as to protect the
the public from hazard,	Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other pub1i•.
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be resto1·ed in a manner satisfactory to the Village.

ARTICLE V.

USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS
Sec. 1.	No person shall dischare or cause to be. discharge any storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
Sec. 2. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be dis-· charged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sew­ ers or storm .sewers: or to a natural outlet approved by the Legisla­ tive Body.	Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged,on approval of the Legislative Body, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
Sec. 3. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of
the follouing described wastes or waters to any public sewers:
(a)	Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flamma­ ble or explosive ligquid 5     solid or gas.
(b)	Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids,
liquids, or gases, in sufficient quantity, either singly or by inter­
action '•Tith other wastes 1   to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constiute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plan, including, but not limited to, cyanides in excess of two (2) mg/l as CN in the wastes discharged to the public sewer/
(c)	Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having
any other corrosive property capable of causing danger of hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage 1·JOrks.
(d)	Solid or viscous substances in quantities, or of such size
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other inter­ ference with the proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags 1   feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair, and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grindeJ
Sec. 4. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the
following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it ap-
-----  ,.:,,._, ....,..	........       +i.... ......       ............   ,.....4,..... .......        ,......p    +i.--..-..    T,.....,..,.;t'""1  .....  +;'trn   Pf"'\r1-,:r    +hn+  C!l1,....h     T.T .....,... +,....t'""
 

and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
Sec. 6.  Grease 5  oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Legislative Body, they are necessary for the prop­ er handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units.	All interceptors shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
Pl'_	Where prelimary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are
provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continu­ ously in satisfactory and effective operation by the ovmer at his expense.
Sec. 8.	When required by the Legislative Body, the 01mer of any property servicedcby a building sewer carrying industrial wastes sha­ ll install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sei:·rer to facilitate o observation 5  sampling, and measurement of the wastes.	Such manhole, 1·1hen required, shall be accessibly and aafely located, and shall be constructed in accordance tli th plans approved by the Legislative Body. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
Sec. 9.= All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics
of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this ordinance sh­ all be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard
Hethods for the Examinat;i.on of Hater and	'lastewater", published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole.	In the event that no special manhole has bee required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest doi:mstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.	Sampling shall be carried out by custom­ arily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constitefits upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property.	The particular analyses involved will determinewhether
a twenty-foµr (24-) hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is
appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples whould be taken.
!formally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obt­ ained from 24- hr. composites of all outfalls whereas PH 1 s are deter­ mined from periodic grab samples.
Sec. 10 No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the Village and any industrial concern whereby an indust1·ial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Village for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern.

ARTICLE V1

Protection from fiamage
Sec. 1. No authorized person shall maliciously, wilfully, or neg­ ligently, break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works.	Any person violating this article, on conviction thereof, shall be fined in the amount not exceeding $100 for each violation.

ARTICLE V11

Powers and Authoriity of Inspectors
Sec. 1.	The Legislative Body and other duly authorized employees of the Village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for purposes of inspection, obser­
vation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the pro­ visions of this ordinance.	The Legislative Body or its representat­ ives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metal-lurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for
waste treatment.
Sec. 2.	The Legislative Body and other duly authorized employees of the Village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the Village holds an easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspectiom, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any par tion of the sewage works lying within said easement.	All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shal	e done in fu l accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private property involved.
 
ARTICLE V111

Penalties
Sec. 1.	Any person found to be violating any provision of this ord­ inance, except Article Yl, shall be served by the Village with writ­
ten notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reaso­ nable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.	The off­ ender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, perman­ ently cease all violations.
Sec. 2.	Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for ran Article V111, Sectionl, shall be guilty of a mis demeanor, and on conviction thereof, shall be fined in the amount
not exceeding $1,000 for each violation.	Each day in which any such
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
Sec. 3. Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance
shall become liable to the Village for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned the Village by reason of such violation.

ARTICLE 1X

Validity
Sec. 1.	All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith
are hereby repealed.
Sec. 2.	The invalidity of any section. clause, sentence or provision of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of any other part of this ordinance which can be given effect without such invalid	part
or parts.

ARTICLE X

Assessment of Charges
Sec. 1.-· The Legislative Body shall have the authority to establish reasonable charges for the use of sewers.
Sec. 2.	IBewage assessments shall be made on a quarterly basis on the first day of each caJ.enr1ar quarter.	Quarterly assessments shall be payable on or before the 15th day following the date of invoice.	A five (5) per cent penalty shall be added to all assessments not paid on or before the 15th day follmwing the date of invoice.	The Legislative Body may shut off and terminate the supply of water to any person whose assessment is not paid on or before the 30th day
following the date of invoice.	In addition to the foregoing, the normal cutoff and turn on charges of the Village Water Department, together with all IDther expenses incurred by the Village, shall be assessed to the property owner.

ARTICLE Xl

Ordinance in Force
Sec. 1.	This ordinance shall take effect from its passage.

Accepted and placed- on 'file: :Aug'ust-'.L4-., 1972.

Lyman N. Phelps Robert E.L. Colburn
Neil A. Sherman 	 Village Trustees
