St. Johnsbury, Vermont
Full text of the St Johnsbury Town Charter
AN ACT TO CONSOLIDATE AND MERGE THE VILLAGE OF ST. JOHNSBURY AND
THE TOWN OF ST. JOHNSBURY.
It is hereby enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Vermont:
Sec. 1. The village of St. Johnsbury and the town of St. Johnsbury are hereby
consolidated and merged, and the village of St. Johnsbury shall, except as hereinafter
provided, cease to exist as a political entity or body corporate.
Sec. 2 (a) All assets of the village of St. Johnsbury on the date this act becomes
effective shall become the property of the town of St. Johnsbury, except that those assets
shall be subject to the debts of the village of St. Johnsbury to the extent provided by law on
that date. The village of St. Johnsbury shall remain in existence so far as necessary to
complete payment of its indebtedness and other obligations to which it was subject on that
date. The taxpayers residing in the village of St. Johnsbury as it was bounded just prior to
that date shall be subject to a tax on their grand list to be assessed annually by the
selectmen of the town of St. Johnsbury in an amount sufficient to pay off any such
indebtedness according to its terms.
*Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of the town of St. Johnsbury, Vermont, Law s of Vermont, Acts of 1957, Chapter
345 enacted by the Vermont General Assembly and approved June 18, 1957. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected
without notation. Words added for clarification have been added in brackets. Amendments have been included and are
indicated by a history note immediately follow ing the amended section.
**Editor's note - Acts of 1969, ch. 154, printed herein, did not specifically amend the charter. It is included for reference as it
affects the charter.
NO.154 .AN ACT TO AUTHORIZE THE TOWN OF ST. JOHNSBURY TO MAKE
IMPROVEMENTS TO ITS WATER SYSTEM AND TO FINANCE THE COST THEREOF
THROUGH THE ISSUE OF GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS.
It is hereby enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Vermont.
Sec. 1. Notwithstanding subsection (b) of section 2 of No. 345 of the Acts of 1957 as
amended by section 1 of No. 231 of the Acts of 1965, all taxable property in the town of St.
Johnsbury shall be subject to the levy of unlimited ad valorem taxes to pay bonds and
notes authorized by the voters of the town for water purposes.
Sec. 2. This act shall take effect from passage. Approved: March 18, 1969.
(b) The taxpayers residing in the village of St. Johnsbury as is was bounded just prior to
the date this act becomes effective shall be subject to a tax on their grand list to be
assessed annually by the selectmen of the town of St. Johnsbury in an amount sufficient to
pay off current expenses and indebtedness in continuing the present functions and
additions thereto within that area which are not common to the town of St. Johnsbury.
(c)For the purpose of providing special services to a portion of the town, the warning for
any annual or special meeting may contain appropriate articles under which the legal
voters in that area may vote for such special services as they desire. The town shall
furnish to each area such special services as are so voted, and the cost in each area,
including the cost of all equipment, replacements, maintenance, salaries and other
operating expenses, shall be paid by a tax on the grand list of each taxpayer therein for his
ratable share thereof, to be assessed annually by the selectmen to be collected at the
same time and in the same manner as the town votes to have its other taxes collected, and
such tax assessed upon grand list shall be a lien thereon with the same priority as other
taxes lawfully assessed thereon.
(d) In order to complete the payment of existing indebtedness of the village of St.
Johnsbury and indebtedness that may be incurred from time to time for that area, the
officers of the town of St. Johnsbury corresponding to those of the village of St. Johnsbury
who had charge of the payment of such debt shall have authority to act as the duly
authorized officers of the village of St. Johnsbury. The tax so assessed shall be collected
at the same time and in the same manner as other town taxes.
(Laws of Vt., Acts of 1965, ch. 231, §1)
(e) Upon a vote of the majority of the legal voters of the Town of St. Johnsbury at an annual
or special meeting duly warned for the purpose, there is hereby created in the Town of St.
Johnsbury a special district to be known as the St. Johnsbury Downtown Improvement
District (District) which shall exist for a period of 12 years unless the Town of St. Johnsbury
votes otherwise at an annual or special meeting warned for such purpose. The District
shall be that area consisting of properties with frontage on either side of Railroad Street
from Cross Street to Maple Street and seven additional properties on Eastern Avenue and
Pearl Streets. The District may continue in existence for period of longer than 12 years
upon the vote of the majority of the legal voters of the Town at an annual or special meeting
duly warned for that purpose and the area of the district may be changed upon the vote of
the legal voters at the same or different annual or special meeting properly warned.
The District is more precisely shown on the plan "St. Johnsbury Downtown Improvement
District - Revised January 3, 1997" and recorded with Town Clerk of the Town of St.
Johnsbury.
(1) Commission-Creation/Membership: A St. Johnsbury Downtown Improvement District
Commission (Commission) is created consisting of seven members. Five members shall
be at the time of appointment and during their terms owners of property, or managers,
proprietors or operators of businesses located within the District and one member shall be
at the time of appointment and during his/her term a legal resident of the Town of St.
Johnsbury, who shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen to serve for the term of five
years and until their successors are appointed and qualified, excepting that their terms of
the first five Commissioners appointed shall be from the date of appointment until one
year, two years, three years, four years and five years after April 1, 1997 respectively. One
member shall be a Selectman, or an employee of the Town of St. Johnsbury, who shall be
appointed by the Board of Selectmen to serve for the term on one year commencing the
first day of April and until the member's successor is appointed and qualified. The
Commission shall have a chairman and vice-chairman elected by the Commission
members. Any vacancy shall be filled by the appointing authority for the remainder of the
unexpired term. Commissioners may be removed by the Board of Selectmen only for
cause and after public hearing duly warned.
(2) Purposes and Powers: The Commission is created for the general purpose of
maintaining and improving the economic, cultural and environmental vitality and quality of
the Town of St. Johnsbury and, in particular, the District created by this Section; to
promote the Town and the District as a regional retail, commercial and service center; and
to serve as an advocate for orderly development of the District in order to encourage
expansion of the retail, commercial and service base of the District and the Town by
attracting new business and investment.
The rights, powers and duties of the Commission acting on its own authority or acting
through the Town of St. Johnsbury Select Board, as set forth in this section, shall be
broadly construed to accomplish the purposes set forth within the District and shall include
the following:
(A) to prepare a budget (the "Budget") for the District in accordance with subsection e (1)
hereof;
(B) to advertise and promote the District;
(C) to represent the interests of the District;
(D) to hire and remove personnel as provided for in the Budget or as otherwise
approved by the Select Board;
(E) to receive and expend contributions, grants, and income;
(F) to expend funds as provided for in the Budget or as otherwise approved by the
Select Board;
(G) to manage and maintain public spaces and to assume or supplement the
services and maintenance heretofore provided the District by the Town as recommended
to and approved by the Board of Selectmen;
(H) to acquire and dispose of property as recommended to and approved by the
Board of Selectmen;
(I) to install and make public improvements as recommended to and approved by
the Board of Selectmen;
(J) to cooperate with the Town in the use, management and improvement of public
parking facilities and to undertake such management or improvements and to
regulate vehicular traffic within the District as recommended by the Board of
Selectmen;
(K) to enter into contracts;
(L) to regulate, lease, license, establish rules and fees and otherwise manage the
use of public spaces within the District;
(M) to plan for the orderly development of the District in cooperation with the Town
Planning Commission and as recommended to and approved by the Board of
Selectmen;
(N) to do all other things necessary or convenient to carry out the purposes of the
Section except that the Commission may not assume authority over any subject matter or
activity under the jurisdiction of another Town official, department or board as of the
effective date of the Section or contrary to any order or ordinance in effect as of such date
other than to hire and remove personnel under contract or employed by the Commission
unless and until the Board of Selectmen, by order, transfers such jurisdiction to the
Commission, notwithstanding Section 8 of the charter, or amends the order or ordinance.
(3) Annual Budget: Annually the Commission shall submit to the Board of Selectmen for
approval for the next fiscal year a capital and operating budget of revenues and
expenditures which shall be used exclusively to repay debt on capital improvements in the
District and to defray the expenses incurred by the Commission in connection with the
operation, maintenance and repair of the District. In the event the Board of Selectmen
does not approve the budget as submitted, the Board shall return the budget forthwith to
the Commission with its recommendations for the Commission's reconsideration.
Appropriations other than from contributions, grants and income for the Commission shall
be raised through common area fees which shall be assessed and collected as tax on
property as provided for in this Section. The Commission may borrow money in
anticipation of common area fees upon approval of the Board of Selectmen.
(4) Common Area Fees:
(A) Common area fees are charges levied upon the owners of taxable properties
located in this District, excepting such portions of properties used for owner occupied
residential purposes.
(B) The District shall have the authority to assess common area fees for taxable
real estate in the District based upon one of the following assessment methods:
(i) A flat fee per taxable parcel identifiable on the Grant List.
(ii) A flat fee per taxable parcel plus a formula based on any one, or
combination thereof, of square footage of commercial space, number of apartments,
square footage of lot size, linear footage of frontage, number of parking spaces provided,
number of parking spaces that would be needed to conform to the Town's existing Zoning
By-Laws for new construction, or any equation which raises fees adequate to meet an
annual Commission Budget with a method that reasonably apportions costs to property
owners in relation to the benefit that accrues to them.
The Commission shall only raise common area fees sufficient to meet the Budget
regardless of the assessment method.
The common area fees shall be established by the Commission upon approval of the
Commission Budget by the Board of Selectmen and shall be assessed annually by the
Selectmen to be collected at the same time and in the same manner as the Town votes to
have its taxes collected, and such common area assessment shall be a lien thereon with
the same priority as taxes lawfully assessed thereon.
(C) Consistent with the Charter for the Town of St. Johnsbury, and the laws of the United
States and of this State, the Commission, with the approval of the Board of Selectmen,
may substitute any local option taxes permitted by law in lieu of common area fees that
exist to meet the Budget.
(D) Appeals: Persons aggrieved by any decision of the Commission involving the
assessment or levy of common area fees may appeal the decision to the board of
Selectmen by filing a written notice of appeal with the Town Clerk within 30 days of the
date of such decision, and furnishing a copy of the notice of appeal to the Commission.
The Selectmen shall set a date and place for a hearing on the appeal within 60 days of the
filing of the notice of appeal. The Board shall give the appellant and the Commission at
least 15 days notice prior to the hearing date. Any person entitled to take an appeal may
appear and be heard in person or be represented by agent or attorney at such hearing.
Any hearing held under this section may be adjourned by the Board from time to time,
provided, however, that the date and place of adjourned hearing shall be announced at
that hearing or 15 days notice thereof is furnished to the appellant and the Commission.
The Board shall render its decision, which shall include Findings of Fact, within 45 days
after completing the hearing, and shall within that period send the appellant, and the
Commission, by certified mail, a copy of the decision.
(Laws of Vt. Acts of 1997)
Sec. 3. The officers of the village of St. Johnsbury shall, prior to the date when this act
goes into effect, settle, so far as possible, the pecuniary affairs of the village of St.
Johnsbury, and shall, except as hereinafter provided, on said date turn over and deliver to
the clerk of the town of St. Johnsbury, all the records, books and documents of the village
of St. Johnsbury, and to the proper officers of the said town all other property of the said
village.
Sec. 4. (a) Said town shall have and is hereby granted the authority to exercise all powers
relating to municipal affairs and no enumeration of powers in this charter shall be deemed
to limit or restrict the general grant of authority hereby conferred; but this grant of authority
shall not be deemed to limit the authority of the legislature to alter, amend or repeal this
charter; or to limit the right to hereafter pass general laws applicable alike to this and all
other municipal corporations of the state; nor shall this grant of authority be deemed to limit
the patronage or control of the state with respect to said town.
(b) The Town shall start its annual meeting at 7:30 o'clock in the afternoon of the day
before the first Tuesday of March and may transact at that time any business not involving
voting by Australian ballot or voting required by law to be by ballot and to be held on the
first, Tuesday of March. Discussion shall be permitted at such meetings on all articles
contained in the warning for the annual meeting. A meeting so started shall be adjourned
until the following day.
(Laws of Vt., Acts of 1973, ch. 274, §1)
Sec. 5. Under the general grant of authority contained in and conferred upon the town by
Section 4, the town of St. Johnsbury may exercise the following powers and functions:
(a) To levy, assess and collect taxes, in order to carry out its powers, to appropriate and
to borrow money, within the limits prescribed by the general laws; and to collect special
assessments for benefits conferred;
(b) To furnish all local public services, including without limiting the generality of the
foregoing a water system, electric light and power system, and a sewage system and
disposal plant; to purchase, hire, construct, own, maintain, and operate or lease local
public utilities subject to chapter 411 of V.S. 47; to acquire, by condemnation or otherwise,
within or without the limits of said town, property necessary for any such purpose, subject
to restrictions imposed by the general law for the protection of other communities;
(c) To make local public improvements and to acquire, by condemnation or otherwise,
property within its corporate limits necessary for such improvements; and also to acquire
an excess over that needed for any such improvement, and to sell or lease such excess
property with restrictions, in order to protect and preserve the improvement;
(d) To acquire by gift or purchase, sell, convey, lease, assign, maintain and service real
and personal property as may be necessary or incidental to the exercise of its municipal
powers, duties and functions and to exercise in connection therewith any incidental powers
as may be necessary to preserve and maintain the value of any such property once lawfully
acquired.
(e) To issue and sell bonds on the security of any such property, or of any public utility
owned by the town, or of the revenues thereof, or of both, including in the case of a public
utility, if deemed desirable by the town, a franchise stating the terms upon which, in case of
foreclosure, the purchaser may operate such utility;
(f) To purchase or lease lands within or without the corporate limits of the town, to lay out
or widen streets, highways, lanes, commons, alleys, and walks, to provide places of
healthy recreation in summer or in winter such as a skating rink, a swimming pool, a
playing field, a public park; to provide for tourist camping sites, and aviation landing field,
and a municipal forest reserve; and for any municipal purposes whatever.
(g) To adopt and enforce within its limits local police, sanitary, zoning, town planning and
other similar regulations, not in conflict with the laws of this State.
(h) To establish and maintain a fire department.
(i) To establish and maintain a police department, to provide for the appointment of police
officers, who shall be sworn and who shall have the same powers as constables in the
service of civil and criminal process, and such further special authority as may be provided
in the by-laws or ordinances of said town enacted under authority of law. Such fire and
police departments may be consolidated into one department if the town shall so vote.
(j) To appropriate annually money for the maintenance, care, improvement and support of
Fairbanks Museum, so long as the same shall remain a nonprofit institution for the
promotion of education.
Sec. 6. The St. Johnsbury Center fire district No. 1 is abolished when a majority of the
legal voters of said fire district present and voting on the question at a regular or special
meeting of said fire district warned for said purpose so vote and shall thereupon cease to
exist as a political entity and body corporate. All the property and funds of said fire district
shall on such date be vested in the town of St. Johnsbury and the town of St. Johnsbury
shall thereupon assume all indebtedness and obligations of said fire district unless said
liabilities and obligations exceed said assets in which case said fire district shall continue
to exist until such excess is paid unless the town of St. Johnsbury votes otherwise at a
regular or special meeting warned for said purpose.
Sec. 7. In meetings duly warned for the purpose, the town of St. Johnsbury shall have
power to make, alter, repeal or amend by-laws, which together with the ordinances and
regulations adopted by the selectmen shall regulate its affairs, and shall carry into effect
the provisions and intent of this charter.
Sec. 8. The selectmen of the town of St. Johnsbury consistent with the constitution and
laws of the United States and of this State, shall have the power and authority to make,
establish, impose, alter, amend or repeal ordinances and regulations and to enforce the
same by fine, penalty, forfeiture, injunction, restraining order or any proper remedy, with
respect to the inspection, regulation, licensing or suppression of the following affairs,
establishments, employments, enterprises, uses, undertakings and businesses, viz:
(a) The sale and measurement of wood, coal, oil and all other fuels; hay scales; markets
dealing in meat, fish, and foodstuffs; slaughterhouses; groceries; restaurants, lunch carts
and other eating establishments; all places where beverages are manufactured,
processed, bottled or sold; manufacturing establishments; saloons; taverns; innkeepers;
hotels; motels; rooming houses; junk businesses; advertising billboards; overhanging
signs and awnings; billiard rooms; pool rooms; bowling alleys; public halls; dance halls;
theaters; moving picture houses; all places where tobacco, cigars and cigarettes are
manufactured or sold; repair shops; brickyards; stone sheds; blacksmith shops; public
garages; the transportation, storage and sale of propane gas, naphtha, gasoline,
kerosene, fuel oil and other inflammable oils; the breeding, raising and keeping of horses,
cattle, swine, poultry, mink, foxes, furbearing and other domestic animals; coal sheds;
wood yards; creameries, dairies; dyeing establishments; garbage plants; gas works; livery
stables; skating rinks; sewers; cesspools; privies; cow stables, barns; wells; and public
dumps; oil and gasoline storage tanks, and gasoline filling stations.
(b) Processions, parades, traveling showmen, shows, circuses, menageries, carnivals,
clairvoyants, mendicants, fortune tellers, spiritualists, mediums, itinerant vendors, peddler,
auctioneers, pawnbrokers, professional and amateur sports.
(c) The use of streets and highways; the regulation of traffic, both vehicular and pedestrian;
taxicabs and all vehicles, exclusive of motor buses, used in the conveyance for hire of
persons or goods; the parking, operation and speed of vehicles; guide posts, street signs,
and street safety devices; milk and cream businesses and routes.
(d) Cruelty to animals; fast driving; the going at large of animals; and the keeping of bees.
(e) The erection of poles, and the placing of wires, cables, and pipes, subject to the
provision of chapter 409 V.S. 47; the laying of water mains and sewers; the excavating of
streets; the disposal of refuse, filth and animal carcasses; the throwing or dumping of
ashes, waste paper, handbills, circulars, or rubbish of any sort; the planting, preservation,
or destruction of shade trees.
(f) The transportation, manufacture, storage and sale of gunpowder, ashes, lime, matches,
fireworks, explosives, acids, and other dangerous or combustible materials.
(g) The cleaning of public sidewalks and gutters, and the removal there from of snow, ice,
litter, garbage, stands, tables, boxes and other materials encumbering or obstructing any
public sidewalk, street or way.
(h) A building code; the construction, repair and alteration of chimneys, flues, stovepipes,
furnaces, fireplaces and heating apparatus and plumbing facilities of all kinds.
(i) Nuisances, bawdyhouses, gaming houses; racing pools; gambling instruments of all
kinds; noisome and offensive places and occupations, loafing, obscenity and ribaldry upon
the town streets and highways; vagrancy; riots, disturbances, disorderly assemblies, and
all breaches of the peace; pollution of the public water supply.
Sec. 9. The by-law adopted by the town and the ordinances and regulations passed by
the selectmen, whether enacted under the authority of general or special law, shall be
published in a newspaper having general circulation in said town at least twenty days
before the effective date thereof, and all such enactments shall thereupon be recorded at
length by the town clerk in a book kept for that purpose in the office of the town clerk, and
the town clerk's certificate that such by-laws, ordinances and regulations were duly
adopted and passed at an annual meeting of said town or at a special meeting thereof
lawfully called for that purpose or were duly enacted and adopted by the selectmen of the
town under authority of law or under authority of a vote of the town shall be prima facie
evidence of such fact in any court in this state; and certified copies of said by-laws,
ordinances and regulations and the clerk's certificates shall be received as evidence in all
the courts of the State.
Sec. 10. (a) Fines, penalties, and forfeitures up to and including two hundred dollars, for
each breach of an ordinance, or by-law, may be established by the selectmen, or by a
properly warned town meeting.
These fines, penalties, and forfeitures may be recovered in an action of tort brought in the
name of the town, and in any such action a general complaint relying on the ordinance or
the by-law shall be sufficient.
The process may issue either against the body or the property of the defendant, and if the
defendant is found guilty, and if it is found by the court that the cause of action arose from
his willful or malicious act or neglect, it shall so adjudge, and may further adjudge that he
be confined in close jail, and may issue execution against his body with a certificate of
such findings endorsed thereon; and such execution with such certificate thereon shall
have the same effect as an execution issued on a judgment founded upon tort having a like
certificate endorsed thereon.
(b) Any person refusing to comply with any town ordinance or by-law, relating to his
business may be enjoined by a proper action in chancery brought in the name of the town,
from continuing such business in violation of such ordinance or by-law, and in any such
action a bill relying on the ordinance or by-law shall be sufficient.
(c) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the town from having and
exercising such other powers as may be proper to enforce obedience to its ordinances
and by-laws and to punish violations thereof.
Sec. 11. All violations of ordinances or by-laws may be prosecuted in behalf of the town
by its attorney, or police officers, or by any other duly authorized prosecuting officer, before
the Caledonia Municipal Court; and all fines, penalties or forfeitures recovered by the said
town for violations of such ordinances or by-laws, shall be paid into the town treasury.
Sec. l2. The elective officers of the town shall be those authorized by the general laws of
this State, except that notwithstanding the provisions of section 3509 of the Vermont
Statutes, Revision of 1947, the listers shall be appointed annually by the selectmen, unless
the town at an annual or special meeting duly warned for that purpose shall vote otherwise.
Sec. 13. This act shall become operative an take effect when it is approved and ratified:
(a) By a majority of the legal voters residing in the territory embraced in the village of St.
Johnsbury present and voting on the question at a regular or special meeting of said
village of St. Johnsbury, the warning for which shall contain the notice or warrant as
hereinafter appears, and
(b) By a majority of the legal voters of the town of St. Johnsbury present and voting on
the question at a regular or special meeting of said town, the warning for which shall
contain the notice or warrant as hereinafter appears.
The notice or warrant for each of said meetings shall contain an article substantially as
follow:
"To see if the (village), (town) shall vote to approve, ratify and adopt an act of the General
Assembly of the State of Vermont of 1957 entitled `An Act to Consolidate and Merge the
Village of St. Johnsbury and the Town of St. Johnsbury’."
(Laws of Vt., Acts of 1965, ch. 231, §2
Sec. 14. In case a majority of the voters present and voting at each of the meetings
specified in section 13, shall vote to approve, ratify and adopt this act, the consolidation
and merger of the village of St. Johnsbury and the town of St. Johnsbury shall take effect
on that first day of January, which shall follow by not less than three months, the approval,
ratification and adoption of this act by the last of the two meetings held as aforesaid.
Upon such effective date the selectmen shall continue in office for the remainder of their
respective terms and the other officers of the town of St. Johnsbury shall continue in office
until the first Tuesday in March next following, and their successors shall have been elected
or appointed; and the ordinances of the village of St. Johnsbury then in force shall remain
of full force and effect, following the effective date of this act for a period of one year only,
so far as such ordinances shall continue to be applicable and appropriate, except as
repealed, amended, altered or modified by the selectmen of the town of St. Johnsbury,
and as respects only that part of the town of St. Johnsbury comprised within the limits of
the village of St. Johnsbury, as defined by No. 179 of the Acts of 1927.
Sec. 15. The authority granted by this act to the village of St. Johnsbury and the town of St.
Johnsbury to merge shall expire twenty years from the date of the passage and adoption
of this act unless all of the municipalities mentioned herein shall have voted to adopt the
provisions hereof within such period.
(Laws of Vt., Acts of 1965, ch. 231, §3)
Sec. 16. If any provision of this act is for any reason held invalid, such invalidity shall not
affect the remaining provisions, which can be given effect without the invalid provision. To
this end the provisions of this act are declared to be severable.
Sec. 17. Sections 13 and 15 of this act shall take effect from its passage.
Approved June 18, 1957.
Sec. 18. Essential Services Budget; other appropriations. The selectmen shall
prepare an annual budget for the Town which shall be known as the "Essential Services
Budget." It shall include such sum or sums of money as are necessary to carry out
essential governmental services, and to meet the ordinary expenses and liabilities of the
Town. The "Essential Services Budget" shall be warned as a separate article or articles
for the annual town meeting and be adopted or modified by the vote of the majority of
those eligible to vote who are present at the meeting. Any article in the warning providing
for appropriation of funds, in addition to the Essential Services Budget, shall be voted on
by Australian ballot. The form of the ballot to be used shall be substantially as follows:
Shall the Town vote to appropriate the sum of___________________________to be use
for _____________________________________
If in favor, make an X in this square. If opposed, make an X in this square
On any question wherein the vote is not specifically required to be by ballot, a ballot
may be demanded by three voters at any meeting.
(Laws of Vt., Acts of 1973, ch. 274, §2)
The Vermont Statutes Online
Title 24 Appendix: Municipal Charters
Chapter 151: Town Of St. Johnsbury
§ 151-1. Merger of Village and Town
The Village of St. Johnsbury and the Town of St. Johnsbury are hereby
consolidated and merged, and the Village of St. Johnsbury shall, except as
hereinafter provided, cease to exist as a political entity or body corporate.
§ 151-2. Assets transferred; liabilities; taxation; special services; downtown
improvement district
(a) All assets of the Village of St. Johnsbury on the date Act No. 345 of the Acts
of 1957, as amended, becomes effective shall become the property of the Town of
St. Johnsbury, except that those assets shall be subject to the debts of the Village
of St. Johnsbury to the extent provided by law on that date. The Village of St.
Johnsbury shall remain in existence so far as necessary to complete payment of its
indebtedness and other obligations to which it was subject on that date. The
taxpayers residing in the Village of St. Johnsbury as it was bounded just prior to
that date shall be subject to a tax on their grand list to be assessed annually by the
selectmen of the Town of St. Johnsbury in an amount sufficient to pay off any such
indebtedness according to its terms.
(b) The taxpayers residing in the Village of St. Johnsbury as it was bounded just
prior to the date Act No. 345 of the Acts of 1957, as amended, becomes effective
shall be subject to a tax on their grand list to be assessed annually by the
selectmen of the Town of St. Johnsbury in an amount sufficient to pay off current
expenses and indebtedness in continuing the present functions and additions
thereto within that area which are not common to the Town of St. Johnsbury.
(c) For the purpose of providing special services to a portion of the Town, the
warning for any annual or special meeting may contain appropriate articles under
which the legal voters in that area may vote for such special services as they
desire. The Town shall furnish to each area such special services as are so voted,
and the cost in each area, including the cost of all equipment, replacements,
maintenance, salaries, and other operating expenses, shall be paid by a tax on the
grand list of each taxpayer therein for his or her ratable share thereof, to be
assessed annually by the selectmen to be collected at the same time and in the
VERMONT GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Vermont Laws Page 1 of 14
https://legislature.vermont.gov/statutes/fullchapter/24APPENDIX/151 11/2/2018
same manner as the Town votes to have its other taxes collected, and such tax
assessed upon grand list shall be a lien thereon with the same priority as other
taxes lawfully assessed thereon.
(d) In order to complete the payment of existing indebtedness of the Village of
St. Johnsbury and indebtedness that may be incurred from time to time for that
area, the officers of the Town of St. Johnsbury corresponding to those of the
Village of St. Johnsbury who had charge of the payment of such debt shall have
authority to act as the duly authorized officers of the Village of St. Johnsbury. The
tax so assessed shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as
other Town taxes.
(e) A special district to be known as the St. Johnsbury Downtown Improvement
District (District) is created. The District shall be that area consisting of properties
with frontage on either side of Railroad Street from Cross Street to Maple Street
and seven additional properties on Eastern Avenue and Pearl Street. The District is
more precisely shown on the Plan "St. Johnsbury Downtown Improvement District,
Revised January 3, 1997" and recorded with the Town Clerk in the Town of St.
Johnsbury.
(1) Commission-Creation; Membership: A St. Johnsbury Downtown
Improvement District Commission (Commission) is created consisting of seven
members appointed by the Selectboard. Five members shall be, at the time of
appointment and during their terms, natural persons who are owners of property,
managers, proprietors, operators, officers, or directors of businesses located
within the District who shall be appointed to serve for a term of five years and until
their successors are appointed and qualified, except that the terms of the first five
commissioners shall be from the date of appointment until one year, two years,
three years, four years, and five years after April 1, 1997, respectively. One member
shall be a member at large who shall be, at the time of appointment and during his
or her term, a legal resident of the Town of St. Johnsbury, who shall be appointed
to serve for the term of five years commencing the first day of April and until the
member's successor is appointed and qualified. One member shall be a
Selectman, or an employee of the Town of St. Johnsbury, who shall be appointed
to serve for a term of one year commencing the first day of April and until the
member's successor is appointed and qualified. The Commission shall have a
Chairman and Vice Chairman elected by the Commission members. Any vacancy
shall be filled by the appointing authority for the remainder of the unexpired term.
Commissioners may be removed by unanimous vote of the Selectboard.
Vermont Laws Page 2 of 14
https://legislature.vermont.gov/statutes/fullchapter/24APPENDIX/151 11/2/2018
(2) Purposes and Powers: The Commission is created for the general
purpose of maintaining and improving the economic, cultural, and environmental
vitality and quality of the Town of St. Johnsbury and, in particular, the District
created by this subsection; to promote the Town and the District as a regional
retail, commercial, and service center; and to serve as an advocate for orderly
development of the District in order to encourage expansion of the retail,
commercial, and service base of the District and the Town by attracting new
business and investment.
The rights, powers, and duties of the Commission acting on its own authority
or acting through the Town of St. Johnsbury Selectboard, as set forth in this
section, shall be broadly construed to accomplish the purposes set forth within the
District and shall include the following:
(A) to prepare a budget (the "budget") for the District in accordance with
subdivision (1) of this subsection;
(B) to advertise and promote the District;
(C) to represent the interests of the District;
(D) to hire and remove personnel as provided for in the budget or as
otherwise approved by the Selectboard;
(E) to apply for available governmental grants in aid and economic and in
kind incentives when approved by the Selectboard;
(F) to receive and expend contributions, grants, and income;
(G) to apply for an allocation of the State's private activity bond volume
cap under 26 U.S.C. § 141, as amended, when approved by the Selectboard;
(H) to expend funds as provided for in the budget or as otherwise
approved by the Selectboard;
(I) to manage and maintain public spaces and to assume or supplement
the services and maintenance heretofore provided the District by the Town as
recommended to and approved by the Selectboard;
(J) to acquire and dispose of property as recommended to and approved
by the Selectboard;
(K) to install and make public improvements as recommended to and
approved by the Selectboard;
Vermont Laws Page 3 of 14
https://legislature.vermont.gov/statutes/fullchapter/24APPENDIX/151 11/2/2018
(L) to cooperate with the Town in the use, management, and improvement
of public parking facilities and to undertake such management or improvements
and to regulate vehicular traffic within the district as recommended by the
Selectboard;
(M) to enter into contracts;
(N) to regulate, lease, license, establish rules and fees, and otherwise
manage the use of public spaces within the District;
(O) to plan for the orderly development of the District in cooperation with
the Town Planning Commission and as recommended to and approved by the
Selectboard;
(P) to do all other things necessary or convenient to carry out the
purposes of this subsection except that the Commission may not assume authority
over any subject matter or activity under the jurisdiction of another Town official,
department, or board as of the effective date of this subsection or contrary to any
order or ordinance in effect as of such date other than to hire and remove
personnel under contract or employed by the Commission, unless and until the
Selectboard, by order, transfers such jurisdiction to the Commission,
notwithstanding section 8 of the charter, or amends the order or ordinance.
(3) Annual Budget: Annually the Commission shall submit to the Selectboard
for approval for the next fiscal year a capital and operating budget of revenues
and expenditures which shall be used exclusively to repay debt on capital
improvements in the District and to defray the expenses incurred by the
Commission in connection with the operation, maintenance, and repair of the
District. In the event the Selectboard does not approve the budget as submitted,
the Selectboard shall return the budget forthwith to the Commission with its
recommendations for the Commission's reconsideration. Appropriations other than
from contributions, grants, and income for the Commission shall be raised through
common area fees which shall be assessed and collected as tax on property as
provided for in this subsection. The Commission may, upon adoption of the annual
budget and upon approval of the Selectboard, borrow money in anticipation of
common area fees.
(4) Common Area Fees:
(A) Common area fees are charges levied upon the owners of taxable
properties located in the District, excepting such portions of properties used for
owner-occupied residential purposes.
Vermont Laws Page 4 of 14
https://legislature.vermont.gov/statutes/fullchapter/24APPENDIX/151 11/2/2018
(B) The District shall have the authority to assess common area fees for
taxable real estate in the district based upon one of the following assessment
methods:
(i) A flat fee per taxable parcel identifiable on the grand list.
(ii) A flat fee per taxable parcel plus a formula based on any one, or
combination thereof, of square footages of commercial space, number of
apartments, square footage of lot size, linear footage of frontage, number of
parking spaces provided, number of parking spaces that would be needed to
conform to the Town's existing zoning bylaws for new construction, or any
equation which raises fees adequate to meet an annual Commission budget with a
method that reasonably apportions costs to property owners in relation to the
benefit that accrues to them.
The Commission shall only raise common area fees sufficient to meet
the budget regardless of the assessment method.
The common area fees shall be established by the Commission upon
approval of the Commission budget by the Selectboard and shall be assessed
annually by the Selectboard to be collected at the same time and in the same
manner as the Town votes to have its taxes collected, and such common area
assessment shall be a lien thereon with the same priority as taxes lawfully
assessed thereon.
(C) Consistent with the charter for the Town of St. Johnsbury and the laws
of the United States and of this State, the Commission, with the approval of the
Selectboard, may substitute any local option taxes permitted by law in lieu of
common area fees that exist to meet the budget.
(D) Appeals:
Persons aggrieved by any decision of the Commission involving the
assessment or levy of common area fees may appeal the decision to the
Selectboard by filing a written notice of appeal with the Town Clerk within 30 days
of the date of such decision, and furnishing a copy of the notice of appeal to the
Commission. The Selectboard shall set a date and place for a hearing on the
appeal within 60 days of the filing of the notice of appeal. The Selectboard shall
give the appellant and the Commission at least 15 days' notice prior to the hearing
date. Any person entitled to take an appeal may appear and be heard in person or
be represented by agent or attorney at such hearing. Any hearing held under this
subsection may be adjourned by the Selectboard from time to time; provided,
however, that the date and place of adjourned hearing shall be announced at that
hearing or 15 days' notice thereof is furnished to the appellant and the
Vermont Laws Page 5 of 14
https://legislature.vermont.gov/statutes/fullchapter/24APPENDIX/151 11/2/2018
Commission. The Selectboard shall render its decision, which shall include
findings of fact, within 45 days after completing the hearing, and shall within that
period send the appellant, and the Commission, by certified mail, a copy of the
decision. An aggrieved person may appeal a decision of the Selectboard to the
Caledonia County Superior Court. The appeal shall be taken in such manner as
the Supreme Court may by rule provide for appeals from State agencies governed
by 3 V.S.A. §§ 801 through 816. Notice of appeal shall be sent by mail to the
Commission.
§ 151-2a. Taxation for bonds and notes
Notwithstanding subsection 2(b) of this charter, all taxable property in the Town
of St. Johnsbury shall be subject to the levy of unlimited ad valorem taxes to pay
bonds and notes authorized by the voters of the Town for water purposes.
§ 151-3. Settlement of Village affairs
The officers of the Village of St. Johnsbury shall, prior to the date when Act No.
345 of the Acts of 1957, as amended, goes into effect, settle, so far as possible,
the pecuniary affairs of the Village of St. Johnsbury, and shall, except as
hereinafter provided, on said date turn over and deliver to the Clerk of the Town of
St. Johnsbury, all the records, books, and documents of the Village of St.
Johnsbury, and to the proper officers of the said Town all other property of the
said Village.
§ 151-4. Authority; annual meeting
(a) Said Town shall have and is hereby granted the authority to exercise all
powers relating to municipal affairs and no enumeration of powers in this charter
shall be deemed to limit or restrict the general grant of authority hereby conferred;
but this grant of authority shall not be deemed to limit the authority of the
Legislature to alter, amend, or repeal this charter; or to limit the right to hereafter
pass general laws applicable alike to this and all other municipal corporations of
the State; nor shall this grant of authority be deemed to limit the patronage or
control of the State with respect to said Town.
(b) The Town shall start its annual meeting at 7:30 o'clock in the afternoon of
the day before the first Tuesday of March and may transact at that time any
business not involving voting by Australian ballot or voting required by law to be
by ballot and to be held on the first Tuesday of March. Discussion shall be
permitted at such meetings on all articles contained in the warning for the annual
meeting. A meeting so started shall be adjourned until the following day.
§ 151-5. Powers
Vermont Laws Page 6 of 14
https://legislature.vermont.gov/statutes/fullchapter/24APPENDIX/151 11/2/2018
Under the general grant of authority contained in and conferred upon the town
by section 4 of this charter, the Town of St. Johnsbury may exercise the following
powers and functions:
(1) To levy, assess, and collect taxes, in order to carry out its powers, to
appropriate and to borrow money, within the limits prescribed by the general laws;
and to collect special assessments for benefits conferred.
(2) To furnish all local public services, including without limiting the generality
of the foregoing a water system, electric light and power system, and a sewage
system and disposal plant; to purchase, hire, construct, own, maintain, and operate
or lease local public utilities subject to chapter 411 of V.S. 47; to acquire, by
condemnation or otherwise, within or without the limits of said Town, property
necessary for any such purpose, subject to restrictions imposed by the general
law for the protection of other communities.
(3) To make local public improvements and to acquire, by condemnation or
otherwise, property within its corporate limits necessary for such improvements;
and also to acquire an excess over that needed for any such improvement, and to
sell or lease such excess property with restrictions, in order to protect and
preserve the improvement.
(4) To acquire by gift or purchase, sell, convey, lease, assign, maintain, and
service real and personal property as may be necessary or incidental to the
exercise of its municipal powers, duties, and functions and to exercise in
connection therewith any incidental powers as may be necessary to preserve and
maintain the value of any such property once lawfully acquired.
(5) To issue and sell bonds on the security of any such property, or of any
public utility owned by the Town, or of the revenues thereof, or of both, including
in the case of a public utility, if deemed desirable by the Town, a franchise stating
the terms upon which, in case of foreclosure, the purchaser may operate such
utility.
(6) To purchase or lease lands within or without the corporate limits of the
Town, to lay out or widen streets, highways, lanes, commons, alleys, and walks, to
provide places of healthy recreation in summer or in winter such as a skating rink,
a swimming pool, a playing field, a public park; to provide for tourist camping sites,
and aviation landing field, and a municipal forest reserve; and for any municipal
purposes whatever.
(7) To adopt and enforce within its limits local police, sanitary, zoning, Town
planning, and other similar regulations, not in conflict with the laws of this State.
Vermont Laws Page 7 of 14
https://legislature.vermont.gov/statutes/fullchapter/24APPENDIX/151 11/2/2018
(8) To establish and maintain a fire department.
(9) To establish and maintain a police department, to provide for the
appointment of police officers, who shall be sworn and who shall have the same
powers as constables in the service of civil and criminal process, and such further
special authority as may be provided in the bylaws or ordinances of said Town
enacted under authority of law. Such fire and police departments may be
consolidated into one department if the Town shall so vote.
(10) To appropriate annually money for the maintenance, care, improvement,
and support of Fairbanks Museum, so long as the same shall remain a nonprofit
institution for the promotion of education.
§ 151-6. Fire District; process for abolition
The St. Johnsbury Center Fire District No. 1 is abolished when a majority of the
legal voters of said Fire District present and voting on the question at a regular or
special meeting of said Fire District warned for said purpose so vote and shall
thereupon cease to exist as a political entity and body corporate. All the property
and funds of said Fire District shall on such date be vested in the Town of St.
Johnsbury and the Town of St. Johnsbury shall thereupon assume all
indebtedness and obligations of said Fire District unless said liabilities and
obligations exceed said assets in which case said Fire District shall continue to
exist until such excess is paid unless the Town of St. Johnsbury votes otherwise at
a regular or special meeting warned for said purpose.
§ 151-7. Bylaws
In meetings duly warned for the purpose, the Town of St. Johnsbury shall have
power to make, alter, repeal, or amend bylaws, which together with the ordinances
and regulations adopted by the selectmen shall regulate its affairs, and shall carry
into effect the provisions and intent of this charter.
§ 151-8. Ordinances and regulations
The selectmen of the Town of St. Johnsbury consistent with the Constitution
and laws of the United States and of this State, shall have the power and authority
to make, establish, impose, alter, amend, or repeal ordinances and regulations and
to enforce the same by fine, penalty, forfeiture, injunction, restraining order, or any
proper remedy, with respect to the inspection, regulation, licensing, or
suppression of the following affairs, establishments, employments, enterprises,
uses, undertakings, and businesses, viz:
Vermont Laws Page 8 of 14
https://legislature.vermont.gov/statutes/fullchapter/24APPENDIX/151 11/2/2018
(1) The sale and measurement of wood, coal, oil, and all other fuels; hay
scales; markets dealing in meat, fish, and foodstuffs; slaughterhouses; groceries;
restaurants, lunch carts, and other eating establishments; all places where
beverages are manufactured, processed, bottled, or sold; manufacturing
establishments; saloons; taverns; innkeepers; hotels; motels; rooming houses; junk
businesses; advertising billboards; overhanging signs and awnings; billiard rooms;
pool rooms; bowling alleys; public halls; dance halls; theaters; moving picture
houses; all places where tobacco, cigars, and cigarettes are manufactured or sold;
repair shops; brickyards; stone sheds; blacksmith shops; public garages; the
transportation, storage, and sale of propane gas, naphtha, gasoline, kerosene, fuel
oil, and other inflammable oils; the breeding, raising, and keeping of horses, cattle,
swine, poultry, mink, foxes, furbearing, and other domestic animals; coal sheds;
wood yards; creameries, dairies; dyeing establishments; garbage plants; gas
works; livery stables; skating rinks; sewers; cesspools; privies; cow stables, barns;
wells; and public dumps; oil and gasoline storage tanks, and gasoline filling
stations.
(2) Processions, parades, traveling showmen, shows, circuses, menageries,
carnivals, clairvoyants, mendicants, fortune tellers, spiritualists, mediums, itinerant
vendors, peddlers, auctioneers, pawnbrokers, professional and amateur sports.
(3) The use of streets and highways; the regulation of traffic, both vehicular
and pedestrian; taxicabs and all vehicles, exclusive of motor buses, used in the
conveyance for hire of persons or goods; the parking, operation, and speed of
vehicles; guide posts, street signs, and street safety devices; milk and cream
businesses and routes.
(4) Cruelty to animals; fast driving; the going at large of animals; and the
keeping of bees.
(5) The erection of poles, and the placing of wires, cables, and pipes, subject
to the provision of chapter 409 V.S. 47; the laying of water mains and sewers; the
excavating of streets; the disposal of refuse, filth, and animal carcasses; the
throwing or dumping of ashes, waste paper, handbills, circulars, or rubbish of any
sort; the planting, preservation, or destruction of shade trees.
(6) The transportation, manufacture, storage, and sale of gunpowder, ashes,
lime, matches, fireworks, explosives, acids, and other dangerous or combustible
materials.
(7) The cleaning of public sidewalks and gutters, and the removal therefrom
of snow, ice, litter, garbage, stands, tables, boxes, and other materials
encumbering or obstructing any public sidewalk, street, or way.
Vermont Laws Page 9 of 14
https://legislature.vermont.gov/statutes/fullchapter/24APPENDIX/151 11/2/2018
(8) A building code; the construction, repair, and alteration of chimneys, flues,
stovepipes, furnaces, fireplaces, and heating apparatus and plumbing facilities of
all kinds.
(9) Nuisances, bawdyhouses, gaming houses; racing pools; gambling
instruments of all kinds; noisome and offensive places and occupations, loafing,
obscenity and ribaldry upon the Town streets and highways; vagrancy; riots,
disturbances, disorderly assemblies, and all breaches of the peace; pollution of the
public water supply.
§ 151-9. Publication of bylaws and ordinances
The bylaw adopted by the Town and the ordinances and regulations passed by
the selectmen, whether enacted under the authority of general or special law, shall
be published in a newspaper having general circulation in said Town at least 20
days before the effective date thereof, and all such enactments shall thereupon be
recorded at length by the Town Clerk in a book kept for that purpose in the office
of the Town Clerk, and the Town Clerk's certificate that such bylaws, ordinances,
and regulations were duly adopted and passed at an annual meeting of said Town
or at a special meeting thereof lawfully called for that purpose or were duly
enacted and adopted by the selectmen of the Town under authority of law or
under authority of a vote of the Town shall be prima facie evidence of such fact in
any court in this State; and certified copies of said bylaws, ordinances, and
regulations and the Clerk's certificates shall be received as evidence in all the
courts of the State.
§ 151-10. Penalties
(a) Fines, penalties, and forfeitures up to and including two hundred dollars, for
each breach of an ordinance or bylaw, may be established by the selectmen, or by
a properly warned Town meeting. These fines, penalties, and forfeitures may be
recovered in an action of tort brought in the name of the Town, and in any such
action a general complaint relying on the ordinance or the bylaw shall be
sufficient. The process may issue either against the body or the property of the
defendant, and if the defendant is found guilty, and if it is found by the court that
the cause of action arose from his or her willful or malicious act or neglect, it shall
so adjudge, and may further adjudge that he or she be confined in close jail, and
may issue execution against his or her body with a certificate of such findings
endorsed thereon; and such execution with such certificate thereon shall have the
same effect as an execution issued on a judgment founded upon tort having a like
certificate endorsed thereon.
Vermont Laws Page 10 of 14
https://legislature.vermont.gov/statutes/fullchapter/24APPENDIX/151 11/2/2018
(b) Any person refusing to comply with any Town ordinance or bylaw, relating to
his or her business may be enjoined by a proper action in chancery brought in the
name of the Town, from continuing such business in violation of such ordinance or
bylaw, and in any such action a bill relying on the ordinance or bylaw shall be
sufficient.
(c) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the Town from having
and exercising such other powers as may be proper to enforce obedience to its
ordinances and bylaws and to punish violations thereof.
§ 151-11. Prosecution of violations
All violations of ordinances or bylaws may be prosecuted in behalf of the Town
by its attorney, or police officers, or by any other duly authorized prosecuting
officer, before the Caledonia Municipal Court; and all fines, penalties, or forfeitures
recovered by the said Town for violations of such ordinances or bylaws shall be
paid into the Town Treasury.
§ 151-12. Officers
The elective officers of the Town shall be those authorized by the general laws
of this State, except that notwithstanding the provisions of section 3509 of the
Vermont Statutes, Revision of 1947, the listers shall be appointed annually by the
selectmen, unless the Town at an annual or special meeting duly warned for that
purpose shall vote otherwise.
§ 151-12a. Compensation and fees
(a) The Selectboard shall annually consider, and from time to time set, the
compensation of the following officers:
(1) Town Manager;
(2) Constable;
(3) members of the Board of Assessment.
(b) The Town Clerk and the Selectboard shall jointly set the compensation of
the Town Clerk each year. The Town Treasurer and the Selectboard shall jointly
set the compensation of the Town Treasurer each year. If the Selectboard and the
Town Clerk or Town Treasurer are unable to agree on the amount of either
officer's compensation, that officer's compensation shall be set by vote of the
Town and the Selectboard shall include an article or articles in the annual meeting
warning to that effect. The article or articles shall be adopted or modified by the
vote of the majority of those eligible to vote who are present at the meeting. The
article or articles shall not be voted on by Australian ballot.
Vermont Laws Page 11 of 14
https://legislature.vermont.gov/statutes/fullchapter/24APPENDIX/151 11/2/2018
(c) The Town Manager, with the approval of the Selectboard, shall set the
compensation of all other town officers and employees. (Added 2005, No. M-14
(Adj. Sess.), § 2.)
§ 151-12b. Offices abolished
The Office of Fence Viewer, Inspector of Lumber, Shingles, and Wood, Second
Constable, and Weigher of Coal are all hereby abolished. Except as otherwise
provided in this chapter, the Town Manager or his or her designee shall exercise
the powers, duties, and responsibilities of any of the offices abolished by this
section in the event that the need should arise. (Added 2005, No. M-14 (Adj. Sess.),
§ 3.)
§ 151-13. Expiration of terms of selectmen upon merger
Upon such effective date of the merger of the Village of St. Johnsbury and the
Town of St. Johnsbury the selectmen shall continue in office for the remainder of
their respective terms and the other officers of the Town of St. Johnsbury shall
continue in office until the first Tuesday in March next following, and their
successors shall have been elected or appointed; and the ordinances of the
Village of St. Johnsbury then in force shall remain of full force and effect, following
the effective date of this act for a period of one year only, so far as such
ordinances shall continue to be applicable and appropriate, except as repealed,
amended, altered, or modified by the selectmen of the Town of St. Johnsbury, and
as respects only that part of the Town of St. Johnsbury comprised within the limits
of the Village of St. Johnsbury, as defined by No. 179 of the Acts of 1927.
§ 151-14. Authority to merge; expiration
The authority granted by this act to the Village of St. Johnsbury and the Town of
St. Johnsbury to merge shall expire 20 years from the date of the passage and
adoption of this act unless all of the municipalities mentioned herein shall have
voted to adopt the provisions hereof within such period.
§ 151-15. Severability
If any provision of this act is for any reason held invalid, such invalidity shall not
affect the remaining provisions which can be given effect without the invalid
provision. To this end, the provisions of this charter are declared to be severable.
§ 151-16. Preparation of budgets; Australian ballot
Vermont Laws Page 12 of 14
https://legislature.vermont.gov/statutes/fullchapter/24APPENDIX/151 11/2/2018
(a) The Selectboard shall prepare an annual budget for the Town, including a
Town annual budget and a former Village District special services budget. The
School Director shall prepare an annual School District budget. The annual
budgets, other articles providing for the appropriation of funds, and public
questions shall be voted by Australian ballot.
(b) On any question wherein the vote is not specifically required to be by ballot,
a ballot may be demanded by three voters at any meeting. (Amended 2009, No.
M-7, § 2, eff. May 8, 2009.)
§ 151-17. Department of Assessment
(a) Creation. There is hereby created a Department of Assessment headed by a
person experienced in the appraisal of real estate, who shall be appointed by the
Town Manager with the approval of the Selectboard.
(b) Appraisal of property. The Department of Assessment shall appraise all real
and personal property for the purpose of drawing up the grand list. Appraisals
shall be reviewed periodically and updated. Technically qualified individuals or
firms may be employed as needed.
(c) Powers. The Department of Assessment shall have the same powers,
discharge the same duties, proceed in the same manner, and be subject to the
same liabilities as those prescribed for listers or a board of listers under applicable
provisions of Vermont law with respect to drawing up the grand list, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter. (Added 2005, No. M-14 (Adj. Sess.), § 4.)
§ 151-18. Board of Assessment
(a) Creation. There is hereby created a Board of Assessment composed of the
three listers.
(b) Duties. The Board of Assessment shall exercise all powers and duties with
respect to grievances, otherwise imposed upon the listers or a board of listers
under the laws of the State of Vermont, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter. (Added 2005, No. M-14 (Adj. Sess.), § 5.)
§ 151-19. Appeals
A person aggrieved by the final decision of the Board of Assessment under the
provisions of section 18 of this chapter may appeal in writing under the provisions
of 32 V.S.A. chapter 131. (Added 2005, No. M-14 (Adj. Sess.), § 6.)
§ 151-20. Undesignated reserve fund
Vermont Laws Page 13 of 14
https://legislature.vermont.gov/statutes/fullchapter/24APPENDIX/151 11/2/2018
The Selectboard may annually reserve any surplus in the essential services
budget, not to exceed five percent of the budget, for the purpose of establishing
an undesignated reserve fund. The reserve fund shall be kept in a separate
account and invested as are other public funds and may be expended for
purposes as may be authorized by a majority of the voters present and voting at
an annual or special meeting duly warned. (Added 2005, No. M-14 (Adj. Sess.), § 7.)
§ 151-21. Recall
Any Town officer, as defined by 17 V.S.A. § 2646, may be recalled by the
following process:
(1) A petition shall be filed with the Town Clerk signed by not less than
twenty-five percent of the number of registered voters at the time the petition is
submitted.
(2) The petition shall request a meeting of the voters of the Town for the
purpose of recalling a Town officer and shall set forth the name of the person to
be recalled, the reason for the recall, and shall identify the office he or she holds.
(3) The Selectboard shall, within 15 days of receipt of such petition, warn a
meeting to act upon the petition.
(4) The meeting shall be held not less than 30 nor more than 40 days from
the date of the warning.
(5) The meeting shall be warned as provided by the general laws of the State
of Vermont.
(6) At least four days, but not more than 15 days, prior to the meeting, an
informational meeting shall be held at which time both the Town officer who is the
subject of the recall petition and the proponents of the recall shall have the
opportunity to discuss the petition to recall. The informational meeting shall be
warned in conjunction with the warning for the meeting.
(7) When a two-thirds majority of the voters present and voting on the
question at such meeting vote in favor of the recall, the Town officer subject to the
petition shall be recalled and the office he or she held shall be deemed vacant.
(8) A recall petition shall not be brought against the same officer more than
once within any 12-month period. (Added 2015, No. M-3, § 2, eff. Mar. 12, 2015.)
Vermont Laws Page 14 of 14
https://legislature.vermont.gov/statutes/fullchapter/24APPENDIX/151 11/2/2018
CODE OF CIVIL ORDINANCES
TOWN OF ST. JOHNSBURY, VERMONT
Published by the Order of the Board of Selectmen
Published in this format November 9, 1992.
Amendments:
Chapter 3: Animals: June 11, 2012
Chapter 5: Fire Prevention and Protection: May 27, 2014, July 27, 2014 Article V: Open Burning
Chapter 6: Housing: October 24, 2017
Chapter 7, Article VI: Street Performing Regulations: November 25, 2013
Chapter 8: Loitering Ordinance: June 11, 2012
Objectionable Noise: November 26, 2012
Disorderly Conduct added to Objectionable Noise: June 23, 2014
Prohibition of Use of Tobacco Products on Town Owned Property: July 12, 2019
Chapter 12: Parking amendments: November 1, 1993 April 10, 2000, January 1, 2004
Chapter 13: Utilities: November 13, 2000
i
TOWN OF ST. JOHNSBURY CODE OF
ORDINANCES
Published by Order of the Board of Selectmen, St. Johnsbury, VT
October 24, 2017
ii
PREFACE
The Code of Ordinances in this booklet represents the complete re-codification of the ordinances of the
Town of St. Johnsbury, Vermont adopted November 9, 1992 of a general and permanent nature. This
booklet has been revised and re-formatted, and includes amendments adopted by the Select Board
since the original re-codification.
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code also include the 1966 Code and Ordinances
subsequently adopted by the Board of Selectmen. The source of each section is included in the history
note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section
is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code.
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various
sections within each chapter have been catch lined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related
sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included.
Numbering System
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes.
Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash
referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section
within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 2 is numbered 2-2 and the second section of
Chapter 3 is 3-2. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new
sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for
amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically
come between section 4-1 and 4-2 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 4-1.1,
4-1.2 and 4-1.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is
to be included between Chapters 5 and 6, it will be designated as Chapter 5.5. Care should be taken that
the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and
new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of
the chapter embracing the subject, and in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article
embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division.
Indices
The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under
several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still
others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross
references within each index which stands as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in
which he is interested.
Loose-leaf Supplements
A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the loose-leaf
system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept upto-
date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and
the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders
of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the
obsolete pages.
iii
Successfully keeping this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume.
As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the
amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the
publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and,
in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes.
The following copies of the Code shall be maintained:
The Town Clerk
The Town Manager
The Police Chief
The Fire Chief
The Director of Public Works
The Planning Commission (7 copies)
The Developmental Review Board (5 copies)
The Town Attorney
The Town Website
iv
Table of Contents
PREFACE.................................................................................................................................................. ii
Numbering System ............................................................................................................................. ii
Indices ................................................................................................................................................. ii
Loose-leaf Supplements ..................................................................................................................... ii
HISTORY .................................................................................................................................................. 1
Source ............................................................................................................................................. 1
Historical Note ................................................................................................................................ 1
V.S.A. Title 24 Appendix: Municipal Charters ............................................................................. 1
Chapter 151: TOWN OF ST. JOHNSBURY ................................................................................ 1
§ 151-1. Merger of village and town .................................................................................................. 1
§ 151-2. Assets transferred; liabilities; taxation; special services; downtown improvement district 1
(1) Commission-Creation; Membership: ........................................................................................ 2
(2) Purposes and Powers: ............................................................................................................... 2
(3) Annual Budget: .......................................................................................................................... 4
(4) Common Area Fees: .................................................................................................................. 4
§ 151-2a. Taxation for bonds and notes ............................................................................................. 5
§ 151-3. Settlement of village affairs ................................................................................................. 5
§ 151-4. Authority; annual meeting ................................................................................................... 5
§ 151-5. Powers .................................................................................................................................. 6
§ 151-6. Fire district; process for abolition ........................................................................................ 7
§ 151-7. Bylaws ................................................................................................................................... 7
§ 151-8. Ordinances and regulations ................................................................................................. 7
§ 151-9. Publication of bylaws and ordinances .................................................................................. 8
§ 151-10. Penalties ............................................................................................................................. 9
§ 151-11. Prosecution of violations .................................................................................................... 9
§ 151-12. Officers ............................................................................................................................... 9
§ 151-12a. Compensation and fees .................................................................................................... 9
§ 151-12b. Offices abolished ............................................................................................................ 10
§ 151-13. Expiration of terms of selectmen upon merger ............................................................... 10
§ 151-14. Authority to merge; expiration ........................................................................................ 10
§ 151-15. Severability ....................................................................................................................... 11
v
§ 151-16. Preparation of budgets; Australian ballot ........................................................................ 11
§ 151-17. Department of assessment .............................................................................................. 11
§ 151-18. Board of assessment ........................................................................................................ 11
§ 151-19. Appeals ............................................................................................................................. 11
§ 151-20. Undesignated reserve fund .............................................................................................. 12
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ................................................................................................... 12
Chapter I: GENERAL PROVISIONS ......................................................................................................... 14
Sec. 1-1.How Code designated and cited. .................................................................................... 14
Sec. 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction. ........................................................................... 14
Sec. 1-3. Catch lines of sections. .................................................................................................. 16
Sec. 1-4. History notes. ................................................................................................................. 16
Sec. 1-5. References and editor's notes. ...................................................................................... 16
Sec. 1-6. Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. ..................................... 16
Sec. 1-7. Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. ........................................................... 16
Sec. 1-8. Effect of repeals. ............................................................................................................ 16
Sec. 1-9. Certain ordinances not affected by Code. ..................................................................... 17
Sec. 1-10. Effect of amendments to Code. ................................................................................... 17
Sec. 1-11. Supplementation of Code. ........................................................................................... 18
Sec. 1-12. Severability of parts of Code ........................................................................................ 19
Sec. 1-13. General penalty............................................................................................................ 19
Chapter 2: ADMINISTRATION ............................................................................................................... 20
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL ..................................................................................................................... 20
Secs. 2-l--2-25. Reserved. ............................................................................................................. 20
ARTICLE II. BOARD OF SELECTMEN................................................................................................... 20
Secs. 2-26. Meetings. .................................................................................................................... 20
Sec. 2-27. Ordinances and resolutions. ........................................................................................ 20
Secs. 2-28--2-45. Reserved. .......................................................................................................... 21
ARTICLE III. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES ........................................................................................... 21
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY .................................................................................................................... 21
Sec. 2-46--2-60. Reserved. ............................................................................................................ 21
DIVISION 2. TOWN CLERK ................................................................................................................. 21
Sec. 2-61. Duties. .......................................................................................................................... 21
Chapter 3: ANIMALS .......................................................................................................................... 22
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL ..................................................................................................................... 22
SECTION 3-1. AUTHORITY. ............................................................................................................ 22
vi
Secs. 3-2--3-25. Reserved. ............................................................................................................ 22
ARTICLE II. DOGS AND WOLF HYBRIDS - Civil Ordinance ................................................................. 22
SECTION 3-26. PURPOSE. .............................................................................................................. 22
SECTION 3-27. DEFINITIONS. ........................................................................................................ 22
SECTION 3-28. DISTURBANCES AND NUISANCES ......................................................................... 23
SECTION 3-29. ANIMAL WASTE DISPOSAL ................................................................................... 23
SECTION 3-30. COLLAR AND LICENSE ........................................................................................... 23
SECTION 3-31. HUMANE CARE OF DOGS ..................................................................................... 24
SECTION 3-32. ENFORCEMENT ..................................................................................................... 24
SECTION 3-33. VICIOUS DOGS ...................................................................................................... 24
SECTION 3-34. IMPOUNDMENT AND/OR RESTRAINT .................................................................. 24
SECTION 3-35. NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT AND RELEASE FROM IMPOUNDMENT ................... 24
SECTION 3-36. INVESTIGATION OF VICIOUS DOGS RELATING TO NON-PROVOKED ATTACKS ON
HUMANS ............................................................................................................................................. 25
SECTION 3-37. PENALTIES AND COSTS ......................................................................................... 25
SECTION 3-38. OTHER LAWS. ....................................................................................................... 25
SECTION 3-39. SEVERABILITY. ...................................................................................................... 26
SECTION 3-40. EFFECTIVE DATE. .................................................................................................. 26
Secs. 3-41--3-50. Reserved. .......................................................................................................... 26
ARTICLE III. RABIES CONTROL ........................................................................................................... 26
Sec. 3-51. QUARANTINE. .............................................................................................................. 26
Chapter 4: RESERVED ........................................................................................................................... 27
Chapter 5: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION ...................................................................... 28
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL ..................................................................................................................... 28
Sec. 5-1. INTENT. .......................................................................................................................... 28
Sec. 5-2. TAMPERING WITH FIRE ALARM PROHIBITED. ............................................................... 28
Sec. 5-3. TAMPERING WITH SMOKE ALARMS OR CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTORS .................. 28
Secs. 5-4--5-25. RESERVED. .......................................................................................................... 28
ARTICLE II. FIRE DEPARTMENT ......................................................................................................... 29
Sec. 5-26. FIRE HAZARD INSPECTOR ............................................................................................. 29
Sec. 5-27. DUTIES IN CONNECTION WITH PREVENTION OF FIRES. .............................................. 29
Sec. 5-28. RIGHT TO ENTER FOR INSPECTION. ............................................................................. 29
Sec. 5-29. SCOPE OF INSPECTION AUTHORIZED........................................................................... 30
Secs. 5-30--5-45. RESERVED. ........................................................................................................ 30
ARTICLE III. STANDARDS ................................................................................................................... 30
vii
Sec. 5-46. ADOPTED. ..................................................................................................................... 30
Sec. 5-47. RESTRICTIONS ON STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS. ............................................. 30
Sec. 5-48. ORDER TO CORRECT VIOLATIONS ................................................................................ 31
Sec. 5-49. METHOD OF SERVICE OF ORDER. ................................................................................ 31
Sec. 5-50. TIME FOR COMPLIANCE. .............................................................................................. 32
Sec. 5-51. APPEAL FROM ORDER TO CORRECT VIOLATION. ........................................................ 32
Sec. 5-52. ABATEMENT BY TOWN UPON FAILURE TO COMPLY; PENALTY. ................................. 32
Secs. 5-53--5-70. RESERVED. ........................................................................................................ 32
ARTICLE IV. FIRE ALARMS ................................................................................................................. 33
Sec. 5-71. DEFINITION OF USER. ................................................................................................... 33
Sec. 5-72. RESPONSE UPON RECEIPT OF ALARM. ........................................................................ 33
Sec. 5-73. FALSE ALARMS. ............................................................................................................ 33
Sec. 5-74. EXEMPTION. ................................................................................................................. 33
Sec. 5-75. COLLECTION OF CHARGES. .......................................................................................... 34
Sec. 5-76. KNOX BOXES AND STANDARD KEYS ............................................................................. 34
Secs. 5-77--5-100. RESERVED. ...................................................................................................... 34
ARTICLE V. OPEN BURNING .............................................................................................................. 35
Sec. 5-101. IN GENERAL ............................................................................................................... 35
Sec. 5-102. PURPOSE, TITLE .......................................................................................................... 35
Sec. 5-103. DEFINITIONS............................................................................................................... 35
Sec. 5-104. OPEN BURNING AND INCINERATION ........................................................................ 36
Sec. 5-105. DESIGNATION OF ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL ......................................................... 37
Sec. 5-106. REPEAL OF INCONSISTENT PROVISIONS .................................................................... 37
Sec. 5-107. Enforcement and penalties. ....................................................................................... 38
Sec. 5-107.1. Severability. ............................................................................................................ 38
Sec. 5-107.2. Effective date. ........................................................................................................ 38
Chapter 6: HOUSING ............................................................................................................................ 39
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL ..................................................................................................................... 39
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY ORDINANCE ................................................................................... 39
Sec. 6-1 AUTHORITY. ................................................................................................................... 39
Sec. 6-2. STATEMENT OF FINDINGS AND PURPOSE. ................................................................... 39
Sec. 6-3. DEFINITIONS. ................................................................................................................. 40
Sec. 6-4. AUTHORITY OF TOWN HEALTH OFFICER. ..................................................................... 42
Sec. 6-5. BUILDING AND PROPERTY OWNER OBLIGATIONS AND STANDARDS........................... 42
Sec. 6-6. HEALTH AND SAFETY INSPECTION ................................................................................ 43
viii
Sec. 6-7. SAFETY ORDER. ............................................................................................................. 44
Sec. 6-8. APPEAL OF SAFETY ORDER ............................................................................................ 45
Sec. 6-9. PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT ...................................................................................... 45
Sec. 6-10. VACANT BUILDING PERMIT AND STANDARDS ............................................................ 45
Sec. 6-11. FEES. ............................................................................................................................. 47
Sec. 6-12. REPEAL OF PRIOR CONFLICTING ORDINANCES. .......................................................... 48
Sec. 6-13. SEVERABILITY. ............................................................................................................. 48
Sec. 6-14. EFFECTIVE DATE. ......................................................................................................... 48
Secs. 6-15--6-25. RESERVED. ........................................................................................................ 48
ARTICLE II. HOUSING CODE .............................................................................................................. 49
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY ................................................................................................................... 49
Sec. 6-26. PURPOSE ...................................................................................................................... 49
Sec. 6-27. SCOPE ........................................................................................................................... 49
Sec. 6-28. APPLICATION. ............................................................................................................... 49
Sec. 6-29. INTENT. ........................................................................................................................ 50
Sec. 6-30. RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS. ................................................................................... 50
Sec. 6-31. RESPONSIBILITIES OF OCCUPANTS. ............................................................................. 50
Sec. 6-32. LANDLORD EVICTION PROCEDURES. ........................................................................... 51
Sec. 6-33. CONFLICT OF PROVISIONS. .......................................................................................... 51
Secs. 6-34--6-45. RESERVED. ........................................................................................................ 51
DIVISION 2. ADMINISTRATION ......................................................................................................... 51
Sec. 6-46. HOUSING BOARD OF REVIEW. ..................................................................................... 51
Sec. 6-47. ENFORCEMENT. ........................................................................................................... 51
Sec. 6-48. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CODE COMPLIANCE OFFICER ...................................... 52
Sec. 6-49. LIABILITY. ...................................................................................................................... 52
Secs. 6-50--6-65. RESERVED. ........................................................................................................ 52
DIVISION 3. STANDARDS .................................................................................................................. 52
Sec. 6-66. HOUSING CODE ADOPTED. .......................................................................................... 52
Sec. 6-67. GENERAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO HOUSING. ......................................................... 53
Sec. 6-68. HABITABLE SPACE-LIGHT AND VENTILATION. ............................................................. 53
Sec. 6-69. SAME-MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS. ................................................................... 53
Sec. 6-70. PUBLIC SPACE-HEIGHT. ................................................................................................ 54
Sec. 6-71. SAME-LIGHT AND VENTILATION. ................................................................................. 54
Sec. 6-72. NON-INHABITABLE SPACE; HEIGHT. ............................................................................ 54
Sec. 6-73. TOILET ROOMS AND BATHROOMS. ............................................................................. 54
ix
Sec. 6-74. LIGHT AND VENTILATION IN CERTAIN OTHER AREAS. ................................................. 55
Sec. 6-75. EXITS. ............................................................................................................................ 55
Sec. 6-76. CONSTRUCTION, INSTALLATION, AND MAINTENANCE OF STRUCTURAL ELEMENTS. 55
Sec. 6-77. INSECTS AND RODENTS PROTECTION. ........................................................................ 56
Sec. 6-78. FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS-PROHIBITED ACCUMULATIONS AND STORAGE ........... 56
Sec. 6-79. PREVENTION OF FIRES. ................................................................................................ 56
Sec. 6-80. INTERIOR FINISHES, TRIM AND DECORATIVE MATERIALS. .......................................... 56
Sec. 6-81. FIREPLACES AND WOODSTOVES. ................................................................................. 57
Sec. 6-82. OTHER FIRE REGULATIONS. ......................................................................................... 57
Sec. 6-83. EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS. ..................................................................................... 57
Sec. 6-84. HEALTH REQUIREMENTS. ............................................................................................ 58
Sec. 6-85. ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS. ...................................................................................... 58
Sec. 6-86. HEATING. ...................................................................................................................... 58
Sec. 6-87. SMOKE CONTROL. ........................................................................................................ 58
Sec. 6-88. PROHIBITED LOCATIONS FOR HEAT PRODUCING EQUIPMENT. .................................. 58
Sec. 6-89. PLUMBING FACILITIES IN MULTIPLE DWELLINGS AND ROOMING HOUSES. ............... 58
Sec. 6-90. GAS FUEL. ..................................................................................................................... 59
Sec. 6-91. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS. ............................................................... 59
Sec. 6-92. MAINTENANCE OF OPEN AREAS. ................................................................................. 59
Sec. 6-93. MAINTENANCE OF BUILDING STRUCTURES. ............................................................... 59
Sec. 6-94. INFESTATION PREVENTION; SCREENING. .................................................................... 60
Sec 6-95. Garbage and refuse storage and collection. ................................................................. 60
Chapter 7: LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS ............................................................................ 71
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL ..................................................................................................................... 71
Sec. 7-1. Required. ........................................................................................................................ 71
Sec. 7-2. Application. .................................................................................................................... 71
Sec. 7-3. Issuance. ........................................................................................................................ 71
Sec. 7-4. Nontransferable; expiration. ......................................................................................... 71
Sec. 7-5. Inspection....................................................................................................................... 71
Sec. 7-6. Revocation. .................................................................................................................... 72
Sec. 7-7. License required for livery stables and blacksmith shops; fee; restrictions. ................. 72
Sec. 7-8. License required for sale of tobacco products; fee. ...................................................... 72
Sec. 7-9. License required for vehicles for hire; fee. .................................................................... 72
Sec. 7-10. Permit required for certain sales, shows, exhibits; fee. .............................................. 72
Sec. 7-11. Location of vending and other machines restricted. ................................................... 72
x
Secs. 7-12--7-30. Reserved. .......................................................................................................... 72
ARTICLE II. AMUSEMENTS ................................................................................................................ 72
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY .................................................................................................................... 72
Secs. 7-31--7-45. Reserved. .......................................................................................................... 72
DIVISION 2. DANCE HALLS AND OTHER PUBLIC HALLS .................................................................... 72
Sec. 7-46. Licenses required; restrictions; fee. ............................................................................. 72
Secs. 7-47--7-60. Reserved. .......................................................................................................... 73
DIVISION 3. COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT MACHINES AND PLACES OF
AMUSEMENT, SPORT OR RECREATION ................................................................................................... 73
Sec. 7-61. Definitions. ................................................................................................................... 73
Sec. 7-62. License required. .......................................................................................................... 73
Sec. 7-63. Application. .................................................................................................................. 73
Sec. 7-64. Fee. ............................................................................................................................... 73
Sec. 7-65. Issuance; expiration. .................................................................................................... 73
Sec. 7-66. Restrictions .................................................................................................................. 73
Sec. 7-67. Compliance with law. ................................................................................................... 73
Secs. 7-68--7-80. Reserved ........................................................................................................... 73
DIVISION 4. BOWLING ALLEYS, POOL ROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS ............................................ 73
Sec. 7-81. License required. .......................................................................................................... 73
Sec. 7-82--7-95. Reserved. ............................................................................................................ 74
DIVISION 5. THEATERS ...................................................................................................................... 74
Sec. 7-96. License required; restrictions; fee. .............................................................................. 74
Secs. 7-97--7-120. Reserved. ........................................................................................................ 74
ARTICLE III. AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS ................................................................................. 74
Sec. 7-121. Defined. ...................................................................................................................... 74
Sec. 7-122. License required. ........................................................................................................ 74
Sec. 7-123. Fee.............................................................................................................................. 74
Sec. 7-124. Restrictions. ............................................................................................................... 74
Sec. 7-125. Curb pump prohibited. .............................................................................................. 74
Secs. 7-126--7-140. Reserved. ...................................................................................................... 74
ARTICLE IV. FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS ............................................................................. 74
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY .................................................................................................................... 74
Secs. 7-141--7-155. Reserved. ...................................................................................................... 75
DIVISION 2. BUTCHERS, SLAUGHTERHOUSES, ETC. .......................................................................... 75
Sec. 7-156. License required. ........................................................................................................ 75
xi
Sec. 7-157. Restrictions. ............................................................................................................... 75
Sec. 7-158. Fees. ........................................................................................................................... 75
Secs. 7-159--7-175. Reserved. ...................................................................................................... 75
DIVISION 3. GROCERY, MEAT AND PRODUCE, ETC., DEALERS ......................................................... 75
Sec. 7-176. License required. ........................................................................................................ 75
Sec. 7-177. Fee.............................................................................................................................. 75
Sec. 7-178. Restriction. ................................................................................................................. 75
Secs. 7-179--7-185. Reserved. ...................................................................................................... 75
DIVISION 4. RESTAURANTS, CAFES, LUNCH ROOMS, ETC. ............................................................... 75
Sec. 7-186. License required. ........................................................................................................ 75
Sec. 7-187. Fee.............................................................................................................................. 75
Sec. 7-188. Restrictions. ............................................................................................................... 76
Secs. 7-189--7-210. Reserved. ...................................................................................................... 76
ARTICLE V. HOTELS, MOTELS, ROOMING AND LODGING HOUSES AND
OTHER LIVING ESTABLISHMENTS............................................................................................................ 76
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY .................................................................................................................... 76
Sec. 7-211--7-225. Reserved. ........................................................................................................ 76
DIVISION 2. HOTELS, MOTELS, ROOMING HOUSES, ETC.................................................................. 76
Sec. 7-226. License required. ........................................................................................................ 76
Sec. 7-227. Fee.............................................................................................................................. 76
Sec. 7-228. Restriction. ................................................................................................................. 76
Secs. 7-229--7-245. Reserved. ...................................................................................................... 76
DIVISION 3. CAMPGROUNDS AND TRAILERS, MOBILE HOMES AND
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS .............................................................................................................. 76
Sec. 7-246. Definition. .................................................................................................................. 76
Sec. 7-247. License required. ........................................................................................................ 76
Sec. 7-248. Fee.............................................................................................................................. 77
Sec. 7-249. Restrictions. ............................................................................................................... 77
Secs. 7-250--7-270. Reserved. ...................................................................................................... 77
ARTICLE VI. STREET PERFORMING REGULATIONS ............................................................................ 78
Sec. 7-271. PURPOSE .................................................................................................................... 78
Sec. 7-272. DEFINITIONS............................................................................................................... 78
Sec. 7-273. PERMITTED PERFORMANCE LOCATIONS ................................................................... 78
Sec. 7-274. ACCEPTANCE OF CONTRIBUTIONS ............................................................................ 79
Sec. 7-275. COMPLIANCE ............................................................................................................. 79
xii
Sec. 7-276. Effective date ............................................................................................................. 79
Chapter 8: MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES ............................................................................................... 80
Sec. 8-1. CERTAIN OCCUPATIONS PROHIBITED. ........................................................................... 80
Sec. 8-2. DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS; EXCEPTION. ..................... 80
Sec. 8-3. LITTERING PROHIBITED. ................................................................................................. 80
Sec. 8-4. OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC WAYS PROHIBITED. .............................................................. 81
Sec. 8-5. LOITERING ORDINANCE ................................................................................................ 81
Sec. 8-6. CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PLACES
PROHIBITED. ........................................................................................................................................ 82
Sec. 8-7 PUBLIC INDECENCY PROHIBITED. ................................................................................... 82
Sec. 8-8. OBJECTIONABLE NOISE ................................................................................................. 83
Sec. 8-9. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES. ................................................................................... 85
Sec. 8-10. Severability. ................................................................................................................. 85
Sec. 8-11. Effective date. .............................................................................................................. 85
Sec. 8-12. PROHIBITION OF USE OF TOBACCO ON TOWN OWNED PROPERTY ........................... 86
Chapter 9: PARKS AND RECREATION .................................................................................................... 87
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL ..................................................................................................................... 87
Secs. 9-1--9-25. Reserved. ............................................................................................................ 87
ARTICLE II. RECREATION ................................................................................................................... 87
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY .................................................................................................................... 87
Secs. 9-26--9-40. Reserved. .......................................................................................................... 87
DIVISION 2. RECREATION BOARD ..................................................................................................... 87
Sec. 9-41. Created; membership; terms. ...................................................................................... 88
Sec. 9-42. Powers and duties........................................................................................................ 88
Sec. 9-43. Fiscal year. .................................................................................................................... 88
Sec. 9-44. Budget. ......................................................................................................................... 88
Secs. 9-45--9-60. Reserved. .......................................................................................................... 88
DIVISION 3. RECREATION DEPARTMENT .......................................................................................... 89
Sec. 9-61. Creation........................................................................................................................ 89
Sec. 9-62. Purpose. ....................................................................................................................... 89
Sec. 9-63. Fund raising. ................................................................................................................. 89
Sec. 9-64. Accounts. ..................................................................................................................... 89
Sec. 9-65. Reimbursement to town. ............................................................................................. 89
Sec. 9-66. Appointment of Town Tree Warden and Deputy Tree Warden. ................................. 90
Sec. 9-67. Tree Preservation Program. ......................................................................................... 90
xiii
Sec. 9-68. Removal or Pruning of Trees........................................................................................ 90
Sec. 9-69. Jurisdiction of the Tree Warden and/or Deputy Tree Warden.................................... 91
Sec. 9-70. Protection of Public Trees During Construction. ......................................................... 91
Chapter 10: Reserved ........................................................................................................................... 92
Chapter 11: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES ......................................................... 93
Sec. 11-1. Permit for parades and certain processions required. ................................................ 93
Sec. 11-2. Damaging public property prohibited. ........................................................................ 93
Sec. 11-3. Permits required for excavations. ................................................................................ 93
Sec. 11-4. Permit required for posting advertising on public property........................................ 93
Sec. 11-5. Coasting prohibited; exception. ................................................................................... 94
Sec. 11-6. Riding bicycles on sidewalk prohibited. ....................................................................... 94
Sec. 11-7. Skateboard, Roller Skates ............................................................................................ 94
Sec. 11-8. Enforcement and penalties. ......................................................................................... 96
Sec. 11-9. Severability. ................................................................................................................. 96
Sec. 11-10. Effective date. ............................................................................................................ 96
Chapter 12: TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES .................................................................................................... 97
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL ..................................................................................................................... 97
Sec. 12-1. DEFINITIONS ................................................................................................................. 97
Sec. 12-2. EXCESSIVE MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE PROHIBITED ......................................................... 97
Sec. 12-3. LITTERING FROM TRUCK LOADS PROHIBITED ............................................................. 98
Secs. 12-4--12-25. RESERVED ....................................................................................................... 98
ARTICLE II. OPERATION OF VEHICLES .............................................................................................. 98
Sec. 12-26. YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY TO FIRE APPARATUS ............................................................... 98
Sec. 12-27. ENTERING INTERSECTION .......................................................................................... 98
Sec. 12-28. STOP INTERSECTIONS ................................................................................................ 98
Sec. 12-29. YIELD INTERSECTIONS ................................................................................................ 99
Secs. 12-33--12-45. RESERVED ..................................................................................................... 99
ARTICLE III. SPECIFIC STREET REGULATIONS .................................................................................... 99
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY .................................................................................................................... 99
Secs. 12-46--12-60. Reserved ....................................................................................................... 99
DIVISION 2. ONE-WAY STREETS ........................................................................................................ 99
Sec. 12-61. DESIGNATED .............................................................................................................. 99
Secs. 12-62--12-75. Reserved ....................................................................................................... 99
DIVISION 3. SPEED LIMITS .............................................................................................................. 100
Sec. 12-76. DESIGNATED ............................................................................................................ 100
xiv
Sec. 12-77. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES. ............................................................................. 101
Sec. 12-78. Severability. ............................................................................................................. 101
Sec. 12-79 Effective date. ........................................................................................................... 101
Secs. 12-80--12-95. Reserved ..................................................................................................... 101
ARTICLE IV. STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING ................................................................................ 101
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY .................................................................................................................. 101
Sec. 12-96. PROCEDURE ............................................................................................................. 101
Sec. 12-97. PROHIBITED PARKING AREAS .................................................................................. 102
Sec. 12-98. RESTRICTED PARKING AREAS AND HOURS .............................................................. 102
Sec. 12-99. RESTRICTED PARKING OF TRUCKS ........................................................................... 102
Sec. 12-100. Parking prohibited near fires and fire hydrants ............................................... 103
Sec. 12-101. ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY ...................................................................................... 103
Secs. 12-102--12-120. Reserved ................................................................................................. 104
DIVISION 2. HANDICAPPED PARKING ............................................................................................. 104
Sec. 12-121. DESIGNATED .......................................................................................................... 104
Secs. 12-122--12-135. RESERVED ............................................................................................... 104
DIVISION 3. PARKING LOTS ............................................................................................................. 104
Sec. 12-136. DESIGNATED .......................................................................................................... 105
Sec. 12-137. REGULATIONS ........................................................................................................ 105
Sec. 12-138. FEES ........................................................................................................................ 105
Sec. 12-139. VIOLATION; PENALTY ............................................................................................. 105
Secs. 12-140--12-144. RESERVED ............................................................................................... 106
DIVISION 4. PARKING METERS ....................................................................................................... 106
Sec. 12-145. DEFINITIONS........................................................................................................... 106
Sec. 12-146. DESIGNATION OF AREAS; DISPLAY OF INSTRUCTIONS AND USE OF METERS;
PENALTY ............................................................................................................................................ 106
Sec. 12-147. PARKING METER HOURS ........................................................................................ 107
Sec. 12-148. RESTRICTION ON LOCATION .................................................................................. 107
Sec. 12-149. SLUGS PROHIBITED ................................................................................................ 108
Sec. 12-150. DEFACING, TAMPERING, ETC. ................................................................................ 108
Sec. 12-151. COLLECTION AND USE OF MONIES ........................................................................ 108
Sec. 12-152. DOUBLE PARKING PROHIBITED.............................................................................. 109
Sec. 12-153. PERMIT FOR PARKING IN CERTAIN METER ZONES ................................................ 109
Sec. 12-154. RESPONSIBILITY OF VEHICLE OWNER FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING ......................... 109
Sec. 12-155. ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY ...................................................................................... 110
xv
DIVISION 5. AUTHORIZING REMOVAL OF MOTOR VEHICLES ......................................................... 111
Sec. 12-156. PARKING PROHIBITED ............................................................................................ 111
Sec. 12-157. REMOVAL OF MOTOR VEHICLES ............................................................................ 111
Sec. 12-158. RECOVERY OF COSTS AND CREATION OF LIEN ...................................................... 111
ARTICLE V. VEHICLES ...................................................................................................................... 112
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY .................................................................................................................. 112
Secs. 12-159--12-170. RESERVED ............................................................................................... 112
DIVISION 2. SNOWMOBILES ........................................................................................................... 112
Sec. 12-171. PURPOSE ................................................................................................................ 112
Sec. 12-172. ROUTES DESIGNATED ............................................................................................ 112
Sec. 12-173. SPEED LIMIT ........................................................................................................... 113
Sec. 12-174. PROCEDURE FOR OPERATION ................................................................................ 113
Sec. 12-175. PENALTY ................................................................................................................. 114
Chapter 13: UTILITIES ......................................................................................................................... 115
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL .................................................................................................................. 115
Sec. 13-1--13-10. Reserved ........................................................................................................ 115
ARTICLE II. WASTEWATER SYSTEMS .............................................................................................. 115
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL ................................................................................................................ 116
Sec. 13-11. Title ......................................................................................................................... 116
Sec. 13-12. Objective ................................................................................................................. 116
Sec. 13-13. Inconsistent Provisions. .......................................................................................... 116
Sec. 13-14. Definitions. .............................................................................................................. 116
Sec. 13-15. Abbreviations .......................................................................................................... 121
Secs. 13-16--13-20. Reserved .................................................................................................... 122
DIVISION 2. USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED ........................................................................... 122
Sec. 13-21. Unlawful Disposal ................................................................................................... 122
Sec. 13-22. Unlawful Discharge ................................................................................................. 122
Sec. 13-23. Private Disposal Facilities-Unlawful ........................................................................ 122
Sec. 13-24. Sewer Connection Required ................................................................................... 122
Sec. 13-25. Closure of Private Sewers ....................................................................................... 123
Secs. 13-26--13-30. Reserved. ................................................................................................... 123
DIVISION 3. CAPACITY ALLOCATION .............................................................................................. 123
Sec. 13-31. Ownership & Permit ............................................................................................... 123
Sec. 13-32. Introduction to Reserve Capacity Allocation .......................................................... 123
Sec. 13-33. Allocation Priorities ................................................................................................. 124
xvi
Sec. 13-34. Cost Recovery for Town Sewer Expansion .............................................................. 124
Sec. 13-35. Application Requirement ........................................................................................ 125
Sec. 13-36. Preliminary Building Sewer Connection Approval Findings .................................... 125
Sec. 13-37. Conditions of Preliminary Building Sewer Connection Approval ............................ 126
Sec. 13-38. Other Permits Required Prior to Final Connection Approval ................................. 126
Sec. 13-39. Final Building Sewer Connection Approval Requirements ..................................... 127
Sec. 13-40. Transfer of Allocation .............................................................................................. 127
Sec. 13-41. Authority to Require Connection ............................................................................ 128
Secs. 13-42--50. Reserved ......................................................................................................... 128
DIVISION 4. BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS .................................................................... 128
Sec. 13-51. Permit Required ...................................................................................................... 128
Sec. 13-52. Classification of Permits .......................................................................................... 128
Sec. 13-53. Costs and Expenses ................................................................................................. 129
Sec. 13-54. Separate Connections ............................................................................................. 129
Sec. 13-55. Meters ..................................................................................................................... 129
Sec. 13-56. Old Building Sewers ................................................................................................ 129
Sec. 13-57. Construction Practices ............................................................................................ 130
Sec. 13-58. Building and Plumbing Codes ................................................................................. 130
Sec. 13-59. Prior Notice Required ............................................................................................. 130
Sec. 13-60. Minimum Dimensions for Building Sewers ............................................................. 130
Sec. 13-61. Location of Building Sewers .................................................................................... 130
Sec. 13-62. Below Grade Sewers ............................................................................................... 131
Sec. 13-63. Storm Water Collection .......................................................................................... 131
Sec. 13-64. Building Sewer Construction Practices ................................................................... 131
Sec. 13-65. Backfilling ................................................................................................................ 131
Sec. 13-66. Excavations ............................................................................................................. 132
Sec. 13-67. Subsoil Conditions ................................................................................................... 132
Sec. 13-68. Connection to Sewer Main ..................................................................................... 132
Sec. 13-69. Building Sewer Clean-outs ...................................................................................... 132
Sec. 13-70. Compliance with Ordinance .................................................................................... 132
Sec. 13-71. Inspection Certificate .............................................................................................. 133
Sec. 13-72. Testing ..................................................................................................................... 133
Sec. 13-73. Required Insurance and Bond ................................................................................. 133
Sec. 13-74. Guarding of Worksite .............................................................................................. 133
Sec. 13-75. Vehicular and Pedestrian Access ............................................................................ 133
xvii
Sec. 13-76. Maintenance ........................................................................................................... 134
Sec. 13-77. Limitations on Permits ............................................................................................ 134
Secs. 13-78--13-80. Reserved .................................................................................................... 134
DIVISION 5. USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWER ........................................................................................ 134
Sec. 13-81. Unlawful Discharge to Sanitary System .................................................................. 134
Sec. 13-82. Storm Sewer Discharge ........................................................................................... 135
Sec. 13-83. Prohibited Class A Discharge................................................................................... 135
Sec. 13-84. Prohibited Class B Discharge ................................................................................... 135
Sec. 13-85. Conditionally Acceptable Class C Discharge ........................................................... 137
Sec. 13-86. Interceptors Required ............................................................................................. 138
Sec. 13-87. Minimum Standard for Interceptors. ...................................................................... 138
Sec. 13-88. Maintenance of Interceptors .................................................................................. 138
Sec. 13-89. Maintenance of Preliminary Treatment or Flow-Equalizing Facilities .................... 138
Sec. 13-90. Manhole Requirements .......................................................................................... 139
Sec. 13-91. Monitoring Requirements....................................................................................... 139
Sec. 13-92. Testing Requirements ............................................................................................. 139
Sec. 13-93. Changes in Discharges or Connections ................................................................... 139
Sec. 13-94. Chemical Analyses Treatability Studies................................................................... 140
Secs. 13-95--13-100. Reserved .................................................................................................. 140
DIVISION 6. SCAVENGER WASTE ................................................................................................... 140
Sec. 13-101. In General .............................................................................................................. 140
Sec. 13-102. Permit Required .................................................................................................... 140
Sec. 13-103. Compliance with Permit Conditions ..................................................................... 140
Sec. 13-104. Permit Fee ............................................................................................................. 141
Sec. 13-105. Tipping Fee ............................................................................................................ 141
Sec. 13-106. Special Agreements. ............................................................................................. 141
Secs. 13-107--13-110. Reserved ................................................................................................ 141
DIVISION 7. PRIVATE SEWERAGE SYSTEMS ................................................................................... 141
Sec. 13-111. In General .............................................................................................................. 141
Sec. 13-112. Existing Private Systems ........................................................................................ 142
Secs. 13-113--13-115. Reserved ................................................................................................ 142
DIVISION 8. SEWER RENTS ............................................................................................................. 142
Sec. 13-116. Fixed, Operation and Maintenance Charge .......................................................... 142
Sec. 13-117. Calculation of Sewer Rent Charge......................................................................... 143
Sec. 13-118. Capital Costs .......................................................................................................... 143
xviii
Sec. 13-119. Collection .............................................................................................................. 143
Sec. 13-120. Deposits ................................................................................................................ 143
Sec. 13-121. Additional Charges ................................................................................................ 144
Secs. 13-122--13-125. Reserved ................................................................................................ 144
DIVISION 9. APPLICATIONS/PERMITS/FEES ................................................................................... 144
Sec. 13-126. Application for Permit ........................................................................................... 144
Sec. 13-127. False or Misleading Statements ............................................................................ 144
Sec. 13-128. Suspension or Revocation ..................................................................................... 145
Sec. 13-129. Availability for Inspection ..................................................................................... 145
Sec. 13-130. Payment of Fees .................................................................................................... 145
Secs. 13-131--13-135. Reserved. ............................................................................................... 145
DIVISION 10. PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE .................................................................................. 146
Sec. 13-136. Conduct Prohibited ............................................................................................... 146
Secs. 13-137--13-140. Reserved ............................................................................................... 146
DIVISION 11. POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS ............................................................. 146
Sec. 13-141. Entrance to Premises ............................................................................................ 146
Sec. 13-142. Applicability of Safety Rules .................................................................................. 146
Sec. 13-143. Entrance Upon Easement ..................................................................................... 146
Secs. 13-144--13-145. Reserved ................................................................................................ 147
DIVISION 12. PENALTIES/MISCELLANEOUS ................................................................................... 147
Sec. 13-146. Violations .............................................................................................................. 147
Sec. 13-147. Separability/Saving Clause .................................................................................... 147
Sec. 13-148. Effective Date ........................................................................................................ 148
Sec. 13-149--13-199. Reserved .................................................................................................. 148
ARTICLE III. WATER SYSTEMS ........................................................................................................ 148
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL ................................................................................................................ 148
Sec. 13-200 Title ........................................................................................................................ 148
Sec. 13-201. Objective ............................................................................................................... 148
Sec. 13-202. Inconsistent Provisions ......................................................................................... 148
Sec. 13-203. Definitions ............................................................................................................. 149
Sec. 13-204. Responsibility of Existing Users............................................................................. 150
Sec. 13-205. Obligations of New Users ...................................................................................... 150
Secs. 13-206--13-209. Reserved. ............................................................................................... 151
DIVISION 2. SYSTEM EXPANSION ................................................................................................... 151
Sec. 13-210. Expansions, improvements or additions ............................................................... 151
xix
Secs. 13-211--13-214. Reserved ................................................................................................ 151
DIVISION 3. RESIDENT INSPECTIONS ............................................................................................. 151
Sec. 13-215. Appointments and Duties ..................................................................................... 151
Sec. 13-216. Scheduling Inspections ......................................................................................... 151
Sec. 13-217. Cost of Inspection/Fees ........................................................................................ 152
Secs. 13-218--13-220. Reserved. ............................................................................................... 152
DIVISION 4. APPLICATION PROCEDURE ......................................................................................... 152
Sec. 13-221. General .................................................................................................................. 152
Sec. 13-222. Preliminary Application ......................................................................................... 152
Sec. 13-223. Full Application ..................................................................................................... 155
Secs. 13-224--13-226. Reserved ................................................................................................ 155
DIVISION 5. REGULATIONS - OPERATIONS .................................................................................... 156
Sec. 13-227. Procedure for Initiation and Expansion of Water Service .................................... 156
Sec. 13-228. Conformance with Other Regulations ................................................................... 156
Sec. 13-229. Compliance Standards .......................................................................................... 156
Sec. 13-230. Internal Improvements ......................................................................................... 157
Sec. 13-231. St. Johnsbury Water District Service Areas ........................................................... 157
Sec. 13-232. Meters ................................................................................................................... 158
Sec. 13-233. Installation of Services .......................................................................................... 159
Sec. 13-234. Temporary Service ................................................................................................ 160
Sec. 13-235. Winter Provisions .................................................................................................. 160
Sec. 13-236. Abatement ............................................................................................................ 160
Sec. 13-237. Sprinkler Systems .................................................................................................. 160
Sec. 13-238. Fire Hydrants ......................................................................................................... 161
Sec. 13-239. Interruption of Service .......................................................................................... 162
Sec. 13-240. Unauthorized Use of Water - Water Conservation Policy .................................... 162
Sec. 13-241. Developments ....................................................................................................... 163
Sec. 13-242--13-245. Reserved .................................................................................................. 164
DIVISION 6. WATER RENTS ............................................................................................................ 164
Sec. 13-246. Fixed, Operation and Maintenance Charge .......................................................... 164
Sec. 13-247. Calculation of Water Rent Charge ........................................................................ 164
Sec. 13-248. Capital Costs .......................................................................................................... 165
Sec. 13-249. Collection .............................................................................................................. 165
Sec. 13-250. Deposits ................................................................................................................ 165
Sec. 13-251. Additional Charges ................................................................................................ 165
xx
Secs. 13-252--13-254. Reserved ................................................................................................ 166
DIVISION 7. PENALTIES/MISCELLANEOUS ..................................................................................... 166
Sec. 13-255. Violations .............................................................................................................. 166
Sec. 13-256. Repeal ................................................................................................................. 167
Sec. 13-257. Severability/Saving Clause .................................................................................... 167
Sec. 13-258. Effective Date ........................................................................................................ 167
Sec. 13-259--13.299. Reserved .................................................................................................. 167
APPENDIX 1: APPLICATION FORMS, FINAL PHASE ................................................................... 168
APPENDIX 2: WATER TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS ................................................................ 171
APPENDIX 3: WATER & SEWER QUARTERLY BILLING PERIODS .......................................................... 172
CODE INDEX ........................................................................................................................................ 173
1
PART I - TOWN OF ST. JOHNSBURY
CHARTER
HISTORY
Source
Comprehensive Revision 1957 No. 345 (rejected by voters), Amended 1965, No. 231 (approved by
voters); Amended 1969, No. 154; Amended 1973, Local Referendum; Amended 1973, No. 274 (adj.
Sess.); Amended 1997, No. M-7.
Historical Note
No. 345 of the Laws of 1957, which would have merged the town and the village of St. Johnsbury was
defeated that year in a local referendum. No. 231 of the Laws of 1965, which amended the prior
legislative initiative, was subsequently approved in a local referendum.
V.S.A. Title 24 Appendix: Municipal Charters
Chapter 151: TOWN OF ST. JOHNSBURY
§ 151-1. Merger of village and town
The village of St. Johnsbury and the town of St. Johnsbury are hereby consolidated and merged,
and the village of St. Johnsbury shall, except as hereinafter provided, cease to exist as a political
entity or body corporate.
§ 151-2. Assets transferred; liabilities; taxation; special services; downtown
improvement district
(a) All assets of the village of St. Johnsbury on the date Act No. 345 of the Acts of 1957,
as amended, becomes effective shall become the property of the town of St. Johnsbury,
except that those assets shall be subject to the debts of the village of St. Johnsbury to the
extent provided by law on that date. The village of St. Johnsbury shall remain in
existence so far as necessary to complete payment of its indebtedness and other
obligations to which it was subject on that date. The taxpayers residing in the village of
St. Johnsbury as it was bounded just prior to that date shall be subject to a tax on their
grand list to be assessed annually by the selectmen of the town of St. Johnsbury in an
amount sufficient to pay off any such indebtedness according to its terms.
(b) The taxpayers residing in the village of St. Johnsbury as it was bounded just prior to
the date Act No. 345 of the Acts of 1957, as amended, becomes effective shall be subject
to a tax on their grand list to be assessed annually by the selectmen of the town of St.
Johnsbury in an amount sufficient to pay off current expenses and indebtedness in
continuing the present functions and additions thereto within that area which are not
common to the town of St. Johnsbury.
2
(c) For the purpose of providing special services to a portion of the town, the warning for
any annual or special meeting may contain appropriate articles under which the legal
voters in that area may vote for such special services as they desire. The town shall
furnish to each area such special services as are so voted, and the cost in each area,
including the cost of all equipment, replacements, maintenance, salaries and other
operating expenses, shall be paid by a tax on the grand list of each taxpayer therein for
his ratable share thereof, to be assessed annually by the selectmen to be collected at the
same time and in the same manner as the town votes to have its other taxes collected, and
such tax assessed upon grand list shall be a lien thereon with the same priority as other
taxes lawfully assessed thereon.
(d) In order to complete the payment of existing indebtedness of the village of St.
Johnsbury and indebtedness that may be incurred from time to time for that area, the
officers of the town of St. Johnsbury corresponding to those of the village of St.
Johnsbury who had charge of the payment of such debt shall have authority to act as the
duly authorized officers of the village of St. Johnsbury. The tax so assessed shall be
collected at the same time and in the same manner as other town taxes.
(e) A special district to be known as the St. Johnsbury Downtown Improvement District
(district) is created. The district shall be that area consisting of properties with frontage
on either side of Railroad Street from Cross Street to Maple Street and seven additional
properties on Eastern Avenue and Pearl Street. The district is more precisely shown on
the Plan "St. Johnsbury Downtown Improvement District, Revised January 3, 1997" and
recorded with the town clerk in the town of St. Johnsbury.
(1) Commission-Creation; Membership:
A St. Johnsbury Downtown Improvement District Commission (commission) is created
consisting of seven members appointed by the Select Board. Five members shall be, at the time
of appointment and during their terms, natural persons who are owners of property, managers,
proprietors, operators, officers or directors of businesses located within the district who shall be
appointed to serve for a term of five years and until their successors are appointed and qualified,
except that the terms of the first five commissioners shall be from the date of appointment until
one year, two years, three years, four years and five years after April 1, 1997 respectively. One
member shall be a member at large who shall be, at the time of appointment and during his or her
term, a legal resident of the town of St. Johnsbury, who shall be appointed to serve for the term
of five years commencing the first day of April and until the member's successor is appointed
and qualified. One member shall be a Select Board member, or an employee of the town of St.
Johnsbury, who shall be appointed to serve for a term of one year commencing the first day of
April and until the member's successor is appointed and qualified. The commission shall have a
chair and vice-chair elected by the commission members. Any vacancy shall be filled by the
appointing authority for the remainder of the unexpired term. Commissioners may be removed
by unanimous vote of the Select Board.
(2) Purposes and Powers:
The commission is created for the general purpose of maintaining and improving the economic,
cultural and environmental vitality and quality of the town of St. Johnsbury and, in particular, the
district created by this subsection; to promote the town and the district as a regional retail,
3
commercial and service center; and to serve as an advocate for orderly development of the
district in order to encourage expansion of the retail, commercial and service base of the district
and the town by attracting new business and investment.
The rights, powers and duties of the commission acting on its own authority or acting through
the town of St. Johnsbury Select Board, as set forth in this section, shall be broadly construed to
accomplish the purposes set forth within the district and shall include the following:
(A) to prepare a budget (the "budget") for the district in accordance with subdivision (1) of this
subsection;
(B) to advertise and promote the district;
(C) to represent the interests of the district;
(D) to hire and remove personnel as provided for in the budget or as otherwise approved by the
Select Board;
(E) to apply for available governmental grants in aid and economic and in kind incentives when
approved by the Select Board;
(F) to receive and expend contributions, grants and income;
(G) to apply for an allocation of the state's private activity bond volume cap under Section 141 of
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, when approved by the Select Board;
(H) to expend funds as provided for in the budget or as otherwise approved by the Select Board;
(I) to manage and maintain public spaces and to assume or supplement the services and
maintenance heretofore provided the district by the town as recommended to and approved by
the Select Board;
(J) to acquire and dispose of property as recommended to and approved by the Select Board;
(K) to install and make public improvements as recommended to and approved by the Select
Board;
(L) to cooperate with the town in the use, management and improvement of public parking
facilities and to undertake such management or improvements and to regulate vehicular traffic
within the district as recommended by the Select Board;
(M) to enter into contracts;
(N) to regulate, lease, license, establish rules and fees and otherwise manage the use of public
spaces within the district;
(O) to plan for the orderly development of the district in cooperation with the town planning
commission and as recommended to and approved by the Select Board;
4
(P) to do all other things necessary or convenient to carry out the purposes of this subsection
except that the commission may not assume authority over any subject matter or activity under
the jurisdiction of another town official, department or board as of the effective date of this
subsection or contrary to any order or ordinance in effect as of such date other than to hire and
remove personnel under contract or employed by the commission, unless and until the Select
Board, by order, transfers such jurisdiction to the commission, notwithstanding section 8 of the
charter, or amends the order or ordinance.
(3) Annual Budget:
Annually the commission shall submit to the Select Board for approval for the next fiscal year a
capital and operating budget of revenues and expenditures which shall be used exclusively to
repay debt on capital improvements in the district and to defray the expenses incurred by the
commission in connection with the operation, maintenance and repair of the district. In the event
the Select Board does not approve the budget as submitted, the Select Board shall return the
budget forthwith to the commission with its recommendations for the commission's
reconsideration. Appropriations other than from contributions, grants and income for the
commission shall be raised through common area fees which shall be assessed and collected as
tax on property as provided for in this subsection. The commission may, upon adoption of the
annual budget and upon approval of the Select Board, borrow money in anticipation of common
area fees.
(4) Common Area Fees:
(A) Common area fees are charges levied upon the owners of taxable properties located in the
district, excepting such portions of properties used for owner occupied residential purposes.
(B) The district shall have the authority to assess common area fees for taxable real estate in the
district based upon one of the following assessment methods:
(i) A flat fee per taxable parcel identifiable on the grand list.
(ii) A flat fee per taxable parcel plus a formula based on any one, or combination thereof,
of square footages of commercial space, number of apartments, square footage of lot size,
linear footage of frontage, number of parking spaces provided, number of parking spaces
that would be needed to conform to the town's existing zoning bylaws for new
construction, or any equation which raises fees adequate to meet an annual commission
budget with a method that reasonably apportions costs to property owners in relation to
the benefit that accrues to them.
The commission shall only raise common area fees sufficient to meet the budget regardless of
the assessment method.
The common area fees shall be established by the commission upon approval of the commission
budget by the Select Board and shall be assessed annually by the Select Board to be collected at
the same time and in the same manner as the town votes to have its taxes collected, and such
common area assessment shall be a lien thereon with the same priority as taxes lawfully assessed
thereon.
5
(C) Consistent with the charter for the town of St. Johnsbury, and the laws of the United States
and of this state, the commission, with the approval of the Select Board, may substitute any local
option taxes permitted by law in lieu of common area fees that exist to meet the budget.
(D) Appeals: Persons aggrieved by any decision of the commission involving the assessment or
levy of common area fees may appeal the decision to the Select Board by filing a written notice
of appeal with the town clerk within 30 days of the date of such decision, and furnishing a copy
of the notice of appeal to the commission. The Select Board shall set a date and place for a
hearing on the appeal within 60 days of the filing of the notice of appeal. The Select Board shall
give the appellant and the commission at least 15 days' notice prior to the hearing date. Any
person entitled to take an appeal may appear and be heard in person or be represented by agent or
attorney at such hearing. Any hearing held under this subsection may be adjourned by the Select
Board from time to time, provided, however, that the date and place of adjourned hearing shall
be announced at that hearing or 15 days' notice thereof is furnished to the appellant and the
commission. The Select Board shall render its decision, which shall include findings of fact,
within 45 days after completing the hearing, and shall within that period send the appellant, and
the commission, by certified mail, a copy of the decision. An aggrieved person may appeal a
decision of the Select Board to the Caledonia County Superior Court. The appeal shall be taken
in such manner as the Supreme Court may by rule provide for appeals from state agencies
governed by sections 801 through 816 of Title 3, Vermont Statutes Annotated. Notice of appeal
shall be sent by mail to the commission.
§ 151-2a. Taxation for bonds and notes
Notwithstanding subsection (b) of section 2 of this charter, all taxable property in the town of St.
Johnsbury shall be subject to the levy of unlimited ad valorem taxes to pay bonds and notes
authorized by the voters of the town for water purposes.
§ 151-3. Settlement of village affairs
The officers of the village of St. Johnsbury shall, prior to the date when Act No. 345 of the Acts
of 1957, as amended, goes into effect, settle, so far as possible, the pecuniary affairs of the
village of St. Johnsbury, and shall, except as hereinafter provided, on said date turn over and
deliver to the clerk of the town of St. Johnsbury, all the records, books and documents of the
village of St. Johnsbury, and to the proper officers of the said town all other property of the said
village.
§ 151-4. Authority; annual meeting
(a) Said town shall have and is hereby granted the authority to exercise all powers
relating to municipal affairs and no enumeration of powers in this charter shall be deemed
to limit or restrict the general grant of authority hereby conferred; but this grant of
authority shall not be deemed to limit the authority of the legislature to alter, amend or
repeal this charter; or to limit the right to hereafter pass general laws applicable alike to
this and all other municipal corporations of the state; nor shall this grant of authority be
deemed to limit the patronage or control of the state with respect to said town.
(b) The Town shall start its annual meeting at 7:30 o'clock in the afternoon of the day
before the first Tuesday of March and may transact at that time any business not
6
involving voting by Australian ballot or voting required by law to be by ballot and to be
held on the first Tuesday of March. Discussion shall be permitted at such meetings on all
articles contained in the warning for the annual meeting. A meeting so started shall be
adjourned until the following day.
§ 151-5. Powers
Under the general grant of authority contained in and conferred upon the town by section 4 of
this charter, the town of St. Johnsbury may exercise the following powers and functions:
(1) To levy, assess and collect taxes, in order to carry out its powers, to appropriate and to
borrow money, within the limits prescribed by the general laws; and to collect special
assessments for benefits conferred.
(2) To furnish all local public services, including without limiting the generality of the
foregoing a water system, electric light and power system, and a sewage system and
disposal plant; to purchase, hire, construct, own, maintain, and operate or lease local
public utilities subject to chapter 411 of V.S. 47; to acquire, by condemnation or
otherwise, within or without the limits of said town, property necessary for any such
purpose, subject to restrictions imposed by the general law for the protection of other
communities.
(3) To make local public improvements and to acquire, by condemnation or otherwise,
property within its corporate limits necessary for such improvements; and also to acquire
an excess over that needed for any such improvement, and to sell or lease such excess
property with restrictions, in order to protect and preserve the improvement.
(4) To acquire by gift or purchase, sell, convey, lease, assign, maintain and service real
and personal property as may be necessary or incidental to the exercise of its municipal
powers, duties and functions and to exercise in connection therewith any incidental
powers as may be necessary to preserve and maintain the value of any such property once
lawfully acquired.
(5) To issue and sell bonds on the security of any such property, or of any public utility
owned by the town, or of the revenues thereof, or of both, including in the case of a
public utility, if deemed desirable by the town, a franchise stating the terms upon which,
in case of foreclosure, the purchaser may operate such utility.
(6) To purchase or lease lands within or without the corporate limits of the town, to lay
out or widen streets, highways, lanes, commons, alleys, and walks, to provide places of
healthy recreation in summer or in winter such as a skating rink, a swimming pool, a
playing field, a public park; to provide for tourist camping sites, and aviation landing
field, and a municipal forest reserve; and for any municipal purposes whatever.
(7) To adopt and enforce within its limits local police, sanitary, zoning, town planning
and other similar regulations, not in conflict with the laws of this State.
(8) To establish and maintain a fire department.
7
(9) To establish and maintain a police department, to provide for the appointment of
police officers, who shall be sworn and who shall have the same powers as constables in
the service of civil and criminal process, and such further special authority as may be
provided in the bylaws or ordinances of said town enacted under authority of law. Such
fire and police departments may be consolidated into one department if the town shall so
vote.
(10) To appropriate annually money for the maintenance, care, improvement and support
of Fairbanks Museum, so long as the same shall remain a nonprofit institution for the
promotion of education.
§ 151-6. Fire district; process for abolition
The St. Johnsbury Center fire district No. 1 is abolished when a majority of the legal voters of
said fire district present and voting on the question at a regular or special meeting of said fire
district warned for said purpose so vote and shall thereupon cease to exist as a political entity and
body corporate. All the property and funds of said fire district shall on such date be vested in the
town of St. Johnsbury and the town of St. Johnsbury shall thereupon assume all indebtedness and
obligations of said fire district unless said liabilities and obligations exceed said assets in which
case said fire district shall continue to exist until such excess is paid unless the town of St.
Johnsbury votes otherwise at a regular or special meeting warned for said purpose.
§ 151-7. Bylaws
In meetings duly warned for the purpose, the town of St. Johnsbury shall have power to make,
alter, repeal or amend bylaws, which together with the ordinances and regulations adopted by the
selectmen shall regulate its affairs, and shall carry into effect the provisions and intent of this
charter.
§ 151-8. Ordinances and regulations
The selectmen of the town of St. Johnsbury consistent with the constitution and laws of the
United States and of this State, shall have the power and authority to make, establish, impose,
alter, amend or repeal ordinances and regulations and to enforce the same by fine, penalty,
forfeiture, injunction, restraining order or any proper remedy, with respect to the inspection,
regulation, licensing or suppression of the following affairs, establishments, employments,
enterprises, uses, undertakings and businesses, viz:
(1) The sale and measurement of wood, coal, oil and all other fuels; hay scales; markets
dealing in meat, fish, and foodstuffs; slaughterhouses; groceries; restaurants, lunch carts
and other eating establishments; all places where beverages are manufactured, processed,
bottled or sold; manufacturing establishments; saloons; taverns; innkeepers; hotels;
motels; rooming houses; junk businesses; advertising billboards; overhanging signs and
awnings; billiard rooms; pool rooms; bowling alleys; public halls; dance halls; theaters;
moving picture houses; all places where tobacco, cigars and cigarettes are manufactured
or sold; repair shops; brickyards; stone sheds; blacksmith shops; public garages; the
transportation, storage and sale of propane gas, naphtha, gasoline, kerosene, fuel oil and
8
other inflammable oils; the breeding, raising and keeping of horses, cattle, swine, poultry,
mink, foxes, furbearing and other domestic animals; coal sheds; wood yards; creameries,
dairies; dyeing establishments; garbage plants; gas works; livery stables; skating rinks;
sewers; cesspools; privies; cow stables, barns; wells; and public dumps; oil and gasoline
storage tanks, and gasoline filling stations.
(2) Processions, parades, traveling showmen, shows, circuses, menageries, carnivals,
clairvoyants, mendicants, fortune tellers, spiritualists, mediums, itinerant vendors,
peddler, auctioneers, pawnbrokers, professional and amateur sports.
(3) The use of streets and highways; the regulation of traffic, both vehicular and
pedestrian; taxicabs and all vehicles, exclusive of motor buses, used in the conveyance
for hire of persons or goods; the parking, operation and speed of vehicles; guide posts,
street signs, and street safety devices; milk and cream businesses and routes.
(4) Cruelty to animals; fast driving; the going at large of animals; and the keeping of
bees.
(5) The erection of poles, and the placing of wires, cables, and pipes, subject to the
provision of chapter 409 V.S. 47; the laying of water mains and sewers; the excavating of
streets; the disposal of refuse, filth and animal carcasses; the throwing or dumping of
ashes, waste paper, handbills, circulars, or rubbish of any sort; the planting, preservation,
or destruction of shade trees.
(6) The transportation, manufacture, storage and sale of gunpowder, ashes, lime, matches,
fireworks, explosives, acids, and other dangerous or combustible materials.
(7) The cleaning of public sidewalks and gutters, and the removal therefrom of snow, ice,
litter, garbage, stands, tables, boxes and other materials encumbering or obstructing any
public sidewalk, street or way.
(8) A building code; the construction, repair and alteration of chimneys, flues, stovepipes,
furnaces, fireplaces and heating apparatus and plumbing facilities of all kinds.
(9) Nuisances, bawdyhouses, gaming houses; racing pools; gambling instruments of all
kinds; noisome and offensive places and occupations, loafing, obscenity and ribaldry
upon the town streets and highways; vagrancy; riots, disturbances, disorderly assemblies,
and all breaches of the peace; pollution of the public water supply.
§ 151-9. Publication of bylaws and ordinances
The bylaw adopted by the town and the ordinances and regulations passed by the selectmen,
whether enacted under the authority of general or special law, shall be published in a newspaper
having general circulation in said town at least twenty days before the effective date thereof, and
all such enactments shall thereupon be recorded at length by the town clerk in a book kept for
that purpose in the office of the town clerk, and the town clerk's certificate that such bylaws,
ordinances and regulations were duly adopted and passed at an annual meeting of said town or at
a special meeting thereof lawfully called for that purpose or were duly enacted and adopted by
the selectmen of the town under authority of law or under authority of a vote of the town shall be
9
prima facie evidence of such fact in any court in this state; and certified copies of said bylaws,
ordinances and regulations and the clerk's certificates shall be received as evidence in all the
courts of the State.
§ 151-10. Penalties
(a) Fines, penalties, and forfeitures up to and including two hundred dollars, for each
breach of an ordinance, or bylaw, may be established by the selectmen, or by a properly
warned town meeting. These fines, penalties, and forfeitures may be recovered in an
action of tort brought in the name of the town, and in any such action a general complaint
relying on the ordinance or the bylaw shall be sufficient. The process may issue either
against the body or the property of the defendant, and if the defendant is found guilty, and
if it is found by the court that the cause of action arose from his willful or malicious act
or neglect, it shall so adjudge, and may further adjudge that he be confined in close jail,
and may issue execution against his body with a certificate of such findings endorsed
thereon; and such execution with such certificate thereon shall have the same effect as an
execution issued on a judgment founded upon tort having a like certificate endorsed
thereon.
(b) Any person refusing to comply with any town ordinance or bylaw, relating to his
business may be enjoined by a proper action in chancery brought in the name of the town,
from continuing such business in violation of such ordinance or bylaw, and in any such
action a bill relying on the ordinance or bylaw shall be sufficient.
(c) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the town from having and
exercising such other powers as may be proper to enforce obedience to its ordinances and
bylaws and to punish violations thereof.
§ 151-11. Prosecution of violations
All violations of ordinances or bylaws may be prosecuted in behalf of the town by its attorney, or
police officers, or by any other duly authorized prosecuting officer, before the Caledonia District
Court; and all fines, penalties or forfeitures recovered by the said town for violations of such
ordinances or bylaws, shall be paid into the town treasury.
§ 151-12. Officers
The elective officers of the town shall be those authorized by the general laws of this State,
except that notwithstanding the provisions of section 3509 of the Vermont Statutes, Revision of
1947, the listers shall be appointed annually by the selectmen, unless the town at an annual or
special meeting duly warned for that purpose shall vote otherwise.
§ 151-12a. Compensation and fees
(a) The Select Board shall annually consider, and from time to time set, the compensation
of the following officers:
10
(1) town manager;
(2) constable;
(3) members of the board of assessment.
(b) The town clerk and the Select Board shall jointly set the compensation of the town
clerk each year. The town treasurer and the Select Board shall jointly set the
compensation of the town treasurer each year. If the Select Board and the town clerk or
town treasurer are unable to agree on the amount of either officer's compensation, that
officer's compensation shall be set by vote of the town and the Select Board shall include
an article or articles in the annual meeting warning to that effect. The article or articles
shall be adopted or modified by the vote of the majority of those eligible to vote who are
present at the meeting. The article or articles shall not be voted on by Australian ballot.
(c) The town manager, with the approval of the Select Board, shall set the compensation
of all other town officers and employees.
§ 151-12b. Offices abolished
The office of fence viewer, inspector of lumber, shingles and wood, second constable, and
weigher of coal are all hereby abolished. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the town
manager or his or her designee shall exercise the powers, duties, and responsibilities of any of
the offices abolished by this section in the event that the need should arise.
§ 151-13. Expiration of terms of selectmen upon merger
Upon such effective date of the merger of the village of St. Johnsbury and the town of St.
Johnsbury the selectmen shall continue in office for the remainder of their respective terms and
the other officers of the town of St. Johnsbury shall continue in office until the first Tuesday in
March next following, and their successors shall have been elected or appointed; and the
ordinances of the village of St. Johnsbury then in force shall remain of full force and effect,
following the effective date of this act for a period of one year only, so far as such ordinances
shall continue to be applicable and appropriate, except as repealed, amended, altered or modified
by the selectmen of the town of St. Johnsbury, and as respects only that part of the town of St.
Johnsbury comprised within the limits of the village of St. Johnsbury, as defined by No. 179 of
the Acts of 1927.
§ 151-14. Authority to merge; expiration
The authority granted by this act to the village of St. Johnsbury and the town of St. Johnsbury to
merge shall expire twenty years from the date of the passage and adoption of this act unless all of
the municipalities mentioned herein shall have voted to adopt the provisions hereof within such
period.
11
§ 151-15. Severability
If any provision of this act is for any reason held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the
remaining provisions which can be given effect without the invalid provision. To this end the
provisions of this charter are declared to be severable.
§ 151-16. Preparation of budgets; Australian ballot
(a) The Select Board shall prepare an annual budget for the town, including a town
annual budget and a former village district special services budget. The school director
shall prepare an annual school district budget. The annual budgets, other articles
providing for the appropriation of funds, and public questions shall be voted by
Australian ballot.
(b) On any question wherein the vote is not specifically required to be by ballot, a ballot
may be demanded by three voters at any meeting.
§ 151-17. Department of assessment
(a) Creation. There is hereby created a department of assessment headed by a person
experienced in the appraisal of real estate, who shall be appointed by the town manager
with the approval of the Select Board.
(b) Appraisal of property. The department of assessment shall appraise all real and
personal property for the purpose of drawing up the grand list. Appraisals shall be
reviewed periodically and updated. Technically qualified individuals or firms may be
employed as needed.
(c) Powers. The department of assessment shall have the same powers, discharge the
same duties, proceed in the same manner, and be subject to the same liabilities as those
prescribed for listers or a board of listers under applicable provisions of Vermont law
with respect to drawing up the grand list, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
§ 151-18. Board of assessment
(a) Creation. There is hereby created a board of assessment composed of the three listers.
(b) Duties. The board of assessment shall exercise all powers and duties with respect to
grievances, otherwise imposed upon the listers or a board of listers under the laws of the
state of Vermont, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
§ 151-19. Appeals
A person aggrieved by the final decision of the board of assessment under the provisions of
section 18 of this chapter may appeal in writing under the provisions of chapter 131 of Title 32.
12
§ 151-20. Undesignated reserve fund
The Select Board may annually reserve any surplus in the essential services budget, not to
exceed five percent (5%) of the budget, for the purpose of establishing an undesignated reserve
fund. The reserve fund shall be kept in a separate account and invested as are other public funds
and may be expended for purposes as may be authorized by a majority of the voters present and
voting at an annual or special meeting duly warned.
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto.
Year Chapter Section Section this Charter
1957 345 1-18 1-18
1965 231 1 1
2 13
3 15
1973 274 1 4
2 18
1997 345 2
13
PART II ORDINANCE ADOPTING
CODE
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE TOWN OF ST. JOHNSBURY,
VERMONT; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING
A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE;
AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE SELECTMEN OF THE TOWN OF ST. JOHNSBURY AS FOLLOWS:
Section 1. The Code entitled “Code of Ordinances, Town of St. Johnsbury, Vermont” published by
Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 13, each inclusive, is adopted.
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before October 7, 1991, and
not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed.
Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or
part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any
provision of the Code or any Ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall
be punished by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each act of violation and each day
upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by
this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code
section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the
penalty prescribed above, the Town may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances,
injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits.
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of
the Selectmen to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so
that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments.
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after October 7, 1991 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been
codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective February 1, 1993.
Passed and adopted by the Selectmen this 9th day of November, 1992.
St. Johnsbury Selectmen:
Elwin Cross, Chairman
John Hall
Gretchen Hammer
Gabriel Handy
Bryon Quatrini
ATTEST:
Sandra P. Grenier
Town Clerk
Certificate of Adoption
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the
Selectmen of the Town of St. Johnsbury held on the 9th day of November, 1992.
Sandra P. Grenier, Town Clerk
14
PART III - CODE OF ORDINANCES
Chapter I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1.How Code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the
Code of Ordinances, Town of St. Johnsbury, Vermont, and may be so cited.
Sec. 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed,
unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of
selectmen:
Board of selectmen. The words "board of selectmen" shall means and refer to the Board of
Selectmen (interchangeable with Select Board) of the Town of Johnsbury, Vermont.
Charter. The word “Charter" shall mean the Charter of the Town of St. Johnsbury printed as Part
I of this volume.
Code. The word “Code" shall mean this Code of Ordinances of the Town of St. Johnsbury,
Vermont.
County. The term "county" shall mean the County of Caledonia, Vermont.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or
some other town officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed
to authorize the head of the department or other officer or employee to designate, delegate and
authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the
provision or section specify otherwise.
Gender. A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender shall extend and be applied
to both the masculine and feminine genders, and to firms, partnerships and corporations.
Highway. The term "highway" shall include any street, alley, avenue or public place or square,
bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway in the town dedicated or devoted to
public use.
Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons,
firms, associations, corporations, clubs and co-partnerships, whether acting by themselves or
through a servant, agent or employee.
15
Number. A word importing the singular may extend and be applied to the plural, and vice versa.
Oath. The word "oath" shall include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be
equivalent to the words “affirm" and "affirmed."
Owner. The word "owner" applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the
whole or of a part of such building or land.
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms,
partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.
Personal property. The term “personal property" includes every species of property except real
property.
Property. The word "property" shall include real, personal and mixed property.
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any place subject to the primary control of any
public agency, including but not limited to any park, street, public way, cemetery, or open space
adjacent thereto and any lake or stream.
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.
Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the
person cannot write.
State. The term "state" shall mean the State of Vermont.
Street. The word "street" shall embrace highways, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes,
viaducts and all other public ways in the city.
Tenant, occupant. The words "tenant" and "occupant" applied to a building or land shall include
any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or part of such building
or land, either alone or with others.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
Town. The word "town" shall mean the Town of St. Johnsbury, Vermont, and shall extend to and
include its several boards, committees, commissions, officers, employees, etc.
V.S.A. The abbreviation "V.S.A." shall mean the latest edition or supplement of the Vermont
Statutes Annotated.
Written and in writing. The words "written" and "in writing" shall include any representation of
words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
16
Sec. 1-3. Catch lines of sections.
The catch lines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of
such sections, nor as any part of the sections; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catch lines, are amended or reenacted.
Sec. 1-4. History notes.
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have
any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section.
Sec. 1-5. References and editor's notes.
References and editor's notes following certain sections are inserted as an aid and guide to the
reader and are not controlling nor meant to have any legal effect.
Sec. 1-6. Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code so far as they are the same as those of the Code of the
Town of St. Johnsbury, 1966, and of ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this Code
shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not new enactments.
Sec. 1-7. Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinances adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act
committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or
accruing before the effective date of this Code.
Sec. 1-8. Effect of repeals.
The repeal of an ordinance or portion of this Code shall not revive any ordinance or portion of
this Code in force before or at the time the provision repealed took effect. The repeal of an
ordinance or a portion of this Code shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the
repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of repeal, for an
offense committed under the provision repealed.
17
Sec. 1-9. Certain ordinances not affected by Code.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or
otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code:
(a) Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred before the
effective date of this Code;
(b) Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the town, or
authorizing the issue of any bonds of the town, or any evidence of the town's
indebtedness, or any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or
obligation assumed by the town;
(c) Any administrative ordinances of the town not in conflict or inconsistent with the
provisions of this Code;
(d) Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance;
(e) Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving,
widening, repairing, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the town;
(f) Any appropriation ordinance;
(g) Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes;
(h) Any ordinances prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, speed
limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles or loading zones;
(i) Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the town;
(j) Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor;
(k) Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory or any ordinance extending
the boundaries of the town;
(l) Any ordinance establishing positions, classifying positions, setting salaries of town
officers and employees or any personnel regulations;
(m) Any temporary or special ordinances.
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same
extent as if set out at length herein. These ordinances are on file in the town clerk's office.
Sec. 1-10. Effect of amendments to Code.
(a) Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to
indicate the intention of the board of selectmen to make the same a part hereof, shall be
deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood
18
and intended to include such additions and amendments.
(b) All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way
affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code
and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter,
article, division, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may
be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages.
(c) Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such
provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the
following language: "That section ________ of the Code of Ordinances, Town of St.
Johnsbury, Vermont, is hereby amended to read as follows:..." The new provisions shall
then be set out in full as desired.
(d) If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following
language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Town of St. Johnsbury, Vermont,
is hereby amended by adding a section to be numbered ___________, which section
reads as follows:..." The new section may then be set out in full as desired.
(e) All sections, divisions, articles, chapters, or provisions desired to be repealed must be
specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be.
Sec. 1-11. Supplementation of Code.
(a) By contract or by town personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and
printed whenever authorized or directed by the board of selectmen. A supplement to the
Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by
the board of selectmen or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered
by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all
amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so
numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace
pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so
prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of
the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been
repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency
or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, non-substantive
changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is
necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catch lines, headings and titles for sections and other
subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in catch
lines, headings and titles;
19
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted
in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing
section or other subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this
chapter," "this article," this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections
___________ through _________." The inserted section numbers will indicate the
sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance
incorporated into the Code; and
(5) Make other non-substantive changes necessary to preserve the original
meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the
codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included
in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.
Sec. 1-12. Severability of parts of Code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of selectmen that the sections, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence,
paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable,
such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining
phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code.
Sec. 1-13. General penalty.1
(a) Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the town any act is prohibited or is
made or declared to be unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code
or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be
unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such
provision of this Code or ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two
hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any
ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. Referrals to The Community
Restorative Justice Center may be made for any violation of Code at the discretion of the
enforcement officer.
(b) In case of the amendment by the board of selectmen of any section of this Code for
which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in subsection (a) shall
apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for
which a specified penalty other than the aforementioned general penalty is provided in
another section in the same chapter, the penalty so specified shall be held to relate to the
amended section, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein.
1 Charter reference – Penalty authorized §§10. State law references – Authority to establish penalty for
violation or ordinance: 24 V.S.A. 2291; fines, 13 V.S.A. 7251.
20
Chapter 2: ADMINISTRATION2
Art. I In General §2-1--2-25
Art. II Board of Selectmen, §2-26--2-45
Art. III Officers and Employees, §2-46--2-6l
Div. 1. Generally, §2-46--2-60
Div. 2. Town Clerk, §2-61
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 2-l--2-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. BOARD OF SELECTMEN3
Secs. 2-26. Meetings.
The board of selectmen shall meet regularly on such day as the selectmen by resolution may
from time to time designate, to pass and to otherwise set upon ordinances and for the transaction
of other business. The board of selectmen may hold special meetings for the passing of
resolutions and the transaction of other business at such times and places within the corporate
limits as they may agree upon.
(Code 1966, Ch. 1, §5)
Sec. 2-27. Ordinances and resolutions.
(a) All enactments by the board of selectmen for the government of the town shall be termed
ordinances. Proceedings and decisions of a temporary nature shall be termed resolutions.
(b) The enacting clauses which shall be recited in each ordinance or resolution shall be:
(1) Ordinances: "Be it ordained by the Selectmen of the Town of St. Johnsbury as
follows:"
(2) Resolutions: "Be it ordered by the Selectmen of the Town of St. Johnsbury as
follows:"
(c) No ordinance or resolution or amendment, change or repeal of an ordinance or resolution
2 Cross references-Administration of the housing code, §6-45 et seq.: housing board of review, §6-46; recreation
board, §9-41 et seq.
3 State Law references-Municipal officers, 24 V.S.A. 801 et seq.; board of selectmen, 24 V.S.A. 871 et seq.
21
shall be acted upon until it has been reduced to writing. No ordinance or resolution shall be
passed except by a majority vote of the board of selectmen.
(d) No ordinance, amendment, change or repeal of an ordinance shall become effective until
notice has been given by posting and by publication pursuant to the Charter. This provision shall
not apply to by-laws adopted, amended or repealed pursuant to 24 V.S.A. Ch. 117.
(e) All ordinances enacted shall be published in suitable form for the use of all the officers of
the town government and for general distribution.
(Code 1966, Ch. 1, § § 2,6,8)
Charter reference-Publication of ordinances,§9.
Secs. 2-28--2-45. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES4
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 2-46--2-60. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. TOWN CLERK5
Sec. 2-61. Duties.
The town clerk shall be clerk of the board of selectmen. The town clerk shall attend all
meetings of the board of selectmen and make and keep a record thereof. The town clerk shall
engross all ordinances and resolutions passed in the order of their passage, keeping separate
books for the ordinances and separate books for resolutions which shall be marked "Ordinances
of the Town of the Town of St. Johnsbury" and "Resolutions of the Town of St. Johnsbury." The
books shall be kept in the office of the town clerk subject to the inspection of any person
interested therein.
(Code 1966, Ch. 1, §8)
4 Charter reference- Police Department, §5(i)
Cross references- Fire department, §5-26 et seq.; recreation board, §9-41 et seq.; recreation department, §9-61 et
seq.
State law reference-Officers and employees, 24 V.S.A. 871 et seq.
5 State law reference- Town clerk, 24 V.S.A. 1151 et seq.
22
Chapter 3: ANIMALS6
Art. I. In General, § § 3-1--3-25
Art. II. Dogs and Wolf Hybrids, § §3-26--3-50 Civil Ordinance
Art. III. Rabies Control, §3-51
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SECTION 3-1. AUTHORITY.
This ordinance is adopted by the Select Board of the Town of St. Johnsbury under authority of 20
V.S.A. § 3549, 24 V.S.A. §§ 2291 (10) and 2291 (14 & 15), and 24 V.S.A. Chapter 59.7
Secs. 3-2--3-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. DOGS AND WOLF HYBRIDS8 - Civil Ordinance
SECTION 3-26. PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this ordinance to regulate the keeping of dogs and wolf hybrids, to protect public
health and safety and to protect the residents’ quiet enjoyment of their homes and properties.
SECTION 3-27. DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this ordinance, the following words and/or phrases shall apply:
a) “Dog” means any member of the canine species including “wolf hybrids” which are defined
as
1. An animal that is the progeny of a dog and a wolf (Canis lupus or Canis rufus);
2. An animal that is advertised or otherwise described or represented to be a wolf
hybrid; or
3. An animal that exhibits primary physical and/or behavioral wolf characteristics.
b) “Leash” means a strap or cord for restraining and guiding a dog or other domestic animal.
c) “Owner” means any person who has actual or constructive possession of a dog. The term also
includes those persons who provide food and shelter to a dog. (Ord. of 6-13-77)
d) “Running at large” means that a dog or wolf hybrid is not:
6 Cross references- Housing, Ch. 6; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 11.
State law references-Animals, 20 V.S.A. 3341 et seq.; dogs, 20 V.S.A. 354 et seq.; rabies control, 20 V.S.A. 4003
et seq.
7 (Ord. of 6-l3-77, §1)
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, §1-2.
8 Approved June 11, 2012. No petitions were filed.
23
1. on a leash;
2. in a vehicle;
3. on the owner’s property;
4. on the property of another person with that person’s permission; or
5. hunting with the owner.
e) “Nuisance dog” means a dog whose behavior may include running at large, disturbing the
quiet and comfort of others by persistent barking, or defecating in any public area or private
property not that of the owner or keeper.
f) “Aggressive Dog” means a dog whose behavior may include growling, chasing, snarling, or
jumping that causes any person to reasonably fear attack or bodily injury from such animal,
while off the premises of the property of the owner or keeper of the animal.
g) “Vicious dog” means a dog that bites, nips, or attacks any person while off premises of the
owner or keeper of the animal. The term shall also mean any animal that, while off premises
of the owner, attacks another domestic pet or domestic animal, as defined in 20 V.S.A. §
3541.
h) “Authorized officer” means a constable, police officer, animal control officer, humane
officer or any other authorized agent of the Town.
SECTION 3-28. DISTURBANCES AND NUISANCES
a) No dog shall run at large in the town.9
b) No dog shall harass or attack other animals or people if off the premises of the owner or
keeper.
c) A female dog in heat shall be confined to a building or other secured enclosure, except while
under the direct control of the owner.
d) No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog that disturbs the quiet and comfort of others by
frequent, habitual or persistent barking or howling.
SECTION 3-29. ANIMAL WASTE DISPOSAL
The owner or person in control of a dog that defecates in any public area or on the private property of
another person shall immediately remove the fecal material and dispose of it in a sanitary manner.
SECTION 3-30. COLLAR AND LICENSE
a) Each dog shall be licensed according to the laws of this state and shall wear a collar or harness
with the current license attached. An animal that is visiting from out of state must wear a collar or
harness with a current license from its home state attached.10
b) A dog that is found without a collar or harness and/or license may be immediately impounded.
Sec. 3-29.
9 (Ord. of 6-13-77, § §1,3(a)-(c) )
State law reference- Authority to regulate, 20 V.S.A. 3549.
10 20 V.S.A. 3581.(Ord. of 6-13-77, §2)
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, Ch.7.
24
c) The license fee and the surcharge imposed upon dog licenses issued by the town for the
purpose of funding the dog control program are on file in the town clerk's office.
(Ord. of 2-12-79)
SECTION 3-31. HUMANE CARE OF DOGS
All dogs shall be furnished with clean and safe facilities and water sufficient to protect the animal and
the public health. Any dog determined by the authorized officer to be without such clean and safe
facilities and water may be impounded.
(Ord. of 6-13-77, §1(d))
SECTION 3-32. ENFORCEMENT
This is a civil ordinance and shall be enforced by an authorized officer in the Vermont Judicial
Bureau in accordance with 24 V.S.A. §§ 1974a et seq.
SECTION 3-33. VICIOUS DOGS
Vicious dogs may be controlled as outlined in 20 V.S.A. § 3545: Right to kill domestic pets or wolf
hybrids generally; and Title 20 V.S.A. §§ 3546: Investigation of vicious domestic pets or wolf hybrid.
SECTION 3-34. IMPOUNDMENT AND/OR RESTRAINT
a) Any dog that is determined by the authorized officer to be a nuisance, aggressive, or vicious dog
which presents an imminent danger to people or other animals shall be immediately impounded
or the owner may be required to confine, muzzle or otherwise restrain such animal.
b) After the third or subsequent violation of any provision of this ordinance the offending dog may
be impounded.
SECTION 3-35. NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT AND RELEASE FROM IMPOUNDMENT
The officer who impounds a dog shall, within 24 hours, give notice to the owner, if known, either
personally, by telephone call, or by written notice at the owner’s dwelling. Such notice shall inform
the owner of the nature of the violations, the location of the animal and the steps that are necessary to
have the animal returned to the owner.
a) If an impounded dog has no license or other identification, the person who impounds it shall by
the end of the next business day post a notice in the Town Clerk’s office and place a notice or
advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation. Said notices or advertisements shall describe
the dog, where it was found, and state the deadline by which the dog must be claimed and any
related fines or fees paid.
b) Impounded animals shall be released to the owner only after payment of all penalties and
impoundment fees and demonstrating that the dog has a current license. Remedial action may
also be required of the owner, including, but not limited to, actions such as providing a collar and
providing a plan for compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and with state law.
c) Unless the owner or person entitled to possession of the god claims the dog and complies with
subsection C of this section within 7 days of notice provided pursuant to subsections A or B of
25
this section, the impounding officer may transfer ownership rights to another person or dispose of
the dog in a humane manner. When transferring ownership rights, the officer may charge a fee for
the dog to recoup impoundment costs incurred after the required 7 day notice period has lapsed.
d) Notwithstanding the above, if a dog is impounded because a member of the legislative body or a
municipal official designated by the legislative body determines that the animal is a rabies
suspect, the provision of Subchapter 5 of Title 20 Chapter 193 and the rules of the department of
health shall apply.
SECTION 3-36. INVESTIGATION OF VICIOUS DOGS RELATING TO NON-PROVOKED
ATTACKS ON HUMANS
a) When a domestic pet or wolf-hybrid has bitten a person while the animal is off the premises of
the owner or keeper, and the person bitten requires medical attention for the attack, such person
may file a written complaint with the legislative body of the municipality. The complaint shall
contain the time, date and place where the attack occurred, the name and address of the victim or
victims, and any other facts that may assist the legislative body in conducting its investigation.
b) The legislative body, within seven days from receipt of the complaint, shall investigate the
charges and hold a hearing on the matter. If the owner of the domestic pet or wolf-hybrid which is
the subject of the complaint can be ascertained with due diligence, said owner shall be provided
with a written notice of the time, date and place of hearing and the facts of the complaint.
c) If the domestic pet or wolf-hybrid is found to have bitten the victim without provocation, the
municipal officials shall make such order for the protection of persons as the facts and
circumstances of the case may require, including, without limitation, that the domestic pet or
wolf-hybrid is disposed of in a humane way, muzzled, chained, or confined. The order shall be
sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. A person who, after receiving notice, fails to
comply with the terms of the order shall be subject to the penalties provided in 20 V.S.A. § 3550.
d) The procedures provided in this section shall only apply if the domestic pet or wolf-hybrid is not
a rabies suspect. If a member of the legislative body or a municipal official designated by the
legislative body determines that the animal is a rabies suspect, the provisions of Subchapter 5 of
Title 20 Chapter 193 and the rules of the department of health shall apply.
SECTION 3-37. PENALTIES AND COSTS
Any violations of Article II of Chapter 3 in the Town Ordinances are subject to the following
penalties and costs:
First offense: $50.00 $25.00 Waiver penalty
Second offense: $150.00 $50.00 Waiver penalty
Third offense: $200.00 $100.00 Waiver penalty
Fourth and subsequent offense: $250.00 & Impoundment & Impoundment costs $125.00 Waiver penalty
& Impoundment Costs
(The waiver penalty applies when an alleged violator pays the fine without contesting the
violation.)
Impoundment & impoundment costs may also be applicable to first, second, or third offenses.
Impoundment costs shall be set annually by the Select Board.
SECTION 3-38. OTHER LAWS.
26
This ordinance is in addition to all other Ordinances of the Town of St. Johnsbury, and all applicable
laws of the State of Vermont.
SECTION 3-39. SEVERABILITY.
If any section of this ordinance is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
finding shall not invalidate any other part of this ordinance.
SECTION 3-40. EFFECTIVE DATE.
This ordinance shall become effective 60 days after its adoption by the St. Johnsbury Select Board. If
a petition is filed under 24 V.S.A. § 1973, that statute shall govern the taking effect of this ordinance.
Secs. 3-41--3-50. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. RABIES CONTROL
Sec. 3-51. QUARANTINE.11
(a) Whenever it becomes necessary in the judgment of the health officer of the town to
safeguard the public from the spread of the disease of hydrophobia (rabies), such health officer
shall issue a proclamation ordering and requiring every owner of a dog to confine it securely at all
times upon the premises of the owner unless such dog is wearing a muzzle of sufficient strength
to prevent its biting any person or other animal.
(b) Upon the posting of such order or proclamation in three (3) public places within the town,
any un-muzzled dog running at large during the period of such proclamation may be seized and
impounded. All dogs seized, if noticeably infected with rabies, shall be killed forthwith by the
health officer or the town manager or his designee or by any police officer without notice to its
owner. Any dog seized not noticeably infected with rabies shall be impounded in accordance with
the provisions of section 3-34.
(Ord. of 6-13-77, §6)
11 State law reference- Rabies control, 20 V.S.A. 3801, 20 V.S.A. 4003 et seq.
27
Chapter 4: RESERVED
28
Chapter 5: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION12
Art. I. In general, §5-l--5-25
Art. II. Fire Department, §5-26--5-45
Art. III. Standards, §5-46--5-70
Art. IV. Fire Alarms §5-71--5-100
Art. V. Open Burning, §5-101--5-107
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 5-1. INTENT.
It is the intent of this chapter to prescribe certain minimum standards consistent with
nationally recognized good practice for the safeguarding of life and property from the hazards of
fire.
(Ord. of 6-26-78, §2)
Sec. 5-2. TAMPERING WITH FIRE ALARM PROHIBITED.
No person other than authorized officers shall molest or tamper with any fire alarm box
within the town except for the bona fide purpose of ringing an alarm for fire.
(Code 1966, Ch. 3, 8, 11)
Sec. 5-3. TAMPERING WITH SMOKE ALARMS OR CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTORS
No person other than authorized officers shall molest or tamper (as specified by code13) with any
smoke alarms or carbon monoxide detectors, with intent to disable thereby creating a safety hazard,
within any public building (as specified by code) within the Town, except for the bona fide purpose of
performing maintenance. All public buildings (as specified by code) must have functional smoke alarms
and carbon monoxide detectors.14
Secs. 5-4--5-25. RESERVED.
12 Cross references-Fire safety requirements for houses, §6-78 et seq.; yielding right-of-way for fire apparatus
required, §12-26; utilities, Ch. 13.
State law references-Fires, firefighting and fire prevention, 20 V.S.A. 2481 et seq., 24 V.S.A. 3101 et seq.; open
burning, 10 V.S.A. 2645 et seq.; municipal forests, 10 V.S.A. 2651 et seq.
13 See §6-27
14 Amendment adopted May 27, 2014. No petitions were filed.
29
ARTICLE II. FIRE DEPARTMENT15
Sec. 5-26. FIRE HAZARD INSPECTOR16
The fire hazard inspector or inspector is the fire chief of the town or his designated
representative. (Ord. of 6-26-78, §4)
Sec. 5-27. DUTIES IN CONNECTION WITH PREVENTION OF FIRES.
The fire department shall inspect potential fire hazards, require abatement of fire hazards, and
investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of fires. The fire department shall enforce all
laws and regulations regarding.
(a) Control and use of explosives and flammables;
(b) Maintenance of fire escapes;
(c) Maintenance of automatic and other private fire alarm systems and fire extinguishing
equipment;
(d) Control of the means and adequacy of exits in case of fire from factories, schools, hotels,
lodging houses, hospitals, churches, halls, theaters and all other places in which numbers of
persons work, meet, live or congregate;
(e) Educational fire prevention programs.
(Ord. of 6-26-78, §6)
Sec. 5-28. RIGHT TO ENTER FOR INSPECTION.
The inspector shall have the right and authority to enter any building, structure or premises
within the town for the purpose of making inspections or investigations at all reasonable hours;
provided that except in cases of emergency, the right and authority conferred by this section shall
not apply to the entry of a private residence unless written notice is served on the occupant
thereof. Such written notice shall contain a statement of the time that inspection will be made
and shall also contain a statement of the purpose of such inspection or investigation. Anything to
the contrary herein notwithstanding, an inspector shall have the right and authority to enter
single-family, owner-occupied dwellings only if he shall have probable cause to believe a
violation of the fire code exists.
(Ord. of 6-26-78, §6)
15 Cross reference- Officers and employees, §2-46 et seq.
16 State law reference-Authority to create, 24 V.S.A. §1951
30
Sec. 5-29. SCOPE OF INSPECTION AUTHORIZED.
The inspection and examination authorized by section 5-28 shall be for the purpose of
reporting and correcting the following fire hazards pertaining to buildings and the occupants:
(a) Disrepair;
(b) Age and dilapidated condition;
(c) Faulty or unapproved construction;
(d) Inadequate fire escapes or lack of means of egress;
(e) Inadequate fire alarm protection;
(f) Inadequate fire extinguishing equipment;
(g) Materials and buildings especially susceptible to fire;
(h) Conditions endangering other property or occupants;
(i) Any other fire hazards dangerous to life or property.
(Ord. of 6-26-78, §6A)
Secs. 5-30--5-45. RESERVED.
ARTICLE III. STANDARDS17
Sec. 5-46. ADOPTED.
The Vermont Fire and Building Safety Code, as published by the State of Vermont,
Department of Public Safety, as from time to time amended, is hereby adopted by reference.
(Ord. of 6-26-78, §7/ amended 4/30/09)
Sec. 5-47. RESTRICTIONS ON STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS.18
(a) No person shall use, maintain, or permit to be used or maintained any fuel oil tank of more
than ten-gallon capacity in any apartment building, hotel, boarding or rooming house, tenement
house, or other dwelling owned or controlled by such person, unless the tank shall be located in
the basement or cellar of such building or structure, or if there be no basement or cellar, on the
ground floor or first story.
17 State law reference-Fire prevention and protection, 20V.S.A. 2602 et seq.; Bylaws for fire prevention, 24
V.S.A.3101.
18 Amendment adopted May 27, 2014. No petitions were filed.
31
(b) No person shall use, maintain or permit to be used or maintained any fuel oil tank of more
than sixty (60) gallons capacity in any building or structure not used for human habitation and
owned or controlled by such person, unless the tank shall be located in the basement or cellar of
such building or other structure, or if there be no basement or cellar, on the ground floor or first
story.
(c) No person shall store, keep or maintain gasoline in any building intended for human
occupancy or employment. No person shall store, keep or maintain more than ten gallons of
gasoline which shall be stored in a container bearing the underwriters' approved seal, in any
other structure, building or garage. This ten-gallon limit shall not apply to gasoline contained in
the tank of a motor vehicle or motorized equipment.
(d) Notwithstanding the above stated ten-gallon limit for gasoline or fuel, an exception may
be granted by the fire chief in the exercise of his discretion, by issuing a permit stating the
reasons for the exception.
(Code 1966, Ch. 10,§2; Ord. of 3-25-74)
Sec. 5-48. ORDER TO CORRECT VIOLATIONS19
When violations of this chapter or the code adopted in section 5-46 or of any other laws or
ordinances relating to fire hazards are found by the inspector, he shall serve upon the owner,
operator, occupant or other person responsible for the violation a written order to correct the
violation.
(Ord. of 6-26-78, §8)
Sec. 5-49. METHOD OF SERVICE OF ORDER.
The order required herein shall be served in one (1) of the following ways:
(a) By making personal delivery of the order to the person responsible;
(b) By leaving the order with some person of suitable age and discretion upon the premises;
(c) By affixing a copy of the order to the door at the entrance of the premises in violation;
(d) By mailing a copy of the order by registered mail to the last known address of the owner
of the premises;
(e) By publishing a copy of the order in a local paper once a week for three (3) successive
weeks.
(Ord. of 6-26-78, §8(A))
19 State law reference- Uniform fire prevention ticket, 10 V.S.A. 2672.
32
Sec. 5-50. TIME FOR COMPLIANCE.
The order shall set forth a time limit for compliance, dependent upon the hazard and danger
created by the violation. In cases of extreme danger to persons or property, the inspector shall
have the authority to require compliance immediately upon service of the order.
(Ord. of 6-26-78, §8(B))
Sec. 5-51. APPEAL FROM ORDER TO CORRECT VIOLATION.
A person to whom an order to correct a violation is directed shall have the right, within
twenty-four (24) hours of the service of such order, to appeal the order to the town manager who
shall review such order within five (5) days and file his decision. Unless the order is revoked or
modified it shall remain in full force and be obeyed by the person to whom directed. No person
to whom an order is directed shall fail to comply with such order within fifteen (15) days after an
appeal shall have been determined.
(Ord. of 6-26-78, §8 (C))
Sec. 5-52. ABATEMENT BY TOWN UPON FAILURE TO COMPLY; PENALTY.
(a) When a person to whom an order to correct a violation is directed shall fail to comply with
the specified time, the inspector shall have the authority to contract for the removal of such
materials and charge the cost to the person to whom the order is directed. The person removing
material under a contract made hereunder shall be authorized to enter the premises and to remove
such material. If the cost of removal is not paid by the person to whom the order to correct was
issued within sixty (60) days after receipt of a statement from the inspector such cost shall be
levied as a special assessment against the property upon which the fire hazard exist. The levying
of such assessment shall not affect the liability of the person to whom the order is directed to fine
and imprisonment as provided in subsection (b) below.
(b) Any person to whom an order to correct a violation is directed who shall fail to comply
with such order within the specified time shall be punished, upon conviction, as provided in
section 1-13.
(Ord. of 6-26-78 §8(D), (E))
Secs. 5-53--5-70. RESERVED.
33
ARTICLE IV. FIRE ALARMS
Sec. 5-71. DEFINITION OF USER.
User shall mean the owner of the building where an alarm system is located unless the owner
and tenant agree otherwise.
(Ord. of 3-12-84, §3(a))
Cross reference-Definitions and rules of construction generally, §`1-2.
Sec. 5-72. RESPONSE UPON RECEIPT OF ALARM.20
Upon receipt of an alarm at fire headquarters, the fire department will respond to the building
unless the party has notified the fire department of maintenance being done before the alarm
starts to ring. All fire alarms received from dispatch, private, and/or central station alarm
monitoring companies, shall be investigated to determine the cause of the alarm.
(Ord. of 3-12-84, §1)
Sec. 5-73. FALSE ALARMS.21
After the second false or erroneous alarm has been received by the fire department by
automatic or mechanical means from the premises of the user in any calendar year, a charge
which is on file in the town clerk's office shall be imposed on the user. No charge shall be
assessed for fires, legitimate emergencies or situations which could reasonably be perceived by a
person as legitimate emergencies reported via the alarm system. A false or erroneous alarm
occurs when a person purposely activates the alarm, or if the alarm malfunctions and is not
repaired by the event of the third (3rd) false or erroneous alarm.
(Ord. of 3-12-84, §2)
Sec. 5-74. EXEMPTION.
All town departments and any town owned or operated building or structure shall be exempt from
the charges imposed in this article.
(Ord. of 3-12-84, §3(a))
20 Amendment adopted May 27, 2014. No petitions were filed.
21 Amendment adopted May 27, 2014. No petitions were filed.
34
Sec. 5-75. COLLECTION OF CHARGES.
(a) All charges for false alarms under this article shall be owed by the user, payable to the fire
department and the proceeds shall be returned to the town treasurer.
(b) False alarm charges shall be assessed by the fire department as they occur and shall be due
not later than thirty (30) days after the billing is sent.
(c) A delinquent payment fee of ten (10) percent of the amount owed may be assessed on
unpaid charges thirty (30) days after they are due.
(Ord. of 3-12-84, §3)
Sec. 5-76. KNOX BOXES AND STANDARD KEYS22
a) All buildings having a fire alarm system and fire sprinkler systems shall be required
to install key boxes or a so-called Knox Box. Existing buildings not currently in
compliance shall comply with this requirement within one (1) year of the effective
date of this article.
b) The building owner shall be required to install in the key box all master keys to
offices, electrical rooms, elevator equipment and all keys needed to reset the fire
alarm system.
c) If requested by the department, building owners shall be required to supply additional
sets of keys as needed by the fire department to allow more than one (1) team of
firefighters to have access to areas of the building.
d) If requested by the fire department, more than one (1) Knox Box may be required to
facilitate multiple points of entry in large facilities.
e) All new fire alarm control panels shall be keyed with a standard Cat 30 key. Where a
Cat 30 key is not practical, such as in an annunciator panel, an A135 key shall be
used in its place.
f) Existing fire alarm control panel and remote annunciator access keys shall be
converted to this standard within one(1) year of the effective date of this article, or
during the required annual test and inspection by a third party on the owners behest.
Secs. 5-77--5-100. RESERVED.
22 New section adopted May 27, 2014. No petitions were filed.
35
ARTICLE V. OPEN BURNING23
Sec. 5-101. IN GENERAL
WHEREAS, the Town of St. Johnsbury has, by virtue of the authority granted in 24 V.S.A. § 1971 (Title
24, Chapter 59, Section 1971), and 24 V.S.A. § 2202a(a) (Title 24, Chapter 61, Subchapter 8, Section 2202a),
the power to adopt, amend, repeal, and enforce ordinances, and to manage and regulate the solid waste
disposal within its boundaries; and
WHEREAS, the Town of St. Johnsbury has determined that disposal of solid waste through open
burning and incineration practices prohibited by this Ordinance constitute public nuisances, and the Town
of St. Johnsbury has the authority to regulate and prohibit such practices by virtue of the authority granted
in 24 V.S.A. § 2291 (14) (Title 24, Part 2, Chapter 61, Subchapter 11, Section 2291);
NOW, THEREFORE, to protect public health and safety and to promote the responsible use of
resources and protection of the environment, the Select Board of the Town of St. Johnsbury hereby adopts
this ordinance to regulate the open burning and incineration of solid waste in the Town of St. Johnsbury,
Vermont.
Sec. 5-102. PURPOSE, TITLE
Purpose. This ordinance is enacted to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the
inhabitants of the Town of St. Johnsbury and to prohibit solid waste disposal practices
that pose a danger to the public health and welfare and the environment or constitute a
public nuisance.
Title. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Ordinance Prohibiting the
Disposal of Solid Waste Through Open Burning and Incineration.”
Sec. 5-103. DEFINITIONS
a) “Construction/Demolition Debris” means materials resulting from construction, demolition,
or renovation of buildings, roads, bridges and other structures in the Town of St. Johnsbury.
b) “Incineration” means the burning of solid waste in an enclosed container, such as, but not
limited to, a furnace, stove, incinerator or similar device.
c) “Hazardous Waste” means waste that is identified as hazardous in, and regulated by, the
Vermont Hazardous Waste Management Regulations including, but not limited to, waste that
contains toxic, corrosive, reactive, explosive, or flammable ingredients.
d) “Natural wood” means any of the following, provided such material has not been treated or
injected with preservatives or oil; or has, at any time, been painted, stained or glued:
23 Open Burning Section was re-written and effective July 27, 2014.
36
1. trees and brush, including logs, boles, trunks, branches, limbs, roots, and stumps;
2. lumber, including timber, logs, dimensional lumber or slabs dressed for use;
3. pallets and skids
This definition does not include processed wood products such as plywood, particle board, fiber
board, and press board.
e) “Non-woody vegetation” means leaves, grass, yard trimmings, and other organic materials.
f) “Open burning” means the burning of solid waste in the open or in an open container,
including but not limited to a brush pile or a burn barrel, where the products of combustion
are emitted directly into the atmosphere without passing through a stack, chimney or other
enclosure.
g) “Recyclable” means any type of refuse designated by the Town of St. Johnsbury or by the
local solid waste management district to be separated for recycling.
h) “Solid Waste” means any garbage, refuse, hazardous waste or other solid materials generated
by normal residential, commercial, industrial, and community activities. This definition does
not include natural wood and non-woody vegetation, as defined in this Article. For the
purposes of this ordinance, non-solid wastes including but not limited to septage, sludge and
animal manure are excluded from the definition of solid waste.
Sec. 5-104. OPEN BURNING AND INCINERATION
a) Except for outdoor grills and fire places for recreation or preparing of food, no person shall
engage in permitted open burning without first obtaining a permit from the St. Johnsbury Fire
Department. Clean commercial wood may be used in residential recreational fires, within all of
the other permitting regulations. Trash may not be burned; only firewood or clean cut brush or
wood may be burned. Permits shall only be issued upon a finding that the proposed activity will
not adversely affect:
(1) Public health, safety and welfare;
(2) Adjacent or nearby properties; and
(3) Traffic on roads and highways in the vicinity.
b) Unless a permit is obtained pursuant to this ordinance the disposal of solid waste through open
burning or incineration is prohibited in the Town of St. Johnsbury.
c) Prior to the open burning of solid waste, a Permit to Kindle Fire shall be obtained from the Town
of St. Johnsbury Fire Department. Such a permit may only be issued for the following types of
open burning:
1) The open burning of natural wood and non-woody vegetation resulting from yard or
property maintenance, logging and clearing operations, agricultural improvements,
forest or wildlife management, or for festive celebrations. Clean pallets, and
untreated or unstained hardwood (i.e. Handle pieces) may be used.
37
2) After providing the required notice to the Vermont Department of Environmental
Conservation, the burning of solid or liquid fuels or structures for bona fide fire
training provided that materials other than natural wood are removed to the greatest
extent possible prior to the training.
3) With the prior approval in the form of a Department of Environmental Conservation
Burn Permit, the open burning of construction or demolition materials and
commercial wastes such as untreated or unstained pallets and skids. These materials
and wastes can only be “natural wood” items.
4) With the prior approval of the Department of Environmental Conservation, burning
authorized by the Fire Chief / Fire Warden of St. Johnsbury for the protection of public
health or to thwart a hazard.
5) The open burning of natural wood and non-woody vegetation at a designated place
within the municipality by the Town of St. Johnsbury in accordance with 10 V.S.A. §
565 (Title 10, Part 1, Chapter 23, Section 565).
6) Any other open burning is prohibited by this ordinance including but not limited to
the burning of hazardous wastes and recyclable materials.
d) To obtain a Permit to Kindle Fire, the applicant shall establish that no hazardous or nuisance
situations will be created by open burning at the time the permit is issued and that the application
is for open burning that is permitted under this ordinance. Permits to Kindle Fire must provide
for the specific date, time and location of the burning and indicate the specific materials that the
person submitting the permit is authorized to burn. Failure to meet the conditions of the Permit
to Kindle Fire, once it has been issued, will render the permit invalid and subject the person
submitting the permit to enforcement pursuant to this ordinance.
e) The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to the burning of natural wood or any virgin fuel
in a furnace to produce heat or for the purpose of preparing food.
Sec. 5-105. DESIGNATION OF ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL
For the purposes of this ordinance, the Select Board may designate any combination of the
following persons as enforcement personnel: members of the Select Board, the Town Health
Officer, the Fire Chief, the Town Attorney, the Town Constable(s) and any official with law
enforcement authority under Vermont law.
Sec. 5-106. REPEAL OF INCONSISTENT PROVISIONS
All ordinances or parts of ordinances, resolutions, regulations, or other documents inconsistent
with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
38
Sec. 5-107. Enforcement and penalties.
A violation of the ordinances in Chapter 5 shall be a civil matter enforced in accordance with the
provisions of 24 V.S.A. §§ 1974a and 1977 et. Seq.
A. First offense $50.00 full penalty $25.00 waiver penalty
B. Second offense within 6 months $100.00 full penalty $50.00 waiver penalty
C. Third and subsequent offenses within 6 months $200.00 full penalty $100.00 waiver penalty
Sec. 5-107.1. Severability.
Each of the provisions of the ordinance is severable, and if any provision is held invalid for any
reason, the remaining provisions shall not be affected but shall remain in full force and effect.
Sec. 5-107.2. Effective date.
This ordinance shall become effective 60 days after its adoption by the St. Johnsbury Select Board. If
a petition is filed under 24 V.S.A. § 1973, the taking effect of this ordinance shall be governed by that
statute.
39
Chapter 6: HOUSING24
Art. I. In General
§§6-1--6-14 Public Health and Safety Ordinance
§§6-15--6-25 Reserved
Art. II. Housing Code, §§6-26--6-95
Div. l. Generally, §§6-26--6-45
Div. 2. Administration, §§6-46--6-65
Div. 3. Standards, §§6-66--6-95
Art. III. Code Compliance and Enforcement §§6-96--6-113
Div. 1. General Provisions §§6-96--6-102
Div. 2. Administration, Appeals, and Enforcement §§6-103--6-110
Div. 3. Procedures §§6-111--6-113
Art. IV. Rental Unit Registration §§6-113--6-125
Div. 1. Generally §§6-114--6-119
Div. 2. Registration Procedures §§6-120—6-125
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY ORDINANCE25
Sec. 6-1 AUTHORITY.
This Ordinance is adopted by the Town of St. Johnsbury Select Board under authority
granted in 24 V.S.A. Ch. 11, §§ 25(a)(5), (a)(8) and 25(b), 24 V.S.A. §§ 2291(13), (14), and
(15), 24 V.S.A. § 2121, and 24 V.S.A. Chapter 59.
Sec. 6-2. STATEMENT OF FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
Being that there exist in the Town of St. Johnsbury structures, buildings and parcels of land
that have become dangerous or unsafe and numerous other structures that are vacant, abandoned,
and in disrepair, the St. Johnsbury Select Board finds and declares that:
(1) Structures that become dangerous and unsafe must promptly be made safe and secure to
protect the public safety and public safety personnel.
(2) Structures that are vacant and not properly secured are dangerous and unsafe in that they
are extremely vulnerable to being set on fire by unauthorized persons.
24 Cross reference-Animals, Ch. 3.
25 Article I is a new Ordinance adopted May 27, 2014. No petitions were filed.
40
(3) Many structures that are vacant, whether secured or not, are a blight on their
neighborhoods, cause deterioration and instability in their neighborhoods, and have an
adverse impact upon adjacent and nearby properties.
(4) Structures that were previously used as residential units and have since become vacant
have a significant and detrimental impact on the local housing market.
(5) Structures that are vacant and not properly secured attract vagrants and criminals and are
prime locations to conduct illegal activities, including arson and drug use.
(6) Structures that are vacant and unsecured pose serious threats to the public health and
safety and therefore are declared to be public nuisances.
(7) Quarterly abatement and rehabilitation of these structures is necessary to abate such
public nuisances, prevent unsightly blight and the deterioration of neighborhoods with
the consequent adverse impact on the value of adjacent and nearby properties, secure the
public safety and to ensure and enhance the vitality and livability of our neighborhoods.
(8) Communication between owners of dangerous and vacant buildings and the Town is
essential for effective allocation of public resources and the maintenance of public
health, welfare, and safety in regard to such structures.
The purpose of this article is to establish the reasonably necessary measures to abate the
public nuisances, blight, negative housing market impact, and other harmful effects connected
with dangerous and vacant or abandoned buildings, structures and lands, consistent with the
authority vested in the Town to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public through the
regulation of the construction, maintenance, repair, and alteration of buildings, structures and
properties within the Town.
Sec. 6-3. DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this Ordinance, the following words and/or phrases shall apply:
a) Dangerous Building or Dangerous Structure. Any building or structure or part
thereof that, for the lack of proper maintenance, repair, or sanitation is hazardous to
the health or safety of the public or likely to endanger other buildings or property.
The identification and posting will be done by the Town Health Officer. The
identification and posting will be done by the Town Health Officer.26 If a dangerous
structure is found, it must be identified by a sign clearly showing the letters: DS. This
is for the safety of all public safety personal that might need to enter that structure.
b) Vacant Building. Any building or structure that is unoccupied by a person or
occupied by unauthorized persons for more than one hundred and twenty (120) days,
excepting any permitted warehouse, garage, vacation property, or building or
structure used only on a seasonal basis.
26 Sentence added October 24, 2017; no petitions were filed.
41
c) The Town Health Officer. The officer appointed by the Town of St. Johnsbury
Select Board to enforce this Ordinance. The Town Health Officer may hold any other
office in the Town of St. Johnsbury. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the
Town Health Officer from performing his or her duties under other regulations or
ordinances that he or she may be designated to administer and enforce. The Town
Health Officer shall have the authority to inspect buildings, structures or any portion
of a property, interior or exterior, within the territorial limits of the Town of St.
Johnsbury. In the event that the Town Health Officer is unavailable, or has a conflict
of interest, the Fire Chief or his/her designee shall perform the functions of the Town
Health Officer. At any time, the Fire Chief may serve as the Town Health Officer. If
they are two separate positions, the Town Health Officer must be in constant contact
with the Fire Chief and both must share all known pertinent information.
d) Trash. Shall include rubbish, waste and refuse, including, but not limited to
household wastes, food scraps, household appliances, automotive parts, automobiles,
furniture and yard clippings, but shall not include junk at a duly licensed junkyard or
salvage yard.
e) Hazardous Conditions. Shall include, but not be limited to, situations where a
property owner, tenant, any mortgagee in possession, or a designee of any of the
foregoing allows:
1) Trash to unreasonably accumulate or be discarded on a property in such a way
that it causes an obvious hazard to public safety;
2) The creation of an unsanitary condition likely to attract or harbor mosquitoes,
rodents, vermin or disease-carrying pests;
3) Trees and other plant life to dangerously obscure drivers’ views that do not
conform to the By-law site-line requirements.
4) The placement of appliances, cars, and other objects that might constitute an
attractive nuisance to children or attract vermin; or
5) A vacant building to be left in an unsecured state.
f) Substantial rehabilitation. Means rehabilitation the value of which exceeds fifty
(50) percent of the assessed valuation of the building or structure.
g) Showing that the building is being actively marketed for sale or lease means:
1) evidence that the building or structure is being continuously marketed for sale
or lease and is publicly available and viewable for sale or lease to prospective
buyers or lessees until it is under contract, and
2) The disclosure of a reasonable asking price.
h) Building and Property Owner. The person or legal entity that is responsible to the
Town for maintaining the property and paying taxes.
42
Sec. 6-4. AUTHORITY OF TOWN HEALTH OFFICER.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall affect the authority of the Town of St. Johnsbury Health
Officer/Fire Chief or the Select Board to take any action permitted under 18 V.S.A. §§ 126, 127
et seq. The Health Officer and the Select Board retain the authority, in their discretion, to take
action under Vermont state law or under this Ordinance.
Sec. 6-5. BUILDING AND PROPERTY OWNER OBLIGATIONS AND STANDARDS.
Building and property owners shall ensure that the following measures have been undertaken,
whether the building or property is occupied or not, to secure the building or structure by
satisfying the following building maintenance standards:
a) Building Openings. Doors, windows, areaways and other openings shall be weathertight
and secured against entry by birds, vermin and trespassers. Missing or broken
doors, windows and other such openings shall be covered by glass or other rigid
materials which are weather protected, and tightly fitted and secured to the opening.
b) Roofs. The roof and flashings shall be sound and tight, not admit moisture or have
defects which might admit moisture, rain or roof drainage, and allow for drainage to
prevent dampness or deterioration in the interior walls or interior of the building.
c) Drainage. The building storm drainage system shall be functional and allow
discharge in an appropriate manner.
d) Sanitation and Sewage. All buildings shall maintain sewage facilities in a safe and
sanitary condition.
e) Building Structure. The building shall be maintained in good repair and be
structurally sound. Structural members shall be free of deterioration and capable of
safely bearing imposed dead and live loads.
f) Foundation Walls. Foundation walls shall be maintained structurally sound and in a
well-kept condition so as not to pose a threat to public health and safety, shall be
capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and
shall be free from open cracks and breaks, free from leaks, and be animal and rodentproof.
g) Exterior Walls. Exterior walls shall be free of holes, breaks, and loose or rotting
materials.
h) Exterior Features. Cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings,
exposed metal and wood, (and similar decorative features) shall be safe, anchored,
and in good repair.
43
i) Overhanging Extensions. All balconies, canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings,
stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts and similar features shall be in good
repair, anchored, safe and sound.
j) Chimneys and Towers. Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks, and similar
appurtenances shall be structurally safe and in good repair.
k) Walkways. Walkways and driveways shall be safe for pedestrian travel.
l) Accessory and Appurtenant Structures. Accessory and appurtenant structures such as
garages, sheds, and fences shall be free from safety, health, and fire hazards and shall
comply with these building maintenance standards.
m) Premises. All properties located in the Town of St. Johnsbury shall be kept clean,
safe, and sanitary, free from waste, trash, rubbish, debris or excessive vegetation, and
shall not cause any hazardous condition or threat to the public health or safety.
Sec. 6-6. HEALTH AND SAFETY INSPECTION
Upon receiving information that any building, structure or property, or anything attached or
connected therewith is in violation of the specifications of this Ordinance or is otherwise in such
unsafe condition that the public safety is endangered, by the authority given in 18 V.S.A. Ch. 11,
§8, the Town Health Officer shall cause the building, structure or property to be inspected. Such
inspection shall occur according to the following process:
a) Written notice of intent to conduct an inspection pursuant to this Ordinance shall be
given to the owner of the building, structure or property at least Forty-eight (48)
hours prior to the inspection.
b) If the Health Officer has reason to believe that an emergency situation exists which
poses an immediate danger to the health or safety of the public, no notification shall
be necessary prior to inspection.
c) If the owner of a building, structure or property fails or refuses to consent to the
inspection, the Health Officer shall be authorized to obtain a search warrant from the
Vermont District Court for the purpose of determining and ensuring the structural
integrity of the building, the repairs necessary to ensure its structural integrity, that it
will be safe for entry by police officers and firefighters in times of exigent
circumstances or emergency, and that the building and its contents will not present a
hazard to the public.
d) The Health Officer may also view the premises from any public space, or, with the
permission of the property owner, from any nearby or adjacent property.
e) The Health Officer may retain such law enforcement officers, fire officials, engineers,
attorneys and other qualified experts as necessary to assist with a building safety
inspection and the preparation of a Building Safety Order. All cost associated with
such services will be the responsibility of the building owner.
44
Sec. 6-7. SAFETY ORDER.
a) If, upon inspection, the Health Officer determines that a building, structure or
anything attached or connected therewith, or any hazardous condition appears to
endanger the public safety, the Health Officer shall commence an abatement
action by issuing a Safety Order. The Safety Order shall:
1) Identify the hazardous conditions that cause the premises, building, structure
or anything attached or connected thereto to be dangerous.
2) Identify the actions that must be taken by the owner to secure the
Dangerous Building or Premises and abate the hazardous conditions
identified in the order, including, where appropriate, removal of a
Dangerous Building.
3) Set a date by which the actions to secure a Dangerous Building or Premises
and abate the hazardous conditions must be completed by the owner, which
shall be not less than fifteen (15) days from the date of service of the order.
4) Inform the owner of his/her right to appeal the Building Safety Order and
the right to be represented by legal counsel at the appeal hearing.
b) The Safety Order shall be served upon the owner of the Dangerous Building or
Premises by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by first class mail. A
copy of the Order shall be provided to Town of St. Johnsbury Select Board.
c) If it appears to the Health Officer and/or Fire Chief that such structure or premises
would be especially dangerous, the officer may affix a notice of dangerousness in
a conspicuous place upon the structure’s exterior walls, or may affix a posted
notice in the ground which shall not be removed or defaced without the officer’s
authority.
d) If the owner continues such refusal or neglects to remove or make the building or
premises safe, and the Order has become final by the failure to appeal, the
Building Inspector shall be fully authorized to abate the nuisance, except where
removal or demolition of a building is required. The Town Health Officer may,
as necessary, install, or have installed boards or otherwise secure a dangerous
building or order that a building be vacated by any occupants and removed.
e) For removal or demolition, the Town Health Officer, or other appropriate Town
officer, may seek approval from the appropriate Court for a remedy in equity to
remove or demolish a dangerous building, or to order such steps as may be
necessary to abate any hazardous condition. The Town Health Officer may also
seek the imposition of fines in accord with Section 6- 9 of this Ordinance.
f) The Town Health Officer may contract with such service providers or use such
other Town employees as may be necessary to ensure public safety in the
circumstances. The full cost of any work necessitated by a Safety Order shall
45
constitute a lien chargeable against the property owner and may be recovered in
the same manner as taxes for real estate pursuant to 32 V.S.A. Ch. 133.
Sec. 6-8. APPEAL OF SAFETY ORDER
a) A person aggrieved by a Safety Order may appeal such Order to the Town of St.
Johnsbury Select Board within fifteen (15) days of service of the Order. The notice
of appeal shall be in writing and shall set forth a brief statement of the basis of the
appeal.
b) Within thirty (30) days of service of the notice of appeal, the Select Board shall hold
a hearing on the appeal. The Select Board shall issue a written decision within fifteen
(15) days of the close of the hearing. The decision may reverse or sustain the Safety
Order and may contain such additional requirements as the Select Board deems
necessary and appropriate to implement the purpose of this Ordinance.
Sec. 6-9. PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT
a) If the owner fails to comply with a Safety Order, the owner shall be considered to be
in violation of the Order and this Ordinance. The Town shall be authorized to take
such steps as may be allowed under Section 6-7(D) of this Ordinance. In addition,
any violation shall be a civil matter which may be enforced in the Vermont Judicial
Bureau or in the Caledonia County Superior Court, at the election of the Health
Officer.
b) The Health Officer shall notify the owner by issuing a ticket.
c) A civil penalty of not more than $100.00 per violation will be imposed for violation
of this Ordinance. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation of this Ordinance.
d) Violations enforced in the Judicial Bureau shall be in accordance with the provisions
of 24 V.S.A. §§ 1974a and 1977 et seq. For purposes of enforcement in the Judicial
Bureau, the Health Officer shall be the designated enforcement officer. The Health
Officer shall issue tickets and may be the appearing officer at any hearing.
e) Violations enforced in the Superior Court shall be in accordance with the Vermont
Rules of Civil Procedure. The Town of St. Johnsbury may pursue any and all
remedies available at law or in equity.
Sec. 6-10. VACANT BUILDING PERMIT AND STANDARDS
a) Any building vacant for more than 120 days requires a permit. Application by the
owner of a vacant building or structure for a vacant building permit shall be made on
46
a form provided by the Zoning Administrator27. Applicants shall disclose all
measures to be taken to ensure that the building will be kept weather-tight and secure
from trespassers, safe for entry by police officers and firefighters in times of exigent
circumstances or emergency, and together with its premises be free from nuisance
and in good order in conformance with the building owner obligations (see Section 6-
5).
b) The application shall include a "statement of intent." The statement of intent shall
include but not necessarily be limited to information as to the expected period of
vacancy (including the date of vacancy), the plan for regular maintenance during the
vacancy to comply with the maintenance safety requirements of this subsection, and a
plan and timeline for the lawful occupancy, rehabilitation or removal or demolition of
the structure.
c) Upon and at the time of application, the owner of a vacant building or structure shall
arrange for an inspection of the premises by the Health Officer and the appropriate
police and fire officials. The purpose of such inspection is to determine and ensure
the structural integrity of the building, the repairs necessary to ensure its structural
integrity, that it will be safe for entry by police officers and firefighters in times of
exigent circumstances or emergency, that the building and its contents do not present
a hazard to the public during the time that the building or structure remains vacant,
and that the building or structure is following the standards of this Ordinance.28
d) If the Health Officer has reason to believe that an emergency situation exists tending
to create an immediate danger to the health, safety or welfare of the general public, no
notification or warrant shall be necessary and the Health Officer29 shall enter and
inspect the premises pursuant to Section 6-7 of this Ordinance.
e) The Zoning Administrator30 shall provide the Health Officer and the 31St. Johnsbury
Police Department or the Vermont State Police with copies of vacant building permits
at the time of issuance.
f) If the owner of the vacant building or structure fails or refuses to consent to an
inspection, the Health Officer may seek a search warrant from the Vermont District
Court for the purpose of determining and ensuring the structural integrity of the
building, the repairs necessary to ensure its structural integrity, that it will be safe for
entry by police officers and firefighters in times of exigent circumstances or
emergency, that the building and its contents do not present a hazard to the public
during the time that the building remains vacant, and that the building and structure is
in compliance with the standards of this Ordinance.
g) The Health Officer, upon inspection, shall issue any order for work needed to:
27 Changed from Health Officer to Zoning Administrator Oct. 24, 2017; no petitions were filed.
28 Language amended for clarity Oct. 24, 2017; no petitions were filed.
29 Changed from Building Inspector to Health Officer 10/24/17.
30 Changed from Health Officer to Zoning Administrator 10/24/17.
31 Added Health Officer 10/24/17.
47
1) Adequately protect the building from intrusion by trespassers and from
deterioration by the weather in accordance with the standards set forth in this
Ordinance.
2) Ensure that allowing the building to remain will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety and welfare, will not unreasonably interfere with the reasonable and
lawful use and enjoyment of other premises within the neighborhood, and will not
pose an extraordinary hazard to police officers or firefighters entering the
premises in times of emergency.
3) When issuing such orders, the Town Health Officer shall specify the time for
completion of the work. The Order shall act as an interim vacant building permit,
the duration of which shall be for the time set forth in the Town Health Officer’s
order. No interim permit shall be effective for a period of more than ninety (90)
days. All work done pursuant to this article shall be done in compliance with the
applicable building, fire prevention, and zoning statutes and ordinances.
4) The Zoning Administrator32 shall issue a vacant building permit upon his or her
satisfaction that the building has been inspected and is in compliance with the
standards set forth in this Ordinance, and that the building 33is adequately
protected from intrusion by trespassers and from deterioration by the weather.
This permit shall be effective for a period of three hundred sixty-five (365) days.
5) A vacant building or structure shall be deemed adequately protected from
intrusion by trespassers and from deterioration by the weather if it satisfies the
building maintenance standards in Section 6-5(A) of this Ordinance.
Sec. 6-11. FEES.34
a) A fee, set by the Select Board may be charged for a vacant building permit or interim
permit. This fee may also be charged upon the renewal of such permits. Any fees are
to be paid at the time of application or renewal. No permit shall be issued if there are
outstanding fees.
b) Upon a showing that the building or structure is being actively marketed for sale or
lease and maintained pursuant to its vacant building permit or renewal thereof, the
Zoning Administrator shall waive any fees for a period of twelve (12) months from
the time the fee first becomes due. This waiver may be extended for an additional
year for such buildings only if the owner (i) continues to show that the building or
structure is being actively marketed for sale and maintained and (ii) discloses the
details of how the building was actively marketed for sale during the waiver year (i.e.,
offers, appraisals, or consultants engaged). Upon the expiration of the initial twelvemonth
period or its extension, the fee may be charged.
32 Changed from Town Health Officer to Zoning Administrator 10/24/17.
33 Language amended for clarity 10/24/17.
34 Amended to take out set fees 10/24/17.
48
c) When a building is in need of substantial rehabilitation (see Sec. 6-3 (f)), as
determined by the Health Officer, to comply with the obligations and standards set
forth in this Ordinance, the owner must: (a) develop and submit a statement of intent,
scope of work which meets the applicable building and zoning standards and the
obligations and standards set forth in this article, and a reasonable schedule for the
completion of the work, approved by the Health Officer, and (b) secure all necessary
building and zoning permits.
d) If an owner has secured all the duly required permits to demolish the building or
structure, fees may be waived.
Sec. 6-12. REPEAL OF PRIOR CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.
The enactment of this Ordinance shall repeal all other ordinances of the Town of St.
Johnsbury that regulate the topics addressed herein.
Sec. 6-13. SEVERABILITY.
If any section of this Ordinance is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such finding shall not invalidate any other part of this Ordinance.
Sec. 6-14. EFFECTIVE DATE.
This Ordinance shall become effective upon its adoption by the Town of S t. Johnsbury
Select Board in accordance with 24A V.S.A. Ch. 11, § 11.
Secs. 6-15--6-25. RESERVED.
49
ARTICLE II. HOUSING CODE35
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 6-26. PURPOSE36
It is hereby found that there exist, and may in the future exist within the town, dwellings,
dwelling units, rooming units or parts thereof which by reason of their structure, equipment,
sanitation, maintenance, use or occupancy affect adversely the public health, including the
physical, mental and social well-being of persons and families, safety and general welfare. To
correct and prevent the existence of such adverse conditions and to achieve and maintain such
levels of residential environmental quality as will protect and promote public health, safety and
general welfare, it is further found that the establishment and enforcement of minimum housing
standards are required.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §4-01)
Sec. 6-27. SCOPE37
(a) The housing code shall apply to residential premises as follows:
(1) All multiple dwelling units located in the town and including those structures
known as rooming houses;
(2) Residential buildings, including two-family dwellings, except as specifically
excluded in subsection (b) below;
(3) Residential occupancies in buildings of mixed occupancy; and
(4) Accessory structures to residential occupancies (ex. laundry rooms, garages, etc.).
(b) The housing code shall not apply to rooms in motels and hotels which are not occupied as
dwelling units.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §§ 4-02, 4-03)
Sec. 6-28. APPLICATION.
Where a provision of the housing code is found to be in conflict with a provision of a zoning,
building, electrical, plumbing, fire, safety, health, water supply or sewage disposal law or
ordinance or other local or state law or ordinance, the provisions or requirement which is the
more restrictive or which establishes the higher standard shall prevail.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §4-04)
35 Cross references-Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 5; utilities, Ch. 13.
36 State law reference-Similar provision, 24 V.S.A. 5001.
37 State law references-Municipal housing code, 24 V.S.A. 5001 et seq.; fair housing, 9 V.S.A. 4503 et seq.
50
Sec. 6-29. INTENT.
(a) Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the
town to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement under any town
ordinance or law.
(b) Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article, fails to comply with any
order made under the housing code from which he does not appeal or who fails to comply with a
decision made on appeal, upon conviction, shall be fined as provided by section 1-13. The fact
that a fine has been imposed for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to
continue. It is a separate offense to violate a provision of this article or fail to comply with an
order, as aforesaid, after the first offense, each day the violation or failure to comply is
continued. A violation of this section of the code shall not be construed to prevent the
imposition of the penalties provided in section 6-9(c).
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §3-09)
Sec. 6-30. RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS.
(a) Responsibilities of owners shall be the same as set forth in the state health regulations,
Chapter 5, Environmental Health, subchapter 16, Rental Housing Health Code under
Responsibilities of Owners, General, Sanitation Utilities, Transfer of Responsibilities.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, § 13-01)
(b) Notify the Zoning Administrator of any rental unit changes of information as defined in
Article IV of this Chapter.38
Sec. 6-31. RESPONSIBILITIES OF OCCUPANTS.
(a) No occupant shall use or occupy his dwelling unit in such a way as to cause
noncompliance with this article. More particularly, the occupant shall be responsible for
compliance with the housing code as to:
(1) Limiting occupancy of that part of the premises which he occupies or controls to the
maximum which may be established by the housing code;
(2) Maintenance of that part of the premises which he occupies or controls in a clean,
sanitary, and safe condition;
(3) Damage done by his visitors;
(4) Keeping exits from his dwelling unit clear and unencumbered;
(5) Disposal of garbage and refuse into provided facilities in a clean and sanitary manner,
(6) If pets are allowed by landlord, the occupant must keep his or her domestic animals
and pets in and appropriate manner and under control.
(b) If the occupant does not adhere to the above, is found to be in violation of any section of
this article by the health officer, or neglects to comply with an order of the health officer within
the time prescribed, the landlord shall have cause to evict the occupant, in accordance with 12
V.S.A. 4761 et seq. and 12 V.S.A. 4851 et seq.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §13-02)
38 Added 10/24/17; no petitions were filed.
51
Sec. 6-32. LANDLORD EVICTION PROCEDURES.
No landlord shall be authorized to use self-help measures in an effort to evict a tenant, and a
landlord who locks a tenant out of his or her apartment, physically removes a tenant or his or her
belongings from the apartment, or terminates supplied utilities (such as water, heat, electricity) to
a tenant's apartment without a court order authorizing him to do so shall be charged with a
misdemeanor and fined as provided by law.
(Ord. of 12-11-78 § 13-03)
Sec. 6-33. CONFLICT OF PROVISIONS.
To the extent that there is any inconsistency or conflict between the provisions of this housing
code and the Rental Housing Health Code promulgated by the state department of health, the
latter shall govern. In the event that the State Rental Housing Health Code contains a provision
which is more stringent than that provided by this housing code, the applicable provisions of the
State Rental Housing Health Code shall control.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §13-04)
Secs. 6-34--6-45. RESERVED.
DIVISION 2. ADMINISTRATION39
Sec. 6-46. HOUSING BOARD OF REVIEW.
There is hereby established a housing board of review as provided by 24 V.S.A. 5005. The
housing board of review shall be appointed by the board of selectmen. The housing board of
review shall have such powers and responsibilities, and shall be governed by the procedures set
forth in 24 V.S. A. 5005.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §3-07)
Sec. 6-47. ENFORCEMENT.
This article shall be administered and enforced by the Code Compliance Officer40 and such
other persons as the board of health may from time to time designate, under the general
supervision of the board of selectmen, acting in their capacity as the board of health.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §3-01)
39 Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2.
40 Changed housing inspector to Code Compliance Officer 10/24/17.
52
Sec. 6-48. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CODE COMPLIANCE OFFICER41
In addition to any other powers and duties of the Code Compliance Officer, he shall:
(a) Make inspections, by request of a landlord or tenant, of all premises in the town within the
scope of this housing code;
(b) Issue, in writing, notices directing the remedying of conditions found to exist in or on any
premises not conforming with the requirements of this housing code;
(c) Keep a record of all inspections, complaints and violations found in the course of
performing his duties;
(d) Cooperate with other municipal, governmental and private agencies engaged in the study
of improvement of housing conditions.
(e) All inspections and enforcement shall be conducted in accordance with Article III: Code
Compliance and Enforcement.42
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §3-02)
Sec. 6-49. LIABILITY.
Except as otherwise provided for by state or local law or ordinance, no officer, agent or
employee of the town charged with the enforcement of the housing code shall render himself
personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act
required or permitted in the discharge of his duties in the enforcement of the housing code nor
shall he be liable for damages hereunder unless he acted with actual malice and without probable
cause for believing that the person charged with having violated this housing code was guilty of
an unlawful act or omission.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §3-06)
Secs. 6-50--6-65. RESERVED.43
DIVISION 3. STANDARDS
Sec. 6-66. HOUSING CODE ADOPTED.
There is hereby adopted a housing code for the town by authority of 24 V.S.A. 5001 et seq.
enabling municipalities to adopt local housing codes.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §1-01)
41 Changed housing inspector to Code Compliance Officer 10/24/17.
42 Added 10/24/17.
43 Sec. 6-50 –6-53 moved to Article III 10/24/17.
53
Sec. 6-67. GENERAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO HOUSING.
(a) The Health Officer44 may determine that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation, if he
finds that conditions exist in such dwelling which:
(1) Are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of such dwelling,
the occupants of neighboring dwellings or other residents of the town; or
(2) Do not comply with or meet the standards or requirements of the housing code.
(b) Conditions mentioned in subsection (a) above may include any or all of the following:
(1) Defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities;
(2) Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities;
(3) Dilapidation;
(4) Disrepair;
(5) Structural defects;
(6) Un-cleanliness.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §2-01, 2-02)
Sec. 6-68. HABITABLE SPACE-LIGHT AND VENTILATION.
(a) Habitable space shall be provided with natural light through one (1) or more windows,
skylights, transparent or translucent panels, or any combinations thereof, that face directly on
legal open spaces, at least six (6) inches above the adjoining finished grade. A legal open space
must admit an amount of light equivalent to that transmitted through clear glass equal in area to
ten (10) percent of the floor area of the habitable space.
(b) Habitable space shall be provided with artificial light fixtures, as provided in section 2.2
of the State Rental Housing Health Code.
(c) Habitable space shall be provided with natural ventilation through open able parts of
windows or other openings in exterior walls that face legal open spaces above the adjoining
finished grade, or through open able parts of skylights, providing total clear ventilation area
equal to not less than five (5) percent of the total floor area of each habitable space.
(d) Habitable space may also be provided with mechanical ventilation in addition to natural
ventilation.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §5-01)
Sec. 6-69. SAME-MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS.
(a) Dwelling units shall be separated from each other and from other spaces outside the
dwelling unit. Lodging units shall be separated from each other and from other spaces outside
the lodging unit.
(b) A communal kitchen or dining room in a lodging house shall be accessible to the
occupants sharing such kitchen or dining room without going through a sleeping room or a
44 Inspector changed to Health Officer 10/24/17.
54
lodging unit.
(c) It shall be prohibited to use habitable space or public space for sleeping purposes.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §6-01)
Sec. 6-70. PUBLIC SPACE-HEIGHT.
Public space shall have minimum height of seven (7) feet measured from finished floor to
finished ceiling.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §6-01)
Sec. 6-71. SAME-LIGHT AND VENTILATION.
(a) Public space shall be provided with functional artificial light fixtures.
(b) In public stairs, stairways, and passageways artificial light shall be electric lighting
available at all times so as to afford safe passage for occupants and users.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §6-02)
Sec. 6-72. NON-INHABITABLE SPACE; HEIGHT.
Non-inhabitable space, except crawl spaces, attics, closets, locker, storage, utility heater,
boiler room and other spaces for service and maintenance of building, in multiple dwelling shall
have over fifty (50) percent of the floor areas, a minimum height of seven (7) feet measured from
floor to ceiling.
(Ord. 12-11-78, §7-01)
Sec. 6-73. TOILET ROOMS AND BATHROOMS.
(a) Toilet rooms and bathrooms in all dwelling units subject to this chapter shall have
provisions for privacy.
(b) Unless located within dwelling units or directly connected with sleeping rooms, toilet
rooms and bathrooms in multiple dwellings shall be provided in each story containing habitable
space and shall be accessible thereto.
(c) In all dwelling units subject to provisions of this article, toilet rooms and bathrooms shall
be provided with floors impervious to water and easily cleanable.
(d) All doors to bathroom and toilet compartments, except in a dwelling unit, shall have locks
in operable condition to assure privacy.
(Ord. 12-11-78, §7-02)
55
Sec. 6-74. LIGHT AND VENTILATION IN CERTAIN OTHER AREAS.
(a) Kitchenettes, bathrooms, and toilet rooms shall be provided with artificial light fixtures
appropriate for the use of such rooms.
(b) Laundry rooms, furnace rooms, and similar non-inhabitable space shall be provided with
artificial light fixtures appropriate for the intended use of such rooms.
(c) Stairs shall be provided with functional artificial light fixtures to allow safe ascent or
descent.
(d) Kitchenettes, bathrooms, and toilet rooms shall be provided with ventilation in accordance
with either of the following:
(1) Natural ventilation shall be as required for habitable space; mechanical ventilation, if
provided, shall be equivalent to required natural ventilation.
(2) Any combination of natural and mechanical ventilation which meets the requirements
set forth for natural ventilation shall be adequate.
(e) Ventilation shall be provided in unheated attics, spaces below flat roofs, and crawl spaces.
Location and net areas of ventilation openings shall be such as to minimize deterioration of
structural members from condensation or other causes, in conformity with generally accepted
standards.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §7-03)
Sec. 6-75. EXITS.
(a) Safe, continuous and unobstructed exits shall be provided from the interior of the building
to the exterior at street or grade level.
(b) Exits shall be arranged, constructed and proportioned so that occupants may escape safely
from the building in case of emergency.
(c) In all dwellings subject to the provisions of this article in addition to a primary exit from
the building, there shall be provided a secondary exit or, in lieu thereof, one (1) or more exit
openings for emergency use.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §8-01)
Sec. 6-76. CONSTRUCTION, INSTALLATION, AND MAINTENANCE OF STRUCTURAL
ELEMENTS.
The provisions as required under Vermont Health Regulations, Chapter 5, Environmental
Health, subchapter 16, Rental Housing Health Code under Construction, Installation and
Maintenance of Structural Elements are hereby adopted by reference.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §9-01)
56
Sec. 6-77. INSECTS AND RODENTS PROTECTION.
The provisions under Vermont Health Regulations, Chapter 5, Environmental Health,
subchapter 16, Rental Housing Health Codes under Insects and Rodents are hereby adopted by
reference.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §9-02)
Sec. 6-78. FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS-PROHIBITED ACCUMULATIONS AND STORAGE45
(a) It shall be prohibited:
(1) To accumulate or store on residential premises, except in approved locations, any
highly flammable or explosive matter, such as paints, volatile oils, cleaning fluids, and
similar materials or any combustible refuse liable to spontaneous combustion, such as
waste paper, boxes, rags or similar materials; or
(2) To accumulate or store materials on fire escapes or stairs, in stairways or
passageways, at doors or windows or in any other locations where in the event of fire
such materials may obstruct egress of occupants or interfere with firefighting operations.
(b) Fuel oil, gas and other combustible fuel materials shall be stored in accordance with
regulations issued by the state Fire Protection Division and enforced by the town fire department.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §10-01)
Sec. 6-79. PREVENTION OF FIRES.
(a) Walls and ceilings shall be maintained free from cracks and openings which would permit
flame or excessive heat to enter the concealed space.
(b) In buildings of mixed occupancy, nonresidential space shall be separated from residential
space by approved fire separations which will retard the spread of fire.
(c) Garages in or attached to a residential building shall be separated from other spaces in the
buildings by approved fire separations which will retard the spread of fire and prevent flammable
or toxic vapors originating within the garage from being transmitted to other parts of the
building.
(Ord. of 12-11-78,§ 10-02)
Sec. 6-80. INTERIOR FINISHES, TRIM AND DECORATIVE MATERIALS.
Interior finish materials for acoustical correction, surface insulation and decorative treatment on
the surfaces of walls and ceilings and interior trim shall be of materials that will not, in burning,
give off excessive amounts of smoke or objectionable gases.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, § 10-02)
45 Cross reference-Fire prevention and protection, ch.5
57
Sec. 6-81. FIREPLACES AND WOODSTOVES.
(a) Fireplaces, woodstoves, and similar construction used, or intended to be used, for burning
fuel in open fires shall be connected to approved chimneys and shall be installed so that nearby
or adjacent combustible material and structural members shall not be heated to unsafe
temperatures.
(b) Hearths and lining or other parts of fireplaces and woodstoves exposed directly to flame
shall be of materials that will not melt, disintegrate, spall or shatter at high temperatures.
(c) Wood mantels and trim on fireplaces shall be placed and attached so that they cannot be
heated to unsafe temperatures or ignited by sparks or embers from the fire.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, § 10-04)
Sec. 6-82. OTHER FIRE REGULATIONS.
In addition to the standards set forth in this division, the rules and regulations promulgated by the
state department of labor and industry, fire prevention division, and enforceable by the town fire
department and the fire code shall govern in all matters of fire safety.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, § 10-05)
Sec. 6-83. EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
(a) Plumbing, heating, electrical, ventilating air conditioning, refrigerating, cooking, fire
protection and radiation production equipment, elevators dumbwaiters, escalators, and other
mechanical additions, installations, or systems for the use of the building, if installed shall be
located and maintained so that under normal conditions of use such equipment and systems will
not be a danger to health or welfare, a danger because of structural defects, a source of ignition,
or a radiation hazard, and will not create excessive noise, or otherwise become a nuisance.
Equipment and systems include, but are not limited to, apparatus, devices, fixtures, piping, pipe
hangers, pipe covering, wiring, fittings, and materials used as part of or in connection with such
installations.
(b) Equipment and systems subject to damage from freezing shall be adequately protected
against freezing.
(c) Moving parts of equipment which may be a potential hazard shall be guarded to protect
against accidental contact.
(d) Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility, and chimney and smokepipe shall be
constructed and installed so that it will function safely and effectively.
(Ord. 12-11-78, §11-01)
58
Sec. 6-84. HEALTH REQUIREMENTS.
Any dwelling unit, rooming unit or other habitation subject to the provisions of this article which
is rented shall comply with the minimum standards found in state health regulations, Chapter 5,
Environmental Health, subchapter 16, Rental Housing Health Code, under Sanitation Facilities.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, § 11-02)
Sec. 6-85. ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS.
The owner shall have electricity available for every dwelling unit, dwelling, rooming house or
rooming unit as provided in the state health regulations, Chapter 5, Environmental Health,
subchapter 16, Rental Housing Health Code, under Lighting.
(Ord. of 12-11-78 § 11-03)
Sec. 6-86. HEATING.
Standards for heating shall be the same as those found in the state health regulations, Chapter 5,
Environmental Health, subchapter 16, Rental Housing Health Code, under Heating.
(Ord. 12-11-78, § 11-04)
Sec. 6-87. SMOKE CONTROL.
Fuel-burning heat producing equipment shall be installed and maintained so that the emission or
discharge into the atmosphere of smoke, dust, particles, odors or other products of combustion
will not create a nuisance or be detrimental to the health, comfort, safety or property of any
person.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, § 11-05)
Sec. 6-88. PROHIBITED LOCATIONS FOR HEAT PRODUCING EQUIPMENT.
Fuel-burning water heaters shall not be located in sleeping rooms.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §11-06)
Sec. 6-89. PLUMBING FACILITIES IN MULTIPLE DWELLINGS AND ROOMING HOUSES.
Where multiple dwelling or rooming houses contain sleeping accommodations arranged as
individual rooms or suites, for each multiple of six (6) sleeping rooms or fraction thereof, there
shall be provided plumbing fixtures consisting of at least one (1) toilet, one (1) sink, and one (1)
bathtub or shower.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §11-07)
59
Sec. 6-90. GAS FUEL.
Fuel gas piping systems, valves and gas appliances shall be installed and maintained in
compliance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the state department of labor and
industry, fire prevention division and enforceable by the town fire department and the fire code.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §11-08)
Sec. 6-91. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
Residential premises shall be maintained in conformity with the provisions of this article so as
to assure the desirable residential character of the property.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §12-01)
Sec. 6-92. MAINTENANCE OF OPEN AREAS.
(a) Surface and subsurface water shall be appropriately drained to protect buildings and
structures and to prevent development of stagnant ponds.
(b) Fences and other minor constructions shall be maintained in safe and substantial
condition.
(c) Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces, and similar paved areas shall be maintained by
either occupant or owner so as to afford safe passage under normal use and weather conditions.
(d) Yards and courts shall be kept clean and free of physical hazards by either owner or
occupant.
(e) Heavy undergrowth and accumulations of plant growth which are noxious or detrimental
to health or area fire hazard shall not be permitted on the grounds surrounding a dwelling.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §12-02)
Sec. 6-93. MAINTENANCE OF BUILDING STRUCTURES.
(a) Exterior wood surfaces of buildings and structures that are not inherently resistant to
deterioration shall be periodically treated with a protective coating of paint or other suitable
preservative.
(b) Residential buildings shall be maintained in clean and sanitary condition, and free of
conditions detrimental to safety or health, by occupant, and/or landlord, as applicable.
60
(c) No lead-based paint shall be used in painting the interior or exterior of any dwelling unit.
(d) Accessory structures shall be maintained so as to be free of conditions detrimental to
safety or health.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §12-03)
Sec. 6-94. INFESTATION PREVENTION; SCREENING.
(a) Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect, vermin and rodent
harborage and infestation. Methods used for exterminating insects, vermin and rodents shall
conform to generally accepted professional practice.
(b) Where the potential for rodent or vermin infestation exists, windows and other openings
in basements and cellars shall be appropriately screened with wire mesh or other suitable
materials.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §12-04)
Sec 6-95. Garbage and refuse storage and collection.
(a) Adequate sanitary facilities and methods shall be used for the collection, storage,
handling and disposal of garbage and refuse.
(b) In multiple dwellings, it shall be prohibited to store or accumulate garbage or refuse in
public halls and stairways.
(c) In multiple dwellings, by agreement between landlord and occupant, receptacles for
disposal of garbage and refuse shall be provided and arrangements made for its removal, in
accord with the state rental housing health code.
(d) In multiple dwellings, garbage disposal facilities and outside storage shall be screened
from view of any public access or roadway.46
(Ord. of 12-11-78, § 12-05)
46 (d) added 10/24/17; no petitions were filed.
61
Article III -- Housing Code Compliance and Enforcement47
DIVISION 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 6-96. AUTHORITY.
The Select Board has enacted this Ordinance under the authority granted to the Town
through its Charter and under the authority granted to all Vermont municipalities under Title
24 Vermont Statutes Annotated (V.S.A.), Chapter 123, and 9 V.S.A. Chapter 77, to regulate
Municipal Housing Codes.
Sec. 6-97. PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety, and
welfare of all citizens of the Town of St. Johnsbury through establishment of an office for code
compliance. The intent of this Ordinance is to establish an inspection process that will ensure
that rental units throughout the Town meet the standards outlined in Article II, Division
3.Standards (Sections 6-16—6-95). Additionally, this Ordinance establishes a complaint process
that is equitable to both the landlord and tenant alike.
Sec. 6-98. FIRE CODE ADOPTED.
The Town hereby adopts the most recent edition of the Vermont Building & Safety Code, as
adopted by the Vermont Department of Safety, for the purposes of establishing rules and
regulations as the minimum fire safety requirements for all rental units.
Sec. 6-99. SEVERABILITY.
If any section of this Ordinance is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such finding shall not invalidate any other part of this Ordinance.
Sec. 6-100. EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCE.
This Ordinance shall become effective upon its adoption by the Town of St.
Johnsbury Select Board in accordance with 24A V.S.A. Ch. 11, § 11.
Sec. 6-101. DESIGNATION OF EFFECT.
This Ordinance shall constitute a civil ordinance within the meaning of 24 V.S.A. Chapter
123.
47 Article III added 10/24/17; revised from Ch. 6.50-53; no petitions were filed.
62
Sec. 6-102. DEFINITIONS.
.
For the purposes of this chapter, definitions of the terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall be as defined in Section 6-3 of the Town of St. Johnsbury Code of Civil
Ordinances. Otherwise, the following listed words shall have the meanings indicated:
OWNER OCCUPIED: A property in which the owner has established primary residency.
DWELLING UNIT: A building or a part of a building that is used as a home or residence,
with one or more rooms including kitchen designed as a unit for occupancy by one family for
the purpose of cooking, living and sleeping or, having one or more rooms used as sleeping units
with shared access to common areas including a kitchen designed to accommodate unrelated
individuals for the purpose of cooking, living and sleeping
RENTAL UNIT: A dwelling unit that is not owner occupied, and is occupied for longer
than thirty (30) consecutive days; including but not limited to occupancies at hotels, motels,
homeless shelters and other accommodations.
RENTAL AGREEMENT: All agreements, written or oral, embodying terms and conditions
concerning the use and occupancy of a dwelling unit or premises.
RENT: All considerations to be made to or for the benefit of the owner under the rental
agreement, not including security deposits.
TENANT: Any person entitled under a rental agreement to occupy a dwelling unit to the
exclusion of others, or any persons occupying a rental unit as a permanent residence.
DIVISION 2. ADMINISTRATION, APPEALS AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 6-103. DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE CODE COMPLIANCE OFFICER.
(a) The St. Johnsbury Town Manager shall appoint the Town Health Officer and a Code
Compliance Officer who shall hereby be authorized and directed to administer and enforce the
provisions of the adopted Housing codes;
(b) The Town Health Officer and the Code Compliance Officer shall have the authority
to render interpretations of the codes. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in
compliance with the intent of the adopted codes and 24 V.S.A. Chapter 123;
(c) The Code Compliance Officer may delegate this authority to any trained inspector.
Sec. 6-104. RESPONSIBIITIES OF THE CODE COMPLIANCE OFFICER.
(a) The Town of St. Johnsbury Code Compliance Officer shall be responsible for the
administration of this Ordinance;
63
(b) The Code Compliance Officer may enter, examine and survey all rental units that are
subject to routine, complaint-based, and emergency inspections of this Ordinance in accordance
with Section 6-111 Inspection Procedures;
(c) The routine inspection schedule will be set by the Town Manager.
Sec. 6-105. WRITTEN DOCUMENTATION AND ISSUED ORDERS.
(a) Where an inspection indicates that a violation of this Ordinance exists, the Code
Compliance Officer shall issue written documentation notifying the party responsible of the
existence of the violation(s) and the measure(s) required to correct or eliminate it. At the
direction of the Code Compliance Officer, the documentation may require the violations to be
corrected, or significant action taken to begin corrections, within a defined number of business
days or require that the premises be vacated and secured until the rental unit meets the
standards of this chapter. The written documentation shall be based on a finding that the
premises are a danger to the health, welfare or safety of the tenants or the general public and a
violation of the Minimum Housing Standards. Written documentation may further direct:
(1) That the rental unit(s) be repaired so that they meet the standards of this
chapter;
(2) That the rental unit is unfit or unsafe for human habitation because it
constitutes an imminent danger to the health, welfare and safety of the tenants or the
general public, and the rental unit be vacated and secured until the unit is repaired so
that it meets the standards of this chapter;
(3) That the rental unit is unfit for human habitation because it constitutes a
danger to the health, welfare, or safety of the tenants or the general public, and that the
rental unit be demolished pursuant to the provision of § VSA 24-3114.
(b) When the responsible party has failed to take corrective action of any written
documentation, an Order may be issued by the Code Compliance Officer. The written Order
shall state:
(1) That a violation exists;
(2) The measure(s) required to correct or eliminate the violation(s);
(3) A compliance date for which such violation(s) shall be corrected;
(4) Appeal rights;
(5) Penalties for non-compliance.
(c)When the Code Compliance Officer investigates, and issues an Order, such Order
shall be sent to the owner, and if applicable, the tenant of the rental unit;
(d) Orders shall be sent by one or more of the following means:
? United States Postal Service (USPS) Certified Mail Return Receipt Requested; or
? Hand Delivery.
(e) Orders become effective immediately if hand-delivered. If mailed, the Order will take
effect three (3) business days from the date the Order is issued;
64
(f) An Order shall be recorded in the municipal land records, and the Order shall
thereby be effective against any purchaser, mortgagee, attaching creditor, lien holder or other
person whose claim or interest in the property arises after the recording of the Order;
(g) When an Order is cured and any related assessed penalties are paid, the Zoning
Administrator shall record an Order removal or cancellation in the municipal land records.
Sec. 6-106. DWELLINGS UNFIT FOR HABITATION, ETC. PROCEDURE FOR ABATEMENT.
(a) Whenever it appears to the Code Compliance Officer that any dwelling is unfit for
human habitation or that a violation of the housing code exists, the Code Compliance Officer
shall, if the preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, give written notice of
violations to the owner and all parties in interest in such premises and specify a reasonable time
for the correction thereof. If the matter is not corrected, the Code Compliance Officer shall issue
and cause to be served upon the owner and parties in interest in such premises a complaint
stating the charges and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the Housing Board
of Review pertaining to the complaint. A copy of the complaint shall be filed with the town
attorney and the town manager.
(b) If after such hearing, the Housing Board of Review (HBR) determines that the
dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation or that a violation of the housing
code exists, the HBR shall state in writing the findings of fact in support of such determination
and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order to repair or close the
dwelling within the time specified in the order.
(c) If the owner fails to comply with an order issued by the Housing Board of Review
under the provisions of this section, to repair or close a dwelling, the owner shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in Section 6.108 Enforcement and Penalties.
(Ord. of 12-11-78, §3-04)
Sec. 6-107. APPEALS.
(a) Written notice of appeal shall be submitted to the Housing Board of Review within
ten (10) business days of the date of the Order(s);
(b) The Housing Board of Review as provided in 24 V.S.A. 5005 shall review the appeal
and all related documentation and make a written determination within twenty (20) business
days of receipt of an appeal;
(c) The aggrieved party may further appeal to the Select Board within seven (7) business
days of the date of the Housing Board of Review findings in accordance with 24 VSA §5005;
(d) Any person including the enforcement officer aggrieved by any decision of the Select
Board may appeal to Superior Court, in accordance with 24 V.S.A. §5506;
(e) When an owner/tenant appeals an action of the Code Compliance Officer, the Code
Compliance Officer shall not be prevented from completing the inspection of the rental unit and
issuing any necessary Orders. When an appeal is filed, the Orders issued will be stayed
pending resolution of the appeal, unless the Orders issued are to correct life-threatening issues
which will not be stayed.
65
Sec. 6-108. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
(a) The Code Compliance Officer and/or his delegates or any certified Vermont Law
Enforcement Officer shall be the designated Enforcement Officer. They shall issue, or direct to
have issued, Municipal Complaints and pursue enforcement before the Judicial Bureau in
accordance with the provisions of 24 VSA §1974a and §1977 with penalties as prescribed below:
(1) The Code Compliance Officer shall be required to issue an Order on the
person or party responsible for any violations of this Ordinance or the adopted codes.
Where the party fails to remedy a violation to the satisfaction of the Code Compliance
Officer, the Code Compliance Officer may bring appropriate action to enforce the
provisions of this Ordinance. Enforcement may be by any means allowed under state
law including, but not limited to:
(a) First offense. A first offense of this Ordinance shall be punishable by a
fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00); the waiver fine shall be $50 dollars ($50.00);
(b) Second and subsequent offenses. Any second offense of the same
provision of the bylaws within a twelve-month period shall be punishable by a
fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00); the waiver fine shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00).
(2) The Code Compliance Officer may notify the Town Attorney who shall bring
suit in the name of the municipality to enforce such Order. Such suit may be brought in
any court of competent jurisdiction appropriate. The Town may seek a temporary
injunction or Order in any such proceedings. The court may award costs of suit
including reasonable attorney fees.
(b) Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense;
(c) Where the Code Compliance Officer finds that a violation(s) is to such a degree that a
dwelling is declared unsafe, or that significant corrective action has not been taken within the
timeframe provided, the Office may suspend occupancy (“Order”) of a unit (or units) and
require the relocation of the rental unit’s occupants until such time as the rental units meet the
Housing Codes as outlined in this Ordinance.
Sec. 6-109. FEES.
The rates for any inspection fee shall be designated by the Town Manager and adopted
by the Select Board, and upon adoption of the rates, the Select Board shall publish in the local
newspaper the rate change thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of the rate change;
Sec. 6-110. RECORDS.
(a) Records, including inspection reports, records of complaints or other Orders shall be
available for public inspection at the Zoning Administrator’s Office;
(b) Owners and/or a designated managing agent shall receive a copy of the inspection
report within ten (10) business days of the completion of the inspection. Inspection reports shall
be emailed to the designated recipient unless paper copies are requested or the recipient does
not use email;
66
(c)To obtain copies of inspection reports, records of complaints or other Orders, requests
must be made in writing to the Zoning Administrator and the designated records fee paid in
full.
DIVISION 3. PROCEDURES
Sec. 6-111. INSPECTION PROCEDURES.
(a) Inspection requirements are for fire and life safety requirements only, as adopted by
the Vermont Department of Safety;
(b) The Code Compliance Officer shall make periodic inspections of all registered rental
units within the Town;
(c) The Code Compliance Officer may enter, examine and survey all rental units within
the Town that are subject to periodic inspections pursuant to this Ordinance at any reasonable
time between the hours of 8 am to 5 pm, or a time that is mutually agreed upon between the
owner and the Code Compliance Officer;
(d) The owner and tenant(s) shall cooperate with the Code Compliance Officer so that
such inspections shall be made so as to cause the least inconvenience to the owner(s) or
occupant(s) of the rental unit(s);
(e) If the Code Compliance Officer has reason to believe that an emergency situation
exists tending to create an immediate danger to the health, welfare, or safety of the tenants of a
rental unit, or the general public, they may enter, examine and survey the unit at any time;
(f) The Code Compliance Officer shall notify the owner of a rental unit by either
telephone or in writing of its intent to schedule an inspection;
(g) Upon receipt of an inspection schedule request, the owner or their agent shall contact
the Code Compliance Officer within fifteen (15) days to respond and to arrange the date and
time for the inspection;
(h) Once scheduled, the owner shall provide the tenant(s) with notice of an inspection
not less than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the actual inspection being performed, as provided
in 9 VSA §4460;
(i) During the inspection, the owner or their designated representative shall be present
to provide access to the rental unit(s);
(j) Failure to comply with inspection procedures is subject to the penalties set forth in
Section 6-108: Enforcement and Penalties.
Sec. 6-112. COMPLAINT PROCEDURES.
(a) It is expressly provided that the public, owners and tenants of any property in the
Town of St. Johnsbury may file a complaint to the Code Compliance Officer of violations under
this Ordinance and all such complaints shall be treated accordingly;
(b) To initiate a complaint against an owner or tenant, the complainant must first
complete and sign a Town of St. Johnsbury Code Complaint Form. A copy of which can be
67
found at the Town Clerk’s office, at the Zoning Administrator’s office or on the Town Website
www.stjvt.com. Complaints must be signed and dated in order to be investigated;
(c) The Code Compliance Officer shall investigate each complaint received within seven
(7) business days of its receipt to determine if violations exist and to commence corrective
actions;
(d) There shall be a written record of each complaint, the findings of the investigation
and the action taken, if any;
(e) If no action is required to be taken at the time of inspection, this finding shall be
noted on the written record and the complaint will be closed;
(f) Frivolous complaints shall be a violation of this Ordinance. A frivolous complaint
shall be one for which there is no good faith basis for the complaint outlined within this
Ordinance, and this is known to the complainant at the time.
Sec. 6-113. SPECIAL PROVISIONS; RELOCATION SERVICE.
If any person is displaced from a rental unit by enforcement of this chapter, the party
determined to have caused the unsafe condition shall be responsible for paying the cost of
relocation of the displaced person(s) at the most economical local facility available as approved
by the Town, for up to twenty-nine (29) days.
68
ARTICLE IV. HOUSING RENTAL UNIT REGISTRATION48
DIVISION 1 GENERALLY
Sec. 6-114. AUTHORITY.
The Select Board has enacted this Ordinance under the authority granted to the Town
through its Charter and under the authority granted to all Vermont municipalities under Title
24 Vermont Statutes Annotated (V.S.A.), Chapter 123, and 9 V.S.A. Chapter 77, to regulate
Municipal Housing Codes.
Sec. 6-115. PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety, and
welfare of all citizens of the Town of St. Johnsbury through establishment of enforceable
minimum rental housing standards. The intent of this Ordinance is to establish a Rental Unit
registration process through which the Town can fulfill an inspection process that will ensure
that rental units throughout the Town meet the standards outlined in Article II, Division 3
Minimum Housing Standards.
Sec. 6-116. SEVERABILITY.
If any section of this Ordinance is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such finding shall not invalidate any other part of this Ordinance.
Sec. 6-117. EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCE.
This Ordinance shall become effective upon its adoption by the Town of St.
Johnsbury Select Board in accordance with 24A V.S.A. Ch. 11, § 11.
Sec. 6-118. DESIGNATION OF EFFECT.
This Ordinance shall constitute a civil ordinance within the meaning of 24 V.S.A. Chapter
123.
Sec. 6-119. DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this chapter, definitions of the terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall be as defined in Section 6-3 and 6-102 of the Town of St. Johnsbury Code of
Civil Ordinances.
48 Article IV added 10/24/17; no petitions were filed.
69
DIVISION 2. REGISTRATION PROCEDURES.
Sec. 6-120. REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.
(a) The owners of all rental units, including motel and hotel manager units, and
extended stay rental units within hotels, motels, or other buildings, shall be required to have on
file with the Zoning Administrator current information including the following:
(1) The address of the building within which rental unit(s) exist;
(2) the name(s), address(es) and phone number(s) of the property owner(s);
(3) The name, address, and phone number of any managing agent;
(4) The name(s), address(es), and phone number(s) of any emergency contact(s)
for this building;
(5) The number of rental units at the building address and the identifier for each
unit (e.g. unit 1, 2, 3; unit A, B, C; unit 1a, 2a, 3a); and
(6) Any other information deemed appropriate to administer Chapter 6 Rental
Housing Minimum Standards Ordinance;
(b) The owner of any rental unit shall have a continuing obligation to notify the Zoning
Administrator of any changes in the information required above;
(c) Upon purchase or transfer of property containing rental units, the purchaser(s) shall
notify the Zoning Administrator within 30 days of transfer of ownership to ensure all
information is current and correct;
(d) Prior to occupancy of any newly constructed rental unit or conversion of use to a
rental unit, the owner shall notify the Zoning Administrator of information changes.
Sec. 6-121. EXEMPTIONS.
(a) The following properties shall be exempt from registration, fees and/or inspections:
(1) A unit that is currently maintained as part of a nursing, rest or convalescent
home licensed and inspected by the state;
(2) Owner occupied single family home;
(3) A rental unit that is occupied for less than thirty (30) consecutive days in a
calendar year;
(4) A rental unit that is occupied less than thirty consecutive (30) days by the
same tenant(s) and the rental unit is not the current primary residence of a tenant.
(b) An owner-occupied unit of multi-family dwelling is exempt from fees, but must still
register and be inspected for fire and life safety requirements only, as adopted by the Vermont
Department of Safety.
70
Sec. 6-122. RECORDS.
Records, including registration reports, inspection reports, and records of complaints or
other Orders shall be available for public inspection at the Zoning Administrator’s Office.
Sec. 6-123. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
A violation of this ordinance shall be a civil matter enforced in accordance with the
provisions of 24 V.S.A. §§ 1974a and 1977 et. Seq.
A. First offense $50.00 full penalty $25.00 waiver penalty
B. Second offense within 6 months $100.00 full penalty $50.00 waiver penalty
C. Third and subsequent offenses $200.00 full penalty $100.00 waiver penalty
within 6 months
Sec. 6-124. SEVERABILITY.
Each of the provisions of the ordinance is severable, and if any provision is held invalid for
any reason, the remaining provisions shall not be affected but shall remain in full force and
effect.
Sec. 6-125. EFFECTIVE DATE.
This Ordinance shall become effective upon its adoption by the Town of St.
Johnsbury Select Board in accordance with 24A V.S.A. Ch. 11, § 11.
71
Chapter 7: LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS49
Art. I. In General, §§7-1--7-30
Art. II. Amusements, §§ 7-31--7-120
Div. l. Generally, §§ 7-31--7-45
Div. 2. Dance Halls and Other Public Halls, §§ 7-46--7-60
Div. 3. Coin-Operated Amusement Machines and Places of Amusement, Sport or
Recreation, §§ 7-61--7-80
Div. 4. Bowling Alleys, Pool Rooms and Billiard Rooms, §§ 7-81--7-95
Div. 5. Theaters, §§ 7-96--7-120
Art. III. Automobile Service Stations, §§ 7-121--7-140
Art. IV. Food and Food Establishments, §§ 7-141--7-210
Div. 1. Generally, §§ 7-141--7-155
Div. 2. Butchers, Slaughterhouses, Etc., §§ 7-156--7-175
Div. 3. Grocery, Meat and Produce, Etc., Dealers, §§ 7-176--7-185
Div. 4. Restaurants, Cafes, Lunch Rooms, Etc., §§ 7-186--7-210
Art. V. Hotels, Motels, Rooming and Lodging Houses and Other Living Establishments,
§§ 7-211--7-270
Div. 1. Generally, §§ 7-211--7-255
Div. 2. Hotels, Motels, Rooming Houses, Etc., §§ 7-226--7-245
Div. 3. Campgrounds and Trailers, Mobile Homes and Recreational Vehicle Parks,
§§ 7-246--7-270
Art. VI. Peddlers, Solicitors, Itinerant Vendors, § 7-271
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 7-1. Required.
Repealed December 12, 1994 (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-2. Application.
Repealed December 12, 1994 (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-3. Issuance.
Repealed December 12, 1994 (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-4. Nontransferable; expiration.
Repealed December 12, 1994 (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-5. Inspection.
49 Cross references-Licensing of dogs required, § 3-28; certain occupations prohibited in the city, § 8-1; consumption
and possession of alcoholic beverages in public places restricted, § 8-5.
State law references-Junkyards, 24 V.S.A. 2067 et seq.; authority to regulate peddlers, transient vendors, circuses,
amusements, etc., 24 V.S.A. 2291; regulation of entertainment, 31 V.S.A. 401 et seq.
72
Repealed December 12, 1994(This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-6. Revocation.
Repealed December 12, 1994(This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-7. License required for livery stables and blacksmith shops; fee; restrictions.
Repealed December 12, 1994(This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-8. License required for sale of tobacco products; fee.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-9. License required for vehicles for hire; fee.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-10. Permit required for certain sales, shows, exhibits; fee.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-11. Location of vending and other machines restricted.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Cross reference- Coin-operated amusement machines, §7-61 et seq.
Secs. 7-12--7-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. AMUSEMENTS50
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 7-31--7-45. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. DANCE HALLS AND OTHER PUBLIC HALLS51
Sec. 7-46. Licenses required; restrictions; fee.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
50 State law references-Authority to regulate, 24 V.S.A. 2291; regulation of entertainment, 31 V.S.A. 401 et seq.
51 State law reference- Regulation of dance halls, 31 V.S.A. 501 et seq.
73
Secs. 7-47--7-60. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT MACHINES AND PLACES OF
AMUSEMENT, SPORT OR RECREATION52
Sec. 7-61. Definitions.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-62. License required.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-63. Application.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-64. Fee.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-65. Issuance; expiration.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-66. Restrictions53
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, `1994.)
.
Sec. 7-67. Compliance with law.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Secs. 7-68--7-80. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. BOWLING ALLEYS, POOL ROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS54
Sec. 7-81. License required.
52 Cross reference-Location of vending and other coin-operated machines restricted, §7-11.
State law references-Pin ball, gambling machines, 13 V.S.A. 2135 et seq.: authority to regulate, 24 V.S.A. 2291;
state licenses, 32 V.S.A. 7501.
Cross reference-Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.
53 State law reference-Restriction on use by persons under age eighteen, 32 V.S.A. 7504
54 State law reference-Bowling alleys, pool halls, regulation, 31 V.S.A. 501 et seq.
74
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-82--7-95. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. THEATERS55
Sec. 7-96. License required; restrictions; fee.
Repealed December 12, 1994.(This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Secs. 7-97--7-120. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS
Sec. 7-121. Defined.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Cross reference-Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 7-122. License required.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-123. Fee.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-124. Restrictions.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-125. Curb pump prohibited.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Secs. 7-126--7-140. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
55 State law reference-Theaters, 31 V.S.A. 442 et seq.
75
Secs. 7-141--7-155. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. BUTCHERS, SLAUGHTERHOUSES, ETC.
Sec. 7-156. License required.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-157. Restrictions.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-158. Fees.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Secs. 7-159--7-175. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. GROCERY, MEAT AND PRODUCE, ETC., DEALERS
Sec. 7-176. License required.
Repealed December 12, 19994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-177. Fee.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-178. Restriction.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Secs. 7-179--7-185. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. RESTAURANTS, CAFES, LUNCH ROOMS, ETC.
Sec. 7-186. License required.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, l994.)
Sec. 7-187. Fee.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
76
Sec. 7-188. Restrictions.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Secs. 7-189--7-210. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. HOTELS, MOTELS, ROOMING AND LODGING HOUSES AND
OTHER LIVING ESTABLISHMENTS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 7-211--7-225. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. HOTELS, MOTELS, ROOMING HOUSES, ETC.
Sec. 7-226. License required.
Repealed December 12, 1994.(This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-227. Fee.
Repealed December 12, 1994.(This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-228. Restriction.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Secs. 7-229--7-245. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. CAMPGROUNDS AND TRAILERS, MOBILE HOMES AND
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS56
Sec. 7-246. Definition.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Cross reference-Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 7-247. License required.
56 State law reference-Regulation of trailer parks, 24 V. S.A. 2231.
77
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-248. Fee.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Sec. 7-249. Restrictions.
Repealed December 12, 1994. (This amendment is retroactive to January 1, 1994.)
Secs. 7-250--7-270. Reserved.
78
ARTICLE VI. STREET PERFORMING REGULATIONS
Sec. 7-271. PURPOSE
The purpose of this article is to encourage and permit street performance in public areas within the
following structured guidelines and regulations. All performers must receive written permission
(permit) from the Town Manager stating the purpose, date, location, and length of performance.
Said permission may be given to a Festival Director for multiple performances.
Sec. 7-272. DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
hereinafter set forth except where such terms area used in a context which clearly indicates to the
contrary.
a) "Perform" includes, but is not limited to, the following activities: acting, singing, playing
musical instruments, pantomime, juggling, magic, dancing and reciting.
b) "Public Areas" include sidewalks, parks, playgrounds and all other public ways located in
the Town of St Johnsbury, as appropriate.
Sec. 7-273. PERMITTED PERFORMANCE LOCATIONS
a) In designated outdoor public areas in the following zoning districts: Mixed Use,
Commercial, and Residential A. If the zoning code is changed or new zoning districts
created that encompass, this ordinance will cover such areas until a revision is made.
b) If a crowd gathers to see or hear a performer such that the passage of the public
through a public area is blocked, a police officer must be present at the cost of the
performer. In the event that the confines of the activity go beyond the granted
permissions, a law enforcement officer may cause the performer to stop and reapply.
c) No performer or group shall perform at a distance of less than 50 feet from another
performer or group of performers that already is performing.
d) The Town Manager may consult or defer permission for street performers to the Chief
of Police.
79
Sec. 7-274. ACCEPTANCE OF CONTRIBUTIONS
(a) A performer may accept contributions during the performance and such acceptance
shall not constitute a violation of "begging" conduct under the provisions of Article VI
Peddlers, Solicitors, and Itinerant Vendors.
(b) The performance and acceptance of contributions, if such occur in a permitted area as
provided in Section 7-273 (a), will not constitute Loitering under the provisions of
Chapter 11.
Sec. 7-275. COMPLIANCE
The conduct and behavior of all street performers will be in compliance with all existing
Ordinances, which includes but is not limited to the Noise Ordinance, the Loitering Ordinance,
the Public Decency Ordinance and the laws on the obstruction of sidewalks and other
passageways, as well as pamphleteering, advertising or solicitation, and all State and Federal
Laws.
Sec. 7-276. Effective date
This ordinance shall become effective 60 days after its adoption by the St. Johnsbury Select
Board. If a petition is filed under 24 V.S.A. §1973, the taking effect of this ordinance shall be
governed by that statute. 57
57 Adopted Nov. 25, 2013. No petitions were filed.
80
Chapter 8: MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
8-1. Certain Occupations prohibited
8-2. Discharge of firearms prohibited in certain areas; exception
8-3. Littering prohibited.
8-4. Obstruction of public ways prohibited.
8-5. Loitering
8-6. Consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages in public places prohibited.
8-7. Public Indecency Prohibited.
8-8. Objectionable Noise
8-9. Enforcement and penalties.
Sec. 8-1. CERTAIN OCCUPATIONS PROHIBITED.
Repealed May 27, 2008
(Code 1966, Ch. 10, §1)
Sec. 8-2. DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS; EXCEPTION.58
(a) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged or fired, any revolver, pistol, rifle,
shotgun, air-powered rifle, or other similar firearm within the former limits of the Village of St.
Johnsbury or any densely populated areas of town.
(b) This prohibition shall not apply to the use of firearms or weapons by any duly constituted
police officer or other public official when such use is reasonably necessary in the performance
of his/her official duty. This section shall not prevent the discharge of firearms on any properly
constructed firing range or in the conduct of a contest, shoot or meet, when reasonable
precautions are taken for the protection of the public safety. This section shall not prevent the
use of firearms for the disposal of vermin, when permission for such use has been obtained from
the Chief of Police of the town.
(Code 1966, Ch. 10, §3)(Amended 10/23/00)
Sec. 8-3. LITTERING PROHIBITED.59
A person shall not throw, dump, deposit or cause to be thrown, dumped or deposited bottles,
glass, crockery, cans, scrap metal, junk, paper, garbage, old automobiles or parts thereof, refuse
of whatever nature, or any noxious things on public land or private land of others or on or within
view of a public highway. No person having occupied public land or private land of others, upon
58 State law reference-Authority to regulate discharge of firearms, 24 V.S.A. 2291.
59 State law reference-Authority to prohibit nuisances, 24 V.S.A.2291.
81
leaving, shall fail to remove therefrom or deposit in a receptacle provided for that purpose any
bottles, glass, crockery, cans, paper, garbage, refuse of whatever nature or any noxious things
from the land. No person shall deposit in a private garbage receptacle, container or dumpster
without obtaining permission from the owner or renter of that receptacle, container or dumpster.
(Ord. of 6-25-73)
Sec. 8-4. OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC WAYS PROHIBITED.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person either alone or in consort with others to:
(1) Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk, any other public place or
building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted
passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians;
(2) Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public
place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and
uninterrupted use of property or within any business lawfully conducted by anyone or upon or
facing or fronting on such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public
place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress or egress, therein,
thereon, and thereto.
(b) When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in subsection (a)
above, and after having been ordered by a police officer or any other law enforcement officer to
stop causing or committing such conditions and to move on or disperse, and refuses to obey such
order, he shall be in violation of this section, punishable as provided in section 1-13.
(Ord. of 8-25-86, §6)
Sec. 8-5. LOITERING ORDINANCE60
Sec. 8-5.1. Authority
Under authority granted by 24 V.S.A Chapter 61, the Town of St. Johnsbury adopts this
Loitering Ordinance. Pursuant to 24 V.S.A. §§ 2291 (1), (5), and (14) the Select Board shall have
the authority to regulate loitering in the Town of St. Johnsbury.
Sec. 8-5.2. Purpose
60 Adopted June 11, 2012. No petitions were filed.
82
The purpose of this ordinance is to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety, and welfare of
the citizens of St. Johnsbury through the regulation of loitering. The intent of this ordinance is to
prohibit loitering that hinders or impedes the passage of pedestrians or vehicles upon any public or
quasi-public sidewalk, street, curb, crosswalk, walkway area, mall or that portion of private property
utilized for public use. The Select Board of the Town of St. Johnsbury hereby finds that such loitering is a
public nuisance that endangers the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of this town.
Sec. 8-5.3. Definitions
For the purpose of this ordinance:
Loitering shall mean the act of standing or remaining idle in or upon any public or quasi-public
sidewalk, street, curb, crosswalk, walkway area, mall or that portion of private property utilized
for public use.
Sec. 8-5.4. Prohibited Conduct
It shall be unlawful for any persons, after first being warned by any law enforcement officer,
property owner or designee or where a “no loitering” sign or signs have been posted, to loiter, sit or lie
in or upon any public or quasi-public sidewalk, street, curb, crosswalk, walkway area, mall or that
portion of private property utilized for public use, so as to hinder or impede the passage of pedestrians
or vehicles.
Sec. 8-6. CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PLACES
PROHIBITED.
Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage as defined in state
law or to possess any opened container containing alcoholic beverages while such person is:
? In, on, or upon a vehicle, on a street or municipal highway, or
? In a municipal parking lot, or
? In any so-called common area open to the public, or
? With the approval of the Town Manager or his/her designee.
Cross reference-Licenses and business regulations, Ch.7; parks and recreation, Ch.9;
streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch.11.
Sec. 8-7 PUBLIC INDECENCY PROHIBITED.
83
(a) Definition: "Nudity" shall mean the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic
area or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with
less than a fully opaque covering of any portion of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state. The inadvertent showing of the female breast with less than
a fully opaque covering of any portion of the nipple by a woman engaged in the feeding of an
infant child shall not constitute nudity within the meaning of this definition.
(b) Public Indecency:
(1) No person shall knowingly or intentionally in a public place:
(A) engage in sexual intercourse;
(B) appear in a state of nudity;
(C) fondle his/her genitals;
(D) fondle the genitals of another person.
(E) Urinate or defecate in public
(2) No person who owns, leases, or controls property shall knowingly allow any person to
engage in the conduct described in subparagraph (1) above at any time such property is
open to the public.
(Ord. of 3/1/97)
Sec. 8-8. OBJECTIONABLE NOISE61
SEC. 8-8.1 Authority
This ordinance is adopted under authority granted in 24 V.S.A. § 2291 (14), and 24 V.S.A.
Chapter 59.
Sec. 8-8.2. Purpose
The purpose of this ordinance is to protect, preserve, and promote the health, safety, welfare,
peace and quiet for the citizens of St. Johnsbury through the reduction, control and prevention of
objectionable noise. The intent of this ordinance is to establish standards which will eliminate
and reduce unnecessary noises which are physically harmful or otherwise detrimental to the
enjoyment of life, property and maintenance of business.
61 Adopted November 26, 2012
84
Sec. 8-8.3. Definitions
The following acts are declared to be loud, objectionable, and unnecessary noises, which are
therefore a public nuisance, and are prohibited by this ordinance.
a) Radios, other sound-producing devices. The use or operation of any radio,
phonograph, musical instrument or other sound-making or sound-producing device in
such manner as to disturb the quiet or repose of any person or persons in the vicinity
thereof;
b) Defect in vehicle or operation of vehicle. The operation of any automobile,
motorcycle or other type of motor vehicle in such a manner as to create squealing of
tires or loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, exploding, rattling or other types of
noises;
c) Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, internal
combustion engine, motor boat or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other
similar device which will significantly reduce and prevent loud or explosive noises
there from;
d) Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any
automobile, motorcycle or other motorized or electric vehicle except as a danger
warning, the creation by means of any other signaling device or any unreasonable
loud or harsh sound and the sounding of any device for unnecessary and/or
unreasonable periods of time;
e) Construction noise. Noises emanating from the excavation, demolition, alteration or
repair of buildings, structures, property or highways between the hours of 9 PM and 6
AM, except for emergency repairs or maintenance of Town Highways necessary to
protect people or property;
f) Noise in general. Any noise is deemed objectionable because of volume, frequency
or beat and which is not muffled or otherwise controlled.
g) Disorderly Conduct. 62 Noise caused by a person or persons who, with intent to
cause public inconvenience or annoyance or recklessly creating a risk thereof by:
1) Engaging in fighting or in violent, tumultuous, or threatening behavior; or
2) Making unreasonable noise; or
3) In a public place use abusive or obscene language; or
4) Without lawful authority, disturbs any lawful assembly or meeting of persons;
or
5) Obstructing vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(Cross Reference 8-4 Obstruction of Public Ways Prohibited and 8-5 Loitering Ordinance.)
Sec. 8-8.4. Distance
The creation of, permitting or operation of any of the above sets, instruments, devices or
vehicles causing said noise in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of twenty-five
62 Adopted June 23, 2014. There were no petitions filed.
85
(25) feet from a building, structure, vehicle, or location from which the noise emanates shall be
prima facie evidence of a nuisance and a violation of this ordinance.
Sec. 8-8.5. Exemption.
a) All safety equipment and warning devices or any other device used to alert persons to
any emergency or used during the conduct of emergency work including but not
limited to police, fire and medical/rescue vehicle sirens. Car horns or car warning
devices do not fall under this exemption if they are left unattended for an
unreasonable amount of time or multiple noise complaints have been received.
b) The repair and maintenance of municipal facilities, services or public utilities when
such work must be accomplished outside of daytime hours.
c) Snow removal equipment operated within the manufacturer’s specifications and in
proper operating condition.
d) Musical, recreational, and athletic events conducted by and on the site of a school or
educational institution and municipal institutions.
e) Events or businesses conducted by, or permitted by the Town Select Board and/or
Police Department.
Sec. 8-9. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
A violation of Section 8 of this ordinance shall be a civil matter enforced in accordance with
the provisions of 24 V.S.A. §§ 1974a and 1977 et. Seq. This ordinance shall be enforced by any
Vermont certified law enforcement officer. This penalty shall apply to any person(s) who has
actual physical control of a motor vehicle or device in question or the renter, owner or lessee of
any structure under their control from whence the conditions is originating.
D. First offense $50.00 full penalty $25.00 waiver penalty
E. Second offense within 6 months $100.00 full penalty $50.00 waiver penalty
F. Third and subsequent offenses $200.00 full penalty $100.00 waiver penalty
within 6 months
Sec. 8-10. Severability.
Each of the provisions of the ordinance is severable, and if any provision is held invalid for
any reason, the remaining provisions shall not be affected but shall remain in full force and
effect.
Sec. 8-11. Effective date.63
63 Adopted November 26, 2012. No petitions were filed. Full text of Ch. 8 with penalties approved November
25, 2013. No petitions were filed.
86
This ordinance shall become effective 60 days after its adoption by the St. Johnsbury Select
Board. If a petition is filed under 24 V.S.A. § 1973, the taking effect of this ordinance shall be
governed by that statute.
Sec. 8-12. PROHIBITION OF USE OF TOBACCO ON TOWN OWNED PROPERTY
Sec. 8-12.1.. Purpose
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by
prohibiting use of tobacco products, including smokeless tobacco, smoking/vaping and second
hand smoke/vape on or upon Town owned property where people congregate and assemble for
all purposes including, recreation and leisure.
Sec. 8-12.2. Definitions
a) "Tobacco products " shall mean smokeless tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, as well
as cigarettes, electronic cigarettes, vapor cigarettes, cigars, cheroots, stogies, refuse
scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco and all other kinds and forms of
tobacco and tobacco substitutes and/or alternatives prepared in a manner suitable for
smoking in a pipe and/or vape device or otherwise or for smoking.
b) "Tobacco Use" shall mean possession of lighted tobacco products, substitutes and/or
alternatives including vaping. “Tobacco Use” shall also mean the use of smokeless
tobacco products such as chewing tobacco, snuff or other smokeless tobacco
products, where the product is placed in the gum, mouth, nose or otherwise placed in
contact with the skin.
c) “Town Owned Property” shall mean all property owned in fee simple by the Town of
St Johnsbury within the its corporate limits excluding however, all highways, streets
and sidewalks.
d) Prohibition. Except as otherwise provided herein, Tobacco Use is prohibited on or
upon Town Owned Property. This prohibition shall extend an additional twenty-five
(25) feet beyond the physical boundaries of Town Owned Property, which together
with Town Owned Property are hereby designated as tobacco-free areas.
Sec. 8-12.3. Posting
a) Posting. The Town shall post and maintain signs or notices clearly and conspicuously
identifying areas where the use of tobacco is prohibited with the words “No Tobacco
Use”.
Sec. 8-12.4. Enforcement.
a) Any person convicted of a violation or violations of this section shall be subject to a
civil penalty, the fine for which shall be no less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and no
87
more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), with a waiver penalty of fifty dollars
($50.00), for each such violation.
b) All municipal officials duly authorized to issue Vermont Municipal Complaints are
authorized to issue complaints for violations of the provisions of this section.
Sec. 8-12.6 Effective date.64
c) This ordinance shall become effective 60 days after its adoption by the St. Johnsbury
Select Board. If a petition is filed under 24 V.S.A. § 1973, the taking effect of this
ordinance shall be governed by that statute.
Chapter 9: PARKS AND RECREATION65
Art. I. In General, §§ 9-1--9-25
Art. II. Recreation, §§ 9-26--9-65
Div. 1. Generally, §§ 9-26--9-40
Div. 2. Recreation Board, §~9-41--9-60
Div. 3. Recreation Department, §§ 9-61--9-65
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 9-1--9-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. RECREATION
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 9-26--9-40. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. RECREATION BOARD66
64 Adopted May 13, 2019. No petitions were filed.
65 Cross references-Consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages in public places restricted, § 8-5; streets,
sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 11; damaging public property prohibited, § 11-2.
State law reference-Parks and playgrounds, 31 V.S.A. 201 et seq.
66 Cross reference-Administration, Ch. 2.
88
Sec. 9-41. Created; membership; terms.
There is hereby created a recreation board consisting of six (6) members appointed by the
board of selectmen for a term of three (3) years.
(Ord. of 5-14-79, § 3; Ord. of 4-23-84, § 3; Ord. of 6-23-86, §3)
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-46 et seq.
Sec. 9-42. Powers and duties.
The recreation board shall have the power to employ a recreation director and such staff as
may be required to operate a recreation program, and to enter into contracts in the name of and
on behalf of the recreation department. The recreation board shall report to the town manager
monthly and shall include in their report a financial statement accurately reflecting the financial
condition of the recreation department. All expenditures of the recreation department shall be
approved by the recreation board.
(Ord. of 5-14-79, § 4)
Sec. 9-43. Fiscal year.
The recreation board shall operate on a fiscal year ending December 31. Funds remaining on
hand at the close of the fiscal year shall be carried forward as surplus in the account of the
recreation department for the following year.
(Ord. of 5-14-79, § 7)
Sec. 9-44. Budget.
Annually on or before January 15, the recreation board shall prepare and submit to the town
manager a budget reflecting proposed revenues and proposed expenditures for the following
fiscal year. The budget shall not be implemented without the prior approval of the board of
selectmen.
(Ord. of 5-14-79, § 8)
Secs. 9-45--9-60. Reserved.
89
DIVISION 3. RECREATION DEPARTMENT67
Sec. 9-61. Creation.
There is hereby created a recreation department.
(Ord. of 5-14-79, §1)
Sec. 9-62. Purpose.
The purpose of the recreation department shall be to plan, promote, organize and supervise a
comprehensive recreation program and administer the program in the interest of the entire
community.
(Ord. of 5-14-79, §2)
Sec. 9-63. Fund raising.
The recreation department shall have the authority to conduct such activities as the recreation
board deems advisable and necessary to raise funds for the operation of the recreation
department.
(Ord. of 5-14-79, §5)
Sec. 9-64. Accounts.
Funds of the recreation department shall be maintained by the town treasurer and shall be held
in a separate account.
(Ord. of 5-14-79, §6)
Sec. 9-65. Reimbursement to town.
The recreation department shall reimburse the town for actual added cost to the town in
connection with the operation of the recreation department, but the recreation department shall
not be charged with costs in connection with maintenance and operation of the building occupied
by the recreation department. Cost to be reimbursed to the town shall include, by way of
example but not by way of limitation, social security taxes, health insurance, worker's
compensation insurance, unemployment insurance, contributions to the retirement plan and
charges for services actually rendered by the town clerk's office or the town manager's office.
(Ord. of 5-14-79, § 9)
67 Cross reference-Officers and employees, § 2-46 et seq.
90
Sec. 9-66. Appointment of Town Tree Warden and Deputy Tree Warden.
A town tree warden appointed by the Board of Selectmen pursuant to 24VSA§871(5) and a
deputy tree warden appointed by the Board of Selectmen pursuant to this ordinance shall have
the responsibility to carry out the provisions of this ordinance and to make recommendations to
the town in order to provide:
(a) For the care, protection, preservation, planting and removal of public trees, and to provide
for the treatment of pest infestations therein.
(b) The removal from public property of trees which due to their damaged or diseased
condition represent a hazard to public safety.
The town tree warden and deputy tree warden shall have a solid knowledge of modern
arboricultural practices and shall be experienced in the planning, planting and maintenance of
urban trees.
(Ord. of 4/15/04)
Sec. 9-67. Tree Preservation Program.
Shade and ornamental trees within the limits of public way and places shall be under the control
of the town tree warden and/or deputy tree warden. The tree warden and/or deputy tree warden
may plan and implement a shade tree preservation program for the purpose of shading and
beautifying public ways and places by planting new trees and shrubs; by maintaining the health,
appearance and safety of existing trees through feeding, pruning, and protecting them from
noxious insect and disease pests and by removing diseased, dying or dead trees which create a
hazard to public safety or threaten the effectiveness of disease or insect control programs.
(Ord. of 4/15/04)
Sec. 9-68. Removal or Pruning of Trees.
Whenever the town tree warden or deputy tree warden determines that:
(a) A tree or limb in or upon any public property in the town of St. Johnsbury is in danger of
falling in or across any public right-of-way; or
(b) A tree is a danger to public safety and welfare because of defect, decay or lack of support;
or
(c) A tree constitutes a threat to other trees because it harbors or breeds noxious insects or
disease pests;
The tree warden and/or deputy tree warden may remove or render such treatment(s) to the tree
which will result in the danger of being alleviated.
91
(Ord. of 4/15/04)
Sec. 9-69. Jurisdiction of the Tree Warden and/or Deputy Tree Warden.
No person shall cut, climb, break, trim, or remove or in any way injure trees on public right-ofway
or other property of the Town of St. Johnsbury without first having consulted with the town
tree warden and/or deputy tree warden.
No person shall attach or keep attached to a tree on town property any wire, rope, wire insulator,
notice, advertisement, object or other device without having consulted with the tree warden
and/or deputy tree warden.
No person shall excavate soil, cut or fill or otherwise alter the grade or drainage within twenty
feet of a public tree without first consulting with and obtaining permission from the town tree
warden and/or deputy tree warden.
No person shall plant any tree on any public rights-of-way or property without first having
obtained permission from the town tree warden and/or deputy tree warden.
Any person who critically injures or cuts down a public shade tree without permission from the
town tree warden and/or deputy tree warden shall be fined not more than $500 for each tree so
injured or cut. Any other violations of article 4 will result in a fine of not more than $50.
(Ord. of 4/15/04)
Sec. 9-70. Protection of Public Trees During Construction.
No construction will take place within twenty feet of a public tree without having provided for
the protection of said tree during the construction after having consulted with the town tree
warden and/or deputy tree warden.
(Ord. of 4/15/04)
92
Chapter 10: Reserved
93
Chapter 11: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES68
Sec. 11-1. Permit for parades and certain processions required.
a) No procession or parade other than for funeral or religious purposes shall be allowed to use
the public streets or highways of the town unless and until the person in charge thereof or
responsible therefore shall obtain written permission (permit) from the Town Manager’s Office
for such procession or parade.
b) Such permit shall be issued only upon proof that such procession or parade will be
conducted without public tumult or unlawful disturbance of any kind. The permit may be
revoked if such tumult or unlawful disturbance is caused.
(Code 1966, Ch. 3, §2)
Sec. 11-2. Damaging public property prohibited.
No person shall move, injure, deface or damage any guidepost, traffic light, street sign, speed
zone sign, traffic sign or street safety device within the town.
(Code 1966, Ch. 3, §5)
Cross reference-Parks and recreation, Ch. 9.
Sec. 11-3. Permits required for excavations.
No person shall erect any pole, wire or cable on any street within the town or lay any pipe or
conduit under any of the streets or sidewalks or make any excavations in streets or sidewalks for
the laying of pipes, conduits or sewers or for any other purpose without first procuring a permit.
A bond in an amount sufficient to indemnity the town for any possible damage to the streets,
sidewalks or other property shall be provided.
(Code 1966, Ch. 3, §6)
Sec. 11-4. Permit required for posting advertising on public property.
68 Cross references-Animals, Ch. 3; consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages in public places restricted,
§ 8-5; parks and recreation, Ch. 9; specific street regulations, § 12-46 et seq.; stopping, standing, parking on streets,
§ 12-96 et seq.; operation of snowmobiles permitted on certain routes, § 12-172; street requirements in subdivisions,
App. A, § 401; street lighting requirements in subdivisions, App. A, § 403.
State law reference-Protection of highways, 19 V.S.A. 1101 et seq.
94
No person shall post, paint or in any way cause to be displayed any showbill, advertisement,
paper, written or printed matter, upon or in any way attached to any post, pole, fire alarm box, or
other similar structure standing within the limits of the streets or highways of the town without a
permit. Such reasonable rules and regulations as to manner, method and time may be prescribed
by the town manager. Such permit may be revoked at any time for cause.
(Code 1966, Ch. 3, §7)
Sec. 11-5. Coasting prohibited; exception.
No person shall coast or slide on a sled, sleigh or other vehicle in the streets or upon the
sidewalks within the limits of the town except upon such streets as may be set apart for coasting
and so designated by the town manager.
(Code 1966, Ch. 3, §9)
Cross reference-Traffic and vehicles, Ch. 12.
Sec. 11-6. Riding bicycles on sidewalk prohibited.
Prohibitions:
It is unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within the town.
(Code 1966, Ch. 3, § 10)
Parents and Guardians:
The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit
any such child to violate any of the provisions of this Section 11-6.
Sec. 11-7. Skateboard, Roller Skates
a) Definitions:
1) Skateboard - As used in this section "skateboard" means any device consisting
basically of a board or platform mounted on wheels or rollers, whether powered by
gravity, muscle power, or mechanized or motorized means. "Skateboard" shall not
include motor vehicles, bicycles or wheel chairs whether motorized of not.
2) Roller Skates - As used in this action "roller skates" shall include any shoe-like device
with wheels attached including, but not limited to devices commonly referred to as roller
skates, in-line skates, and roller blades.
b) Prohibitions:
1) The use of skateboards and roller skates is prohibited at all times in the following
places:
95
A) The grounds of the municipal buildings, and the grounds of the community
center (recreation building) including stairs and paved areas in front of said
buildings and all of the land and sidewalks immediately adjacent to and
surrounding building
B) The grounds of the Caledonia County Courthouse, including the stairs, paths,
walkways, sidewalks and paved areas immediately adjacent to and surrounding
the Caledonia County Courthouse.
C) All parking lots owned or operated by the Town of St. Johnsbury.
D) All private property, unless given specific permission by the property owner or
the owner's agent.
2) The use of skateboards is prohibited on the following streets and the sidewalks
adjacent thereto:
A) Main Street-Arnold Park to Western Avenue
B) Eastern Avenue-Entire Length
C) Railroad Street-Pearl Street to Bagley Street
D) Maple Street-Entire Length
E) Pearl Street-Entire Length
F) Federal Street-Entire Length
G) Cherry Street-Entire Length
H) Prospect Street-Entire Length
I) Thaddeus Lane-Entire Length
J) Charles Street-Entire Length
K) Central Street-Main Street to Summer Street
L) Winter Street-Main Street to Summer Street
M) Church Street-Main Street to Summer Street
N) Cary Place-Entire Length
O) Clinton Avenue-Entire Length
P) Portland Street-Railroad Street to Western Side of Caledonia Street
The use of roller blades is prohibited on the sidewalks adjacent to the streets listed in subsection
(2) above, but is permitted on said streets.
c) Operation and Use of Skateboards and Roller Skates:
Individuals operating or using skateboards or roller skates shall skate in a prudent manner, and
shall not interfere with the normal traffic flow of vehicles or pedestrians upon the streets or
sidewalks of the Town of St. Johnsbury. Persons operating or using a skateboard or roller skates,
within the public right of way of any street or highway, shall comply with all relevant traffic
regulations and shall operate any such vehicle in a safe manner.
96
Sec. 11-8. Enforcement and penalties.
A violation of Chapter 11 of this ordinance shall be a civil matter enforced in accordance
with the provisions of 24 V.S.A. §§ 1974a and 1977 et. Seq. This ordinance shall be enforced by
any Vermont certified law enforcement officer.
A. First offense $50.00 full penalty $25.00 waiver penalty
B. Second offense within 6 months $100.00 full penalty $50.00 waiver penalty
C. Third and subsequent offenses $200.00 full penalty $100.00 waiver penalty
within 6 months
Sec. 11-9. Severability.
Each of the provisions of the ordinance is severable, and if any provision is held invalid for
any reason, the remaining provisions shall not be affected but shall remain in full force and
effect.
Sec. 11-10. Effective date.
This ordinance shall become effective 60 days after its adoption by the St. Johnsbury Select
Board. If a petition is filed under 24 V.S.A. § 1973, the taking effect of this ordinance shall be
governed by that statute.
97
Chapter 12: TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES69
Art. I. In General, § 12-1--12-25.
Art. II. Operation of Vehicles, § 12-26--12-45.
Art. III. Specific Street Regulations, § 12-46--12-60.
Div. l. Generally, § 12-46--12-60.
Div. 2. One-Way Streets, §12-61--12-75.
Div. 3. Speed Limits, § 12-76--12-95.
Art. IV. Stopping, Standing, Parking, § 12-96--12-155.
Div. 1. Generally, § 12-96--12-120.
Div. 2. Handicapped Parking, § 12-121--12-135.
Div. 3. Parking Lots, § 12-136--12-144.
Div. 4. Parking Meters, § 12-145--12-155.
Div. 5. Authorizing Removal of Motor Vehicles, § 12-156--12-158.
Art. V. Vehicles, § 12-159-12-175.
Div. 1. Generally, § 12-159--12-170.
Div. 2. Snowmobiles, § 12-171--12-175.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 12-1. DEFINITIONS70
The words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in 23 V.S.A. 1001 et seq., except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
Sec. 12-2. EXCESSIVE MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE PROHIBITED
No person while operating a motor vehicle within the town shall cause the motor vehicle to
make an unnecessary and extraordinary noise by virtue of the manner of operation or the lack of
equipment on the motor vehicle or the addition of improper equipment to the motor vehicle.
(Code 1966, Ch. 2, § 12) See noise ordinance Chapter 8.
69 Cross reference-Coasting with a sled or other vehicle in the streets prohibited, § 11-5.
State law reference-Operation of vehicles, 23 V.S.A. 1001 et seq.
70 Cross reference-Definitions and rules of construction generally, §1-2.
98
Sec. 12-3. LITTERING FROM TRUCK LOADS PROHIBITED71
No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon the public highways within the town carrying
material which may fall of or be blown off, littering the streets, without having the load securely
covered in a manner to prevent such littering.
(Code 1966, Ch. 10, §4)
Secs. 12-4--12-25. RESERVED
ARTICLE II. OPERATION OF VEHICLES
Sec. 12-26. YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY TO FIRE APPARATUS
Upon the approach of any moving firefighting apparatus a person in control of a motor
vehicle shall immediately drive the motor vehicle as close as is reasonably practicable to the
right hand curb or ditch of the street or highway upon which such person proceeding and stop
long enough to allow all fire apparatus to pass without interference.
(Code 1966, Ch. 2, § 7)
Cross reference-Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 5.
Sec. 12-27. ENTERING INTERSECTION
A person, in control of or driving a motor vehicle, shall not drive the motor vehicle into the
intersection of any streets or highways or past any designated stop line or stop marker, where the
traffic at such intersection is controlled by automatic traffic lights, unless permission for such
movement is clearly indicated by a green light or by the direction of a police or other qualified
traffic officer.
(Code 1966, Ch. 2, §5)
Sec. 12-28. STOP INTERSECTIONS
A person in control of or driving a motor vehicle on any street or highway shall bring the
motor vehicle to a full stop before passing through a traffic or stop signal or flashing red light or
stop sign placed at the junction of such street or highway.
(Code 1966, Ch. 2, §6)(Amended 2/19/01)
71 State law reference-Similar provisions, 23 V.S.A. 1452 et seq.
99
Sec. 12-29. YIELD INTERSECTIONS
A person in control of or driving a motor vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and decrease the
speed of or stop the motor vehicle, if necessary, to allow a motor vehicle to proceed which is
approaching on an intersecting or converging public highway, when clearly directed to do so by
yield signs or markings erected at intersections or at the junction of converging public highways
as authorized by the selectman, town manager or chief of police.
(Code 1966, Ch. 2, § 11)
Secs. 12-33--12-45. RESERVED
ARTICLE III. SPECIFIC STREET REGULATIONS72
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 12-46--12-60. Reserved
DIVISION 2. ONE-WAY STREETS
Sec. 12-61. DESIGNATED
The board of selectmen, town manager or chief of police may designate any street or highway
for one-way traffic and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. Upon a street or
highway designated and sign posted for one-way traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the
direction designated.
(Ord. of 3-11-85)
Secs. 12-62--12-75. Reserved
72 Cross reference-Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 11
100
DIVISION 3. SPEED LIMITS
Sec. 12-76. DESIGNATED
a) All the territory included within the former boundary of the Village of St. Johnsbury, as it
was bounded just prior to the consolidation and merger of the Village of St. Johnsbury and the
Town of St. Johnsbury, is hereby designated a thirty-mile per-hour maximum speed zone except
as provided in subsections (c)and (d) below. The town manager shall cause to be posted on every
public street and highway that crosses the former Village of St. Johnsbury boundary a sign
indicating a maximum speed limit of thirty (30) miles per hour in the area. All such signs shall
be posted so that they face and are clearly visible to motor vehicle traffic entering the former
Village of St. Johnsbury territory. Such signs shall be placed as close as is practicable to the
point where the former Village of St. Johnsbury boundary intersects such public streets or
highways.
b) No person shall operate a motor vehicle or other conveyance on any public street or
highway within the former Village of St. Johnsbury territory at a speed in excess of thirty (30)
miles per hour.
c) The board of selectmen shall have the power to designate special speed zones in which the
maximum speed limit shall be as low as twenty (20) miles per hour. Only those areas within the
former Village of St. Johnsbury that pose special pedestrian and vehicular traffic problems may
be designated special speed zones. All special speed zones must be clearly described in writing
and kept on file in the town clerk's office for examination by the general public.
d) All special speed zones shall be clearly designated by signs posted at the limits thereof and
indicting a maximum speed limit of twenty (20) miles per hour.
e) The board of selectmen shall have the power to designate additional special speed zones, in
which the maximum speed shall be thirty (30) miles per hour. Only those areas within the town
and outside of the former Village of St. Johnsbury area that pose special pedestrian and vehicular
traffic problems may be designated additional special speed zones. All additional special speed
zones must be clearly described in writing and kept on file in the municipal offices for
examination by the general public.
f) All additional special speed zones shall be clearly designated by signs posted at the limits
thereof and indicating a maximum speed limit of thirty (30) miles per hour.
(Code 1966, Ch. 2, § 9; Ord. of 4-21-69; Ord. of 10-30-72; Ord. of 6-9-80)
101
Sec. 12-77. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
A violation of Articles I, II and III of this ordinance shall be a civil matter enforced in
accordance with the provisions of 24 V.S.A. §§ 1974a and 1977 et. Seq. This ordinance shall be
enforced by any Vermont certified law enforcement officer.
A. First offense $100.00 full penalty $50.00 waiver penalty
B. Second offense within 6 months $150.00 full penalty $75.00 waiver penalty
C. Third and subsequent offenses $200.00 full penalty $100.00 waiver penalty
within 6 months
Sec. 12-78. Severability.
Each of the provisions of the ordinance is severable, and if any provision is held invalid for
any reason, the remaining provisions shall not be affected but shall remain in full force and
effect.
Sec. 12-79 Effective date.
This ordinance shall become effective 60 days after its adoption by the St. Johnsbury Select
Board. If a petition is filed under 24 V.S.A. § 1973, the taking effect of this ordinance shall be
governed by that statute.
Secs. 12-80--12-95. Reserved
ARTICLE IV. STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING73
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 12-96. PROCEDURE
73 Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 11.
102
The person operating or driving a motor vehicle shall park the motor vehicle parallel to the
curb or ditch on the right hand side of the street or highway as the motor vehicle is headed and as
close to the curb or ditch as is reasonably practicable. If diagonal or parallel parking lines are
painted or otherwise indicated on the side of the street, such person shall park or stand the motor
vehicle wholly within the lines and with the head of the vehicle towards the curb or ditch. If
diagonal parking is indicated the vehicle shall be parked within those lines indicated and on the
proper side of the street, except where the total length of the vehicle exceeds the markings, and
shall be parked with the front of the vehicle as close to the curb as is reasonable. If parallel lines
are indicated, the vehicle shall be parked with the front of the vehicle within the lines closest to
the front of the vehicle and the entire vehicle shall be within twelve (12) inches of the curb or
ditch so that traffic will not be obstructed. No motor vehicle shall be left unattended with the
motor running. No motor vehicle shall be double parked for any reason except for the discharges
or boarding of passengers or the loading or unloading of freight. In the circumstances pertaining
to freight, the motor shall be stopped.
(Code 1966, Ch. 2, §3)
Sec. 12-97. PROHIBITED PARKING AREAS
No person shall park or cause to be parked or leave unattended any motor vehicle, team,
bicycle or other vehicle in any space on any street or public highway where such parking is
clearly prohibited by signs or markings upon the pavement authorized by the board of selectmen,
town manager or chief of police. A motor vehicle illegally parked so that traffic is wholly or
partially obstructed may be towed away at the full responsibility of the owner, for both towing
charges and for any damage resulting to the vehicle due to such towing action. The schedule of
streets and areas designated as prohibited parking is on file in the town clerk's office.
(Code 1966, Ch. 2, § 4; Code 1966, Ch. 3, § 12)
Sec. 12-98. RESTRICTED PARKING AREAS AND HOURS
No person shall park or cause to be parked or leave unattended any motor vehicle, team,
bicycle, or other vehicle in any space on any street or public highway for a period longer than the
maximum permitted time specified upon signs erected by the town manager or chief of police.
The schedule of streets and areas designated as restricted parking and the fine for violations are
on file in the town clerk's office.
(Ord. of 6-19-72)(Ch.3, §13, 14, 15)
Sec. 12-99. RESTRICTED PARKING OF TRUCKS
Between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., no person shall park or leave unattended
on any street or public way of the town any vehicle, piece of equipment, mechanism or device
103
which is used or is capable of being used thereon, except a passenger automobile or pickup truck
having no more than two (2) axles.
(Ord. of 10-24-83 §1; amended 4/10/2000)
Sec. 12-100. Parking prohibited near fires and fire hydrants
a) A person shall not park or leave or stop any motor vehicle within one hundred (100) yards
of the premises or building where a fire is in progress, except to allow fire apparatus to pass, or
in any other place where the presence of a motor vehicle interferes with the work of the fire
department in fighting such fire.
b) A person, in control of or driving a motor vehicle, shall not stop, park or leave a motor
vehicle within ten (10) feet of a fire hydrant.
c) A person in control of or driving a motor vehicle, shall not stop, park, or leave a motor
vehicle in a designated fire lane.
(Code 1966, Ch. 2, § § 8, 10)
Sec. 12-101. ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY
a) Upon discovery of a motor vehicle parked in violation of any section of this article it shall
be the duty of the town police officers to place a notice of violation upon the vehicle stating that
date, time, place, and nature of the violation and indicating the fine or penalty therefore and
making a demand for payment thereof.
b) Any vehicle which has accumulated a total of two (2) or more notices of violation for nonmetered
and/or metered parking violations of this article which remain unpaid for more than
sixty (60) days, and which vehicle is parked or left on any public street or in or upon any other
place within the town where the parking or leaving of such vehicle is governed by regulation
under this article, may be immobilized or removed and stored pursuant to the provisions of this
section, until all charges both for all outstanding violations and the charges imposed by such
immobilization or removal and storage have been paid in full or until a bond, certified by the
chief of police or his duly authorized representative, in an amount equal to the charges set forth
above has been posted.
c) The chief of police or his duly authorized representative shall notify by certified mail,
return receipt requested, the registered owner of the vehicle or a holder of a security interest
therein, if his identity can be readily ascertained, within seven (7) days of the storage of a vehicle
pursuant to subsection b) of this section.
104
d) The notice referred to in subsection c) above shall be tendered on forms prescribed and
provided by the chief of police and shall describe the year, make, model, and serial number of
the stored vehicle; the storage location of such vehicle; and the requirements of release as set
forth in subsection b) above; and a notice of the right to reclaim such vehicle within ninety (90)
days after the date of the mailing of the notice. The notice shall indicate that failure to reclaim
the vehicle within the time provided shall be deemed to transfer all right, title, and interest in
such vehicle to the town. Upon the failure of the registered owner of the vehicle or a holder of a
security interest therein to reclaim the vehicle within the time prescribed the police department
may dispose of such vehicle. No unclaimed vehicle shall be retained for a period of longer than
one hundred twenty (120) days.
e) If the chief of police or his duly authorized representative is unable to ascertain the identity
of the registered owner of a vehicle removed pursuant to this section or the holder of a security
interest therein, he shall cause to be published once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the town the notice set forth in subsection d) above.
(Ord. of 1108082, § § 18, 19; b) amended 4/10/2000)
Secs. 12-102--12-120. Reserved
DIVISION 2. HANDICAPPED PARKING
Sec. 12-121. DESIGNATED
a) No person shall park or leave standing any motor vehicle in a parking space designated by
the international symbol of access and the words "Handicapped Parking Only" unless the motor
vehicle bears special handicapped plates from any state or which has a handicapped parking card
issued by the state commissioner of Motor Vehicles displayed in the lower right side of the
windshield.
b) Any person violating this section shall be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for
each violation.
(Amended November 11/1/93; increase fine from $15.00 to $50.00)
(Ord. of 11-8-82, § 17)
Secs. 12-122--12-135. RESERVED
DIVISION 3. PARKING LOTS
105
Sec. 12-136. DESIGNATED
The Town Manager as directed by the Board of Selectmen will designate public parking lots
that are available to the public for free, available by permit, or available through the use of
meters.
(Ord. of 12-28-78, §1; amended 4/10/2000)
Sec. 12-137. REGULATIONS
a) The town manager as directed by the board of selectmen shall:
1) Establish areas within the parking lots wherein parking shall be permitted;
2) Establish the permitted parking time; and
3) Establish regulations for the use of the parking lots.
b) The time so established and the fees shall be clearly stated upon signs erected at the
entrance to the parking lots.
(Ord. of 12-28-78, §2)
Sec. 12-138. FEES
Fees for use of the parking lot shall be on file in the town clerk's office and are payable upon
entering the parking lot or, in lieu thereof, the user shall present a card or other device issued by
the town evidencing permission to park. The cards or other devices shall be issued by the town
and shall be of a type, style and design selected by the town manager, and shall be available for
purchase at such locations as the town manager shall determine for a permit fee which is on file
in the town clerk's office. The cards or other devices shall be issued upon payment of the
scheduled fee.
(Ord. of 12-28-78, §3; amended 4/10/99)
Sec. 12-139. VIOLATION; PENALTY
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this division for any person to park in said parking lot
without first paying the required fee or presenting the card provided for in section 12-138 or to
park in the parking lot during hours when parking is prohibited or in a location therein in which
parking is prohibited. The fine for violating this division shall be not less than one dollar ($1.00)
nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00).
(Ord. of 12-28-78, §4)
106
Secs. 12-140--12-144. RESERVED
DIVISION 4. PARKING METERS
Sec. 12-145. DEFINITIONS
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Motor vehicle shall include all vehicles propelled by power other than muscular power,
except tractors used entirely for work on the farm, vehicles running only upon stationary rails or
tracks, and motorized highway building equipment.
Vehicle shall mean any device by which any person or property may be transported upon a
highway, except those operated upon rails or tracks.
(Code 1966, Ch. 9, §1)
Sec. 12-146. DESIGNATION OF AREAS; DISPLAY OF INSTRUCTIONS AND USE OF METERS;
PENALTY
a) The town manager as directed by the selectmen shall provide for the installation of meters
in designated parking meter zones and shall provide the appropriate curb or street marking lines,
the permitted parking time, and the regulation and operation of parking meters. The town
manager shall cause such meters to be maintained in good workable condition. The permitted
parking time established shall be plainly stated in the instructions on each meter. Meters shall be
placed upon the curb next to individual parking places, and meters shall display by a signal that
the parking space adjacent to such meter is or is not legally in use. Each parking meter installed
shall display a signal showing legal parking upon deposit of the proper coin of the United States
currency as indicated by instructions on such meter. The permitted parking time shall be
107
designated on such meter, during which time and until the expiration of the parking period such
signal shall remain in evidence. At the expiration of such period such parking meter shall
indicate illegal parking.
b) The town manager shall have lines or markings painted or placed upon the curb and/or
upon the street adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of designating the parking space
for which such meter is to be used and each vehicle parking adjacent or next to any parking
meter shall park within the lines or markings established. It shall be unlawful and a violation of
this section to park any vehicle within a parking meter zone in such a position that the vehicle
shall not be entirely within the area designated by such lines or markings as a parking space.
When a parking space in any parking meter zone is parallel with the adjacent curb or sidewalk,
any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked with the foremost part of such vehicle
nearest to such meter.
c) When any motor vehicle or other vehicle is parked in any parking meter zone, the owner or
operator of the vehicle shall deposit in such meter the proper coins for the parking time required,
as indicated in and by instructions on the meter, except as otherwise provided in section 12-153.
The legal parking time and the fees therefore shall be for periods established by the town
Manager at the direction of the Board of Selectmen, and shall be on file in the town clerk's
office.
d) It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or neglect to deposit the proper coin. Failure to
deposit the proper coin shall constitute a violation of this division punishable as provided in
section 12-154. When the proper coin has been deposited and said meter placed in operation
pursuant to the instructions thereon, the adjacent parking space may then be occupied by such
vehicle during the permitted parking time designated in and by the instructions upon the parking
meter. The vehicle shall be considered as unlawfully parked if it remains in such space beyond
the legal parking limit and/or when the parking meter displays a signal showing illegal parking.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this division for any person to cause or permit any vehicle
registered in his name to be unlawfully parked as provided in this section.
(Code 1966, Ch. 9, § § 2-6; Ord. of 5-22-72; Ord. of 11-6-78(1); Ord. of 10-10-83(2); sec. (c)
amended 4/10/2000)
Sec. 12-147. PARKING METER HOURS
Parking meters shall be used during hours and on days as set by the Town Manager as
directed by the Board of Selectmen. The fee required in section 12-146 shall be deposited in
parking meters on such days.
(Code 1966, Ch. 19, § 7; Ord. of 11-6-78(1); amended 4/10/2000)
Sec. 12-148. RESTRICTION ON LOCATION
108
No parking meter shall be installed within such areas as shall be officially designated as bus
stops within parking meter zones. No parking meter shall be installed within such areas as shall
be officially designated as public stands for taxicabs within parking meter zones. No parking
meters shall be installed within such areas as shall be officially designated as truck unloading
zones, and the use of such zones shall be restricted to the unloading or loading delivery vehicles
so identified.
(Code 1966, Ch. 9, §8)
Sec. 12-149. SLUGS PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this division for any person to deposit or cause to be
deposited in any parking meter, any slug, device or other substitute for a coin of the United
States.
(Code 1966, Ch. 9,. § 9)
Sec. 12-150. DEFACING, TAMPERING, ETC.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this division for any person to deface, injure, tamper
with, open, break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed, except that
any official or employee of the town duly authorized may open such meters in the performance
of his duty.
(Code 1966, Ch. 9, § 10)
Sec. 12-151. COLLECTION AND USE OF MONIES
a) It shall be the duty of the town manager to provide for the regular collection of the coins
deposited in the parking meters, to cause proper records to be kept showing the reading of such
meters and to cause the funds collected to be paid over to the town treasurer.
b) The fees required by this division are hereby levied as police regulation and inspection fees
to cover the cost of providing parking spaces, parking meters, and the installation and
maintenance thereof, the cost of regulation, inspection, control and maintenance of the parking
meters, parking spaces and zones hereby established, and for the regulation and control of traffic
moving in and out of, and parking in such parking spaces and zones so created, and for the cost
of any resultant police, traffic, administration or operational expense. In addition, such fees
arising from parking meters located within the St. Johnsbury Downtown Improvement District
109
("District") are hereby levied as police regulation and inspection fees to cover such costs within
the District.
(Code 1966, Ch. 9, § § 11, 13; sec. (b) amended 4/10/2000)
Sec. 12-152. DOUBLE PARKING PROHIBITED
No double parking shall be permitted within any established parking meter zones except for
the discharge or boarding of passengers or freight loading or unloading wherein there is no
freight zone close enough to be reasonably accessible, and any double parking or parking in a
parking meter zone except within a parking space designated pursuant to this division shall be
unlawful and constitute a violation of this division.
(Code 1966, Ch. 9, §14)
Sec. 12-153. PERMIT FOR PARKING IN CERTAIN METER ZONES
a) Any provision of this division to the contrary notwithstanding, a motor vehicle or other
vehicle displaying the permit provided for in this section may be parked in parking meter zones
located within the same parking lot for which such permit was issued without first depositing in
such meter the coin which the owner or operator would otherwise be required to deposit but for
the provisions of this section.
b) The parking permits referred to in this division shall be of a type, style and design selected
by the town manager and shall be affixed to the vehicle by the owner or operator and displayed
so as to be readily visible.
c) The permit shall be issued by the town and shall be available for purchase at the office of
the town treasurer and clerk for a permit fee and for a term as established by the Town Manager
as directed by the Board of Selectmen.
d) The Town Manger shall determine the total number of permits to be made available and
shall issue permits on a first come first served basis.
e) Lost or destroyed permits shall not be replaced, and a new permit will be issued only upon
payment of the full permit fee.
(Code 1966, Ch. 9, § 18; Ord. of 3-14-75, § 2; Ord. of 6-12-78, § 1; Ord. of 8-30-91; sec. a, b, c,
d, e amended 4/10/2000.)
Sec. 12-154. RESPONSIBILITY OF VEHICLE OWNER FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any vehicle registered in his or her name to
110
be unlawfully parked as set out in this Article IV. (Amended 4/10/2000)
Sec. 12-155. ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY
a) It shall be the duty of the town police officers to take the parking meter number, and the
state and vehicle tag number of all vehicles parked in violation of any provision of his division
and to make complaint therefore as they may be directed by the town manager that the proper
fine or penalty may be recovered in an action brought in the name of the town as provided by
law.
b) Nothing contained in this division shall be interpreted to prevent the chief of police and
officers working under his direction from clearing any needed streets within parking meter zones
of all vehicular traffic during fires and during and preparatory to parades.
c) Any person who shall violate any provision of this division shall be fined in accordance
with section 1-13 of this code.
d) A certified copy from a state, commonwealth or provincial commissioner, registrar or
deputy registrar of motor vehicles, or other duly constituted licensing authority, showing that the
license tag or number plate was issued to the defendant shall be proof of the defendant's
ownership of the motor vehicle described therein.
e) Any vehicle which has accumulated a total of two (2) or more notices for metered parking
and/or non-metered violations, as provided in this Article, and which is parked or left on any
public street or in or upon any other place within the town where the parking or leaving of such
vehicle is governed by regulation under this division, may be immobilized or removed and stored
pursuant to the provisions of this section, until all charges both for all outstanding violations and
the charges imposed by such immobilization or removal and storage have been paid in full, or
until a bond, certified by the chief of police or his duly authorized representative in an amount
equal to the charges set forth above has been posted.
f) The chief of police or his duly authorized representative shall notify by certified mail,
return receipt requested, the registered owner of the vehicle or a holder of a security interest
therein, if his identity can be readily ascertained, within seven (7) days of the storage of a vehicle
pursuant to subsection e) of this section.
g) The notice referred to in subsection f) shall be tendered on forms prescribed and provided
by the chief of police and shall describe the year, make, model, and serial number of the stored
vehicle; the storage location of such vehicle; and the requirements of release as set forth in
subsection f) hereof, and shall include a notice of the right to reclaim such vehicle within ninety
(90) days after the date of the mailing of the notice. The notice shall indicate that failure to
reclaim the vehicle within the time provided shall be deemed to transfer all right, title, and
interest in such vehicle to the town. Upon the failure of the registered owner of the vehicle or a
111
holder of a security interest therein to reclaim the vehicle within the time prescribed, the police
department may dispose of such vehicle in the manner desired.
h) If the chief of police or his duly authorized representative is unable to ascertain the identity
of the registered owner of a vehicle removed pursuant to this division or the holder of a security
interest therein, he shall cause to be published once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the town the notice set forth in subsection f) hereof.(Code
1966, Ch. 9, § § 12, 15, 16, 19, 20; Ord. of 11-8-82, ~ 20 ; sec. 154 a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h amended
4/10/2000.)
DIVISION 5. AUTHORIZING REMOVAL OF MOTOR VEHICLES
Sec. 12-156. PARKING PROHIBITED
No person shall park or cause to be parked or leave unattended any motor vehicle in any public,
municipal or private parking lot, drive or way, where such parking is clearly prohibited by signs,
markings upon the pavement, or actual notice.
(Ord. of l/l/04)
Sec. 12-157. REMOVAL OF MOTOR VEHICLES
The Selectmen, Town Manager, Chief of Police, Property Owner or Property Lessee may
remove or cause to be removed from any public, municipal or private parking lot, drive or way a
motor vehicle found to be parked in violation of Section 12-156.
(Ord. of 1/1/04)
Sec. 12-158. RECOVERY OF COSTS AND CREATION OF LIEN
The owner of a motor vehicle removed pursuant to Section 12-157 shall be required to pay the
reasonable towing and storage charges actually resulting therefrom in an amount not to exceed
$100 for towing and $20 per day for storage and the Town of St. Johnsbury, the Property Owner
or the Property Lessee, as the case may be, shall have a lien imposed against the motor vehicle to
secure payment thereof. Such costs, charges, and lien shall be in addition to any criminal
112
penalty.
ARTICLE V. VEHICLES
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 12-159--12-170. RESERVED
DIVISION 2. SNOWMOBILES
Sec. 12-171. PURPOSE
Operation of snowmobiles on the streets and roads enumerated in section 12-172 is for the sole
purpose of providing ingress and egress from and to designated snowmobile trails and for no
other purpose.
(Ord. of 1-8-73, § 3)
Sec. 12-172. ROUTES DESIGNATED
a) Operation of snowmobiles is hereby permitted only upon and over the following streets and
public highways in the town subject, however, to the express conditions and limitations set forth
in sections 12-173 through 12-175:
1) Highway # 69, from Town Highway #68 to Danville line;
2) Highway #68, from former Village of St. Johnsbury line to Danville Line;
3) Highway #71, from Town Highway # 68 to Town Highway #73;
4) Highway #73, from Town Highway #73 to Vermont Route # 5;
5) Highway #14, from Town Highway #73 to its termination point;
6) Highway #17, from former Village of St. Johnsbury Line to Waterford Town Line;
7) Highway #80, from intersection of State Aid Highway #4 to Waterford Town Line;
8) Highway #37, from U. S. #2 to Town highway #16;
9) Highway #16, from State Aid Highway #6 to its termination point;
10) Highway #36, from Town Highway #16 to its termination point;
11) Highway #20, from Town Highway #14 to State Aid Highway #8;
12) Highway #14, from Town Highway #20 to Lyndon Line;
113
13) Highway #15, from U. S. #5 to Town Road #14;
14) Highway #4, from Town Highway #51 to Lyndon Line;
15) Highway #5, from town Highway #8 to Lyndon Line;
16) Highway # 6, from Town Highway #5 to Danville Line;
17) Highway #49, from Town Highway #4 to U.S. #5(across iron bridge);
18) Highway #27, from Town highway #49 North to Town Highway #12;
19) Highway #12, from Town Highway #4 North to Lyndon Line;
20) Highway #32, from Town Highway #27 to its termination point;
21) Highway #10, from Town Highway #49 to Lyndon Line;
22) Highway #11, from Town Highway #10 to its termination point;
23) Highway #9, from Town Highway #11 to its termination point;
24) Highway #31, from Town Highway #10 to its termination point;
25) Highway #18, from State Aid Highway #8 to Kirby Line;
26) State Aid Highway #7, from southerly side of its intersection with Town Highway #8
to northerly side of that intersection;
27) Highway #8, from Town Highway #7 to Town Highway #46;
28) Highway #46, from Town Highway #8 to Town Highway #4;
29) Highway #48, from its termination point to its intersection with Town Highway
#9;
30) Highway #23, from its termination point to its intersection with Town Highway
#5;
31) Highway #25, from Town Highway #5 to its termination point;
32) Highway # 7 from Bridge 28 northwest to Highway # 43;
33) Highway # 524 (River Street).
(Ord. of 1-8-73, § 2; Ord. of 1-10-83, § 2; Ord. of 10-3-96, §2)
Cross reference-Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 11.
Sec. 12-173. SPEED LIMIT
No person shall operate a snowmobile upon the streets or public highways of the town at a speed
in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour.
(Ord. of 1-8-73, §4)
Sec. 12-174. PROCEDURE FOR OPERATION
a) operator of a snowmobile shall keep his machine as far to the right of the centerline of
the highway as possible and shall operate his machine in single file at all times.
b) No person shall operate a snowmobile at a distance of less than fifteen (15) yards
between preceding snowmobiles or other vehicles.
c) The operator of a snowmobile shall yield the right-of-way to any other motor vehicle
operating upon the streets and public highways of the town.
114
(Ord. of 1-8-73, § §5-7)
Sec. 12-175. PENALTY
Any person who violates any section of this division shall be fined not more than fifty dollars
($50.00) for each violation.
(Ord. of 1-8-73, §8)
115
Chapter 13: UTILITIES
Art. I. In General, §§ 13-1--13-10
Art. II. Wastewater Systems, §§ 13-11--13-149
Div. 1. In General, §§ 13-11--13-20
Div. 2. Use of Public Sewers Required, §§ 13-21--13-30
Div. 3. Capacity Allocation, §§ 13-31--13-50
Div. 4. Building Sewers and Connection, §§ 13-51--13-80
Div. 5. Use of Public Sewer, §§ 13-81--13-100
Div. 6. Scavenger Waste, §§ 13-101--13-110
Div. 7. Private Sewerage System, §§ 13-111--13-115
Div. 8. Sewer Rents, §§ 13-115--13-125
Div. 9. Applications/Permits/Fees, §§ 13-126--13-135
Div. 10. Protection from Damage, §§ 13-136--13-140
Div. 11. Powers and Authority of Inspectors, §§ 13-141--13-145
Div. 12. Penalties/Miscellaneous, §§ 13-146--13-199
Art. III. Water Systems, §§ 13-200--13-299
Div. 1. General §§ 13-200--13-209
Div. 2. Systems Expansion §§ 13-210--13-214
Div. 3. Resident Inspections §§ 13-215--13-220
Div. 4. Application Procedure §§ 13-221--13-226
Div. 5. Regulations - Operations §§ 13-227--13-245
Div. 6. Water Rents - §§ 13-246--13-254
Div. 7. Penalties/Miscellaneous -13-255--13-299
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 13-1--13-10. Reserved
ARTICLE II. WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
Pursuant to No. 345 of the Acts of 1957, it is hereby ordained by the Town of St. Johnsbury,
Vermont that the protection of the health and safety of the Town of St. Johnsbury, its inhabitants
and the general public requires the establishment of minimum standards governing the design,
construction, installation and operation of public and private wastewater systems.
116
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
Sec. 13-11. Title
All provisions contained herein, together with such additions and amendments as may be
hereafter adopted, are hereby designated as the "Ordinance Regulating the Use of Public and
Private Wastewater Systems" hereinafter sometimes referred to as the Ordinance.
Sec. 13-12. Objective
The principal objective of wastewater facilities is to collect sanitary and industrial wastewater
and to provide the required or justified degree of treatment under the most favorable and
economic conditions. Therefore, the discharge of wastewaters into the public sewers which do
not require or justify treatment or which will cause damage to or stoppage of the wastewater
system or interfere with wastewater treatment processes are prohibited and/or rigorously
controlled.
Sec. 13-13. Inconsistent Provisions.
Where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction or a stricter standard than any other statute,
by-law, ordinance rule, regulation, permit, easement, or agreement, the provisions of this
Ordinance shall control.
Sec. 13-14. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this ordinance
shall be as follows:
(a) "BOD" (Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five (5) days at
20?C, expressed in milligrams per liter. BOD is a measure of wastewater strength.
(b) "Board" means the Board of Selectmen of the Town of St. Johnsbury, Vermont, acting
as the Board of Wastewater Disposal Commissioners and Board of Sewage Disposal
Commissioners under 24 V.S.A., § 3614 or the St. Johnsbury Town Manager when performing
117
duties now conferred by law upon the Selectmen pursuant to 24 V.S.A. § 1236.
(c) "Building Drain" means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the
building and conveys it through the building wall to the building sewer. The building drain
extends to five (5) feet (1.52 meters) beyond the outer face of the building wall.
(d) "Building Sewer" means that part of the wastewater system which receives the
wastewater from the building drain and conveys it to the nearest end of the house connection
unless a house connection is not available, whereby the building sewer shall be extended to the
nearest available "Y" branch or manhole on the main sewer.
(e) "Chief Operator" means the person or firm acting under the authority of the Board who
is responsible for operating and maintaining the wastewater treatment plant, pump stations,
sludge disposal facilities and other appurtenances as directed by the Board.
(f) "Clerk" means the St. Johnsbury Town Clerk.
(g) "Connection Fee" means a fee imposed on applicants for the municipality's cost of
performing, supplying materials, supervising, inspecting and administering a connection to the
wastewater system including any necessary sewer service extension, upgrading sewers or for any
portion of these activities.
(h) "Committed Reserve Capacity" means the total amount of total development
wastewater flow (gallons per day) and strength (BOD pounds per day) from all projects /
buildings approved by the Board and the Department for discharge to the treatment plant, but not
yet discharging at the time of the calculation.
(i) "Combined Sewer" means a sewer receiving both surface
runoff and wastewater.
(j) "Department" means the Vermont State Department having the permitting authority
over wastewater disposal.
(k) "Development" means the construction of improvements on a tract of land for any
purpose, including, but not limited to, residential, commercial, industrial, manufacturing,
farming, educational, medical, charitable, civic, recreational, and religious uses.
(l) "Development Wastewater Flow" means the flow resulting from full use of the
development at its peak capacity, which flow shall be calculated using flow quantities, adopted
as rules by the Department, as promulgated at the time a connection permit application is made.
(m) "Development Wastewater Strength" means the BOD (pounds per day) from full use
of the development at its peak capacity, which flow shall be calculated using BOD waste
118
strength adopted by the Board.
(n) "Discharge Permit" means a permit issued by the Department pursuant to authority
granted in 10 V.S.A. Chapter 47.
(o) "Garbage" means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
(p) "Health Officer" means the legally designated Health Officer or Deputy Health Officer
of the Town of St. Johnsbury, Vermont.
(q) "House Connection" means that part of the wastewater system that runs from the main
sewer to the building and includes all necessary fittings.
(r) "Industrial Wastewater" means the liquid waste from an industrial manufacturing
process, commercial trade or business. Industrial wastes do not include wastewater.
(s) "Impact Fee" means a fee imposed on applicants for capacity allocation equal to the
capital cost per gallon and/or pounds of BOD of wastewater treatment and disposal capacity
attributable to the project or development. This fee shall be consistent with the intent of impact
fees authorized under 24 V.S.A. Chapter 131.
(t) "Main Sewer" means the sewers laid longitudinally along Town streets or other Town
rights-of-way and is controlled by public authority.
(u) "Natural Outlet" means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body
of surface or groundwater.
(v) "Owner" means any person, who owns or possesses any property.
(w) "Person" means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
institution, partnership, group, governmental entity or other entity.
(x) "Permitted Wastewater Flow" means the maximum plant wastewater flow authorized
in the Discharge Permit.
(y) "Plant Wastewater Flow" means the wastewater inflow to the treatment plant in
gallons per day on an annual average basis (365 day average).
(z) "Plant Wastewater Strength" means the BOD contained in the wastewater inflow to the
treatment plant in pounds per day on an annual average basis (365 day average).
(aa) "Public Wastewater System or Facilities" means all facilities for collecting, pumping,
treating and disposing of wastewater controlled and operated by the Town of St. Johnsbury.
119
(bb) "Private Wastewater System" means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating,
and disposing of wastewater not under the control of the Town of St. Johnsbury.
(cc) "pH" means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams
per liter of solution.
(dd) "Properly Shredded Garbage" means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried
freely under flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than
one-half (1/2) inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
(ee) "Reserve Capacity" means the permitted wastewater inflow and/or inflow strength
minus the actual plant wastewater inflow, and strength during the preceding 12 months.
(ff) "Sanitary Sewer" means a sewer which carries wastewater and to which storm,
surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
(gg) "Sanitary means wastewater of the same character and range of strength as expected
from homes.
(hh) "Secretary" means the Secretary of the Agency of Natural Resources, State of
Vermont or its representatives.
(ii) "Sewage" means a combination of the wastewater from residences, business buildings,
institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and storm waters
as may be present.
(jj) "Sewage Treatment Plant" or "Plant" means the Town of St. Johnsbury wastewater
treatment facility.
(kk) "Sewage Works" means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing
of wastewater.
(ll) "Sewer(s)" means a pipe(s) or conduit(s) for carrying wastewater.
(mm) "Town" means the Town of St. Johnsbury, Vermont.
(nn) "Wastewater Service Area" means that area of the Town that is within 250 feet (76.2
meters) horizontally from existing municipal wastewater collection lines and manholes.
(oo) "Shall" means mandatory.
(pp) "May" means permissive.
120
(qq) "Slug" means any discharge of sanitary sewage, or industrial wastewater which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration
longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour
concentration or flows during normal operation.
(rr) "Storm Drain" or ("Storm Sewer") means a sewer which carries storm and surface
waters and drainage, but excludes wastewater other than unpolluted cooling water.
(ss) "Subdivision" means a tract of land, owned or controlled by a person as defined
herein, which has been partitioned or divided for the purpose of sale or lease into two (2) or more
lots.
(tt) "Subsurface Wastewater Disposal System" means any wastewater treatment system
whereby the tank or plant effluent is leached into the ground by subsurface disposal means.
(uu) "Superintendent" means that employee of the Town who is designated from time to
time by the Board as the person in charge of maintenance of the public wastewater collection
system (sanitary sewers).
(vv) "Suspended Solids" means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory
filtering.
(ww) "Uncommitted Reserve Capacity" means that portion of the reserve capacity
remaining after subtracting the development wastewater flow of all projects approved by the
Board but not yet discharging to the Sewer.
(xx) "Wastewater" means sanitary wastewater and industrial wastewater (sometimes
referred to as "sewage").
(yy) "Watercourse" means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
(zz) "Initiate Construction" means:
(1) For building development; the completion of the foundation.
(2) For subdivision development; the sale of the individual lots.
(aaa) "Completed Construction" means:
(1) For building development completion of construction of all foundations,
framing, siding and roofs.
121
(2) For subdivision development; the sale of the individual lots.
Sec. 13-15. Abbreviations
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following abbreviations shall have the meaning ascribed
to them under this Division. References to standards of the following organizations shall refer to
the latest edition of same.
(a) ANSI means American National Standards Institute.
(b) ASME means American Society of Mechanical Engineers.
(c) ASTM means American Society for Testing and Materials.
(d) AWWA means American Water Works Association.
(e) BOCA means Building Officials Code Association.
(f) NPC means National Plumbing Code.
(g) CS means Commercial Standards.
(h) WPCF means Water Pollution Control Facility.
(i) ppm means parts per million.
(j) mg/l means milligrams per liter.
(k) Degrees F means degrees Fahrenheit.
(l) Degrees C means degrees Centigrade.
(m) cm. means centimeter.
(n) m. means meter.
(o) sq.m. means square meters.
(p) l. means liters.
(q) kg. means kilograms.
122
Secs. 13-16--13-20. Reserved
DIVISION 2. USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED
Sec. 13-21. Unlawful Disposal
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be placed or deposited upon
public or private property within the Town or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Town,
any human excrement or other objectionable waste.
Sec. 13-22. Unlawful Discharge
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of said Town, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable
treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and the laws
and regulations of the State of Vermont.
Sec. 13-23. Private Disposal Facilities-Unlawful
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool leaching field or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
wastewater.
Sec. 13-24. Sewer Connection Required
The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation or other purpose situated within the Town and abutting on any street, alley or right-ofway
in which there is located a public sewer of the Town, is hereby required, if wastewater is
generated, to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the
proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, within forty-five (45)
days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within two hundred
fifty (250) feet (76.2 meters) of the building(s) requiring service. Installation of or repair to a
private wastewater system servicing a building located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a
public sewer is not permitted unless the Board finds that connection would cause extreme
123
hardship and the private wastewater system would meet all pertinent State rules.
Sec. 13-25. Closure of Private Sewers
At the discretion of the Board, private wastewater systems which are abandoned because of the
availability of public sanitary sewers may be required to be thoroughly and properly cleaned,
disinfected, and filled in with clean sand or gravel or removed according to good sanitation
practice and under the inspection and direction of the Board or its representatives.
Secs. 13-26--13-30. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. CAPACITY ALLOCATION
Sec. 13-31. Ownership & Permit
The Town owns and operates a sewage treatment plant and sewage works as defined in 24
V.S.A., § 3501(6) and 3601. The Plant has a permitted capacity, and is operated in accord with a
discharge permit issued by the Department under authority granted in 10 V.S.A., Chapter 47.
The Board is obligated by law to comply with conditions of that permit, and to operate and
manage the Plant and Sewage Works as governmental functions under and pursuant to 24
V.S.A., Chapters 97 and 101.
Sec. 13-32. Introduction to Reserve Capacity Allocation
(a) The permitted capacity of the Plant and Sewage Works is the property of the Town.
The uncommitted reserve capacity of the Plant and Sewage Works shall be allocated by the
Board in the manner described below. This ordinance is adopted in accordance with the
provisions of 24 V.S.A., § 3625, in the manner provided in No. 345 of the Acts of 1957 as
Amended, and shall not be construed as an abandonment or relinquishment of the authority or
responsibility of the Board to regulate, control and supervise all means and methods of
wastewater collection, treatment and disposal within the Town, nor shall it be construed to
impair or inhibit the ability of the Town to contract with persons for the collection, transmission
and treatment of wastewater.
(b) The Town has a design wastewater treatment plant capacity of 1.6 million gallons per
day and currently operates the treatment Plant at an average inflow (gallons) and wastewater
strength (pounds of BOD) per day as identified in the Plant operations reports published
124
monthly by the chief operator of the sewage treatment plant.
Sec. 13-33. Allocation Priorities
(a) All allocations to projects shall be based on the development wastewater flow and
strength. Any differential between actual and development wastewater flows and strength that
occurs is not available to the development owner for re-allotment to another project or a project
expansion.
(b) Allocation of uncommitted reserve capacity shall comply with reserve capacity policy
established by the Board to govern the gross allocation of reserve capacity before the allocation
principles are applied to specific projects.
(c) Residential, commercial, institutional and industrial facilities existing within the sewer
service area existing on the date of adoption of this Ordinance which are required to be
connected to the Town sewer by the provision hereof, or by virtue of existing pollution from the
facilities to waters of the State, shall be entitled to first priority in allocation of uncommitted
reserve capacity. New development within or outside the sewer service area will have second
priority of uncommitted reserve capacity provided that the development is in the best interest of
the Town. No allocation of reserve capacity shall be made for facilities outside the sewer service
area existing on the date of adoption of this Ordinance unless the Board finds that the extension
of the Sewers and the proposed development is in the best interest of the Town.
(d) Subsequent to application of the allocation priority, uncommitted reserve capacity in
the sewage treatment plant may be allocated to specific projects according to the procedures
established by the Board.
(e) Building sewer connection permit applications shall be filed in the Town Clerk's office
and marked with the time and date by the person receiving the application. Thereafter the Board
shall review the applications on a first come, first serve basis. The total remaining uncommitted
wastewater reserve capacity shall be allocated by the Board in such a way that there are no
limitations on what total reserve amounts can be allocated in any one year as long as
uncommitted capacity exists, and no limitation of the type of development receiving the
allocation. The total reserve capacity will be determined each six (6) months and committed
reserve will be continuously recorded for use in allocation decisions.
(f) The Board retains the right to review applications and make allocations on other than a
first-come-first-serve basis if they find such action is in the Town's best interest.
Sec. 13-34. Cost Recovery for Town Sewer Expansion
125
Any expansion of the Town sewer service area to provide for new users shall be funded by the
proposed users paying the portion of the cost of the expansion and upgrade of the Town Sewers
determined appropriate by the Board. In determining this portion, the Board may consider the
percentage of existing development out of the total of existing and proposed development to be
served. In determining this portion of cost the Board may also consider whether or not the
existing developments to be served have helped finance the existing wastewater system. The
Board shall assure that the portion paid by existing users can be financed within a three year
period without causing a rate increase of more than 5% within the three year period.
Sec. 13-35. Application Requirement
Persons wishing to use the Town's wastewater system shall apply to the Board on a form
prescribed by the Board. Such application shall:
(a) Identify the development wastewater flow and strength to be generated by the
project/development;
(b) Include calculations for the volume, flow rate, strength and any other characteristics
determined appropriate by the Board;
(c) Unless waived by the Board all calculations required in subsections (a) and (b) above
for developments generating in excess of 1000 gpd of wastewater, strength in excess of 200 mg/l
of BOD per day shall be certified by a Vermont registered engineer.
(d) Be accompanied by plans and specifications for the construction of building sewers
and any municipal sewer expansions, including pump stations, required to service the
development prepared by a Vermont registered engineer. This requirement to submit plans and
specifications may be waived by the Superintendent until final connection approval.
Sec. 13-36. Preliminary Building Sewer Connection Approval Findings
Upon receipt of the connection application and supportive documents, the Board may make
preliminary approval of uncommitted reserve capacity upon making affirmative findings that:
(a) The proposed wastewater is of domestic, sanitary origin and that there is sufficient
uncommitted reserve capacity to accommodate the volume and strength of the proposed
connection; or
(b) The proposed wastewater is not of domestic sanitary origin but that sufficient evidence
has been presented by the applicant to demonstrate that the flow and strength of the wastewater
is compatible with the proper operation of the wastewater systems and that the proposed
wastewater will not alone or in combination with other wastes cause a violation of the discharge
126
permit, pass through the Plant without treatment, interfere or otherwise disrupt the proper quality
and disposal of Plant sludge or be injurious in any other manner to the wastewater system and
that there is sufficient uncommitted reserve capacity to accommodate the flow and strength of
the wastewater from the proposed development; and
(c) The proposed use of wastewater reserve capacity complies with the allocation
priorities and principles and is not in conflict with any other enactment adopted by the Board or
Town.
Sec. 13-37. Conditions of Preliminary Building Sewer Connection Approval
The Board, after making approval findings may issue a preliminary building sewer connection
approval, which approval shall be a binding commitment of capacity to the project contingent on
compliance with any conditions attached to the preliminary approval and the subsequent issuance
of a final connection approval. The preliminary approval conditions shall include:
(a) Specification of the period of time during which the interim connection approval shall
remain valid, and provisions for time extensions if approved by the Board.
(b) Incorporation of specific conditions which must be fulfilled by the applicant to
maintain validity of the preliminary connection approval.
(c) Provision for revocation by the action of the Board on failure of the applicant to fulfill
requirements of the preliminary building sewer connection approval.
(d) Specification that the recipient of the preliminary building sewer connection approval
may not transfer, by any means, the preliminary connection approval to any other person or
connect to the Sewers.
Sec. 13-38. Other Permits Required Prior to Final Connection Approval
Prior to final building sewer connection approval the applicant shall have:
(a) Secured all other applicable local, State and Federal permits required for the
development/project;
(b) Paid to the Town all connection fees, impact fees, permit fees and other local fees or
taxes. Impact fees will be partially based on the flowage and strength of the proposed
wastewater.
127
(c) Filed with the Board the plans and specifications for connection to and, if necessary,
expansion of the municipal sewers.
Sec. 13-39. Final Building Sewer Connection Approval Requirements
(a) The Board upon making affirmative findings that all conditions of the preliminary
building sewer connection approval and final building sewer connection requirement in
sections 13-27 and 13-28 have been fulfilled or satisfied shall issue the final connection
approval permit which approval may be conditioned as follows:
(1) The permit shall specify the allowed wastewater flowage and strength and any
other characteristics determined appropriate by the Board.
(2) The capacity allocation is not transferable to any other person or project unless
approved in writing by the Board.
(3) The construction of the building sewer connection and, if necessary, the
municipal Sewer expansion, must be overseen and certified to be in compliance
with the plans and specifications and good construction practice by a licensed
plumber, Vermont Registered Professional engineer or employee of the Town
authorized by the Board.
(4) Capacity allocated in conjunction with the final building sewer connection
permit shall revert to the Town if the permit recipient has failed to initiate
construction within two years from the date the permit is issued.
(b) Regardless of the permit expiration period above, the Board may permit construction
of the development over a longer period if this action is in the Town's best interest.
(c) In cases where a final connection permit expires and a new person applies for capacity
on the same or different project, the Board may consider previous fees paid by the original
person when setting fees for the new person applying for capacity.
(d) The Superintendent shall be notified one week in advance of any proposed sewer
connection authorized by a final connection permit. The connection to the municipal
sewer shall not be performed unless a municipal official is present and shall not be
covered until approved by the official.
Sec. 13-40. Transfer of Allocation
128
(a) Initially, reserve capacity is allocated by the Board to a specific person, project and
parcel of land. The allocation is not made solely to a parcel of land and therefore does not
run with the land during project construction. After completion of the project or permit
expiration, however, the allocation (adjusted to the actual development constructed, if
necessary) will run with the land.
(b) The transfer of a capacity allocation is prohibited unless approved in writing by the
Board at the original owner's request.
(c) The Board may approve a transfer of capacity from one project to another and one
owner to another provided the new project and owner meet all the requirements for the
final connection permit originally issued and the original owner requests such transfer.
Sec. 13-41. Authority to Require Connection
Nothing herein shall be construed as limiting or impairing the authority of the Town or the Board
to require connections to the Plant and Sewers under the laws of the State of Vermont or local
ordinances.
Secs. 13-42--50. Reserved
DIVISION 4. BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
Sec. 13-51. Permit Required
No unauthorized person shall cover or uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use,
alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a sewer permit
from the Town. Any person proposing a new discharge into the system or a substantial change in
the volume or character of pollutants that are being discharged into the system shall obtain a
written sewer connection permit from the Board at least forty-five (45) days prior to the
proposed change or connection. No such change or connection shall be made without the written
permit from the Board.
Sec. 13-52. Classification of Permits
129
There shall be three (3) classes of Public Sewer Connection permits: (1) residential, (2)
commercial and (3) industrial. In any case, the Owner, or owner's agent, shall make application
on a special form provided by the Board. The permit application shall be supplemented by any
plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Board. The
permit, inspection and connection fees shall be determined by the Board and will be posted in the
office of the Town Clerk.
Sec. 13-53. Costs and Expenses
All costs and expenses related with the installation and connection to a public sewer shall be
borne by the Owner. The Owner shall indemnify the Town from any loss or damage that may be
caused directly or indirectly by the installation of the sewer connection. The Owner shall post a
cash Bond up to the value of the amount for materials and installation.
Sec. 13-54. Separate Connections
A separate and independent sewer connection shall be provided for every building except where
one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or
can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard, or driveway, in
which case the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and
the whole considered as one sewer connection. Use of private sewers which accept and convey
flow from more than one building may not be used except when found, upon examination and
test by the Town, to be in satisfactory condition and meeting all requirements of this Ordinance.
The burden of proof and all expenses incurred by the Town to determine the condition and
adequacy of the private sewer shall be borne by the Owner of said private sewer. Any changes in
use of the building shall conform to the provisions of this Ordinance.
Sec. 13-55. Meters
The Board may require the Owner of a project or developer to install a water meter so recorded
flow can be used to determine the wastewater charge. Water saving fixtures or holding tanks may
be required by the Town for projects/buildings and developments connecting to the sewer
system.
Sec. 13-56. Old Building Sewers
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found,
upon examination and test by the Town, to meet all requirements of this Ordinance.
130
Sec. 13-57. Construction Practices
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be
used in excavating, placing the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all
conform to all applicable requirements, rules and regulations of the Town. In the absence of
specific provisions or in amplification thereof the materials and procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
Sec. 13-58. Building and Plumbing Codes
The connection of the building sewer to the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of all
applicable rules and regulations of the Town or the procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall
be made gas tight and water-tight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials
must be approved by the Superintendent before installation. The specifications set forth in
BOCA shall apply to internal plumbing and the first ten feet outside the building.
Sec. 13-59. Prior Notice Required
Prior to any connection to the house connection wye "Y" or to the main sewer, the
Superintendent shall be given forty-eight (48) hours’ notice in order that work supervision may
be scheduled. If the Superintendent has not been properly notified, completed work may be
required to be uncovered for examination, at the Owner's own expense.
Sec. 13-60. Minimum Dimensions for Building Sewers
The diameter of the residential building sewer shall not be less than four (4) inches (10.2 cm) and
commercial and industrial not less than six (6) inches. The building sewer shall be laid on a
uniform grade, wherever practicable, at a straight grade of at least one-fourth (1/4) of an inch per
foot (2%). Where, in special cases, a minimum grade of one-fourth (1/4) inch per foot cannot be
maintained, a grade of one-eighth (1/8) inch per foot (1%) may be permitted, but only after the
Superintendent has given written approval for the specific connection. Application for a
variance shall be made prior to construction.
Sec. 13-61. Location of Building Sewers
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the
131
basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three (3) feet (91.4 cm) of
any bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford
protection from frost. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade in the direction from the
main sewer to the building and in a straight alignment insofar as possible. Change in direction
shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings with suitable clean-outs or flush holes
as described in Sec. 13-69 of this Division.
Sec. 13-62. Below Grade Sewers
In all buildings in which the plumbing is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
wastewater to be carried by such sewer shall be lifted by approved artificial means and
discharged to the building sewer.
Sec. 13-63. Storm Water Collection
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway
drains, cellar drains, basement sumps, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer which, in turn, is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. All
such connections which exist shall be disconnected by the Owner, at his or her expense, within
thirty (30) days of receipt of notification by the Board.
Sec. 13-64. Building Sewer Construction Practices
When installing the building sewer, the trenches shall be dug in a careful manner and properly
sheathed where required. The excavated materials shall be placed in a separate pile from road
materials and shall be piled in a compact heap so placed as to cause the least possible
inconvenience to the public. Proper barricades and lights must be maintained around the trench
to guard against accidents.
Sec. 13-65. Backfilling
In backfilling, the material under, around and for two (2) feet (61 cm) immediately over the pipe
shall be selected in accordance with pipe manufacturer’s allocation procedures. The backfill
must be carefully tamped and the balance of the trench backfilled in a workmanlike manner,
tamping and filling in eight (8) inch (20.3 cm) layers so as to reduce any settlement. When the
trench has been filled to the proper height, the road material is to be replaced and heavily tamped
or rolled.
132
Sec. 13-66. Excavations
Where the trench is excavated in rock, the rock must be carefully excavated to a depth of six (6)
inches (15.2 cm) below the bottom of the sewer and the trench brought to the proper elevation
with gravel or other material satisfactory to the Superintendent. The remainder of the trench
must be backfilled with suitable material as described in Sec. 13-65 of this Division.
Sec. 13-67. Subsoil Conditions
Where subsurface-soil conditions warrant, special precautions must be taken as may be directed
by the Superintendent.
Sec. 13-68. Connection to Sewer Main
The connection of the building sewer to the main sewer shall be made at the house connection at
the property line or, if no house connection exists, connection shall be made at the nearest
available "Y" connection on the main sewer or at a manhole. The Superintendent will designate
the position of the end of the house connection at the property line or the "Y" connection on the
main sewer, whichever is appropriate. If it becomes necessary to cut into the main sewer, when
no other source of connection is available, then such connection shall be made as directed by and
under the supervision of the Superintendent. The dead-ends of all pipes not immediately
connected with the house plumbing system must be securely closed by a water-tight cover of
impermeable material and properly marked and located.
Sec. 13-69. Building Sewer Clean-outs
The use of clean-outs on the building sewer shall be made by installing a "Y" and one-eighth
(1/8) bends. The clean-outs shall ordinarily be installed at the point of connection between the
building sewer and the outside part of the house plumbing system at all curves on the building
sewer and on the straight part of the house sewer to the main sewer. The clean-out shall be
brought up from the building sewer to four (4) inches (10.2 cm) below ground level and properly
capped. Locations of all clean-outs shall be recorded and turned over to the Superintendent.
Clean-outs shall be of the same diameter as the building sewer and shall be located where
directed by the Superintendent.
Sec. 13-70. Compliance with Ordinance
Before any portion of an existing building sewer or the house plumbing system outside of the
133
building is connected to the main sewer, the Owner shall prove, to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent that it is clean and conforms in every respect to this Ordinance and all joints are
water-tight.
Sec. 13-71. Inspection Certificate
Where pipe is installed for building sewers, such work shall be performed by a licensed plumber
under the certification of a Vermont licensed professional engineer or under the inspection of the
Superintendent.
Sec. 13-72. Testing
The Superintendent shall determine the appropriate tests to be made for pipe tightness. The
plumber and contractor, at their own expense, shall furnish all necessary tools, labor, materials
and assistance for such tests and shall remove or repair any defective materials when so ordered
by the Board.
Sec. 13-73. Required Insurance and Bond
Any person performing work on public property for the purpose of installing a building sewer
shall file with the Superintendent evidence of adequate insurance coverage for liability and
property damage and provide a cash Bond for the value of materials and installation. Minimum
amounts of insurance coverage and cash Bond will be established by the Board and posted in the
Town Clerk's Office.
Sec. 13-74. Guarding of Worksite
All work shall be adequately guarded with barricades, lights and other measures for protection to
the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, curbs and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Superintendent and other
Town authorities having jurisdiction.
Sec. 13-75. Vehicular and Pedestrian Access
The Contractor shall not block any driveway, street or road at any time without permission of the
Superintendent and other controlling agencies. Every effort shall be made to permit the
movement of vehicular traffic at all times. Whenever it becomes necessary to cross or interfere
with roads, walks or drives, whether public or private, the Contractor shall maintain, at his or her
own expense and subject to the approval of the Superintendent, safe bridges or other means of
egress.
134
Sec. 13-76. Maintenance
Maintenance of all private wastewater facilities including, but not limited to, (1) house plumbing
systems, (2) building sewers to the main sewer, (3) house connections, (4) sewers and (5)
appurtenances shall be the responsibility of the Owner, at his or her expense. The Owner shall be
solely responsible for continually maintaining such facilities in satisfactory operating condition.
Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, (1) maintaining flow, (2) clearing obstructions,
(3) maintaining all joints gas and water-tight, (4) repair or replace collapsed, deteriorated or
defective materials, and (5) all other work which is necessary and essential to maintaining proper
operation and preserving the structural integrity and water-tightness of the system.
Sec. 13-77. Limitations on Permits
The Owner is committed by sewer connection and any other permits to construct the
project/building/development to meet all specifications for which capacity was issued. The
Superintendent or other person authorized by the Town will inspect existing buildings and
construction sites from time to time during each construction phase to assure permit
specifications are being met. A final inspection shall be made prior to the connection from the
building to the main sewer line by the Superintendent. Any permit specification violation not
corrected within a reasonable time set by the Board will render the sewer permit void. The
Owner may apply for a new sewer permit; however, there is no guarantee capacity will exist for
a new sewer permit to be issued. The sewer permit is a unilateral agreement between the Town
and the Owner of the project/building. The Owner to whom the sewer permit is issued does not
own the capacity and forfeits all rights to capacity if preliminary and final permit requirements
are not met. The capacity allocation belongs to the Town and is not transferable until the
project/building/development is constructed and sewer connected to the main sewer line.
Secs. 13-78--13-80. Reserved
DIVISION 5. USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWER
Sec. 13-81. Unlawful Discharge to Sanitary System
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water,
ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or uncontaminated cooling water to any sanitary
135
system.
Sec. 13-82. Storm Sewer Discharge
Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage may be discharged to storm sewers, or to a natural
outlet approved by the Board. Industrial cooling water may be discharged, upon approval of the
Board, to a storm sewer, or natural outlet.
Sec. 13-83. Prohibited Class A Discharge
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described Class A
waters or wastes to any public sewer:
(a) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid
or gas.
(b) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere
with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a
public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment
plant.
(c) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.5 or higher than 8.5, or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage treatment plant.
(d) Any ashes, cinder, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics,
wood, paunch manure, ground garbage, whole blood, hair, flashings, entrails and paper
dishes, cups, milk containers or any other solid or viscous substance, whether whole or
ground by garbage grinders, capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works.
Sec. 13-84. Prohibited Class B Discharge
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described Class B substances,
materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the Superintendent that such
wastes can harm either the sewage treatment plant, wastewater treatment process, or equipment,
have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public
property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes,
the Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
136
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials, of construction in the sewers, nature of
the wastewater treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability
of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited
are:
(a) Any liquor or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees F (65 degrees C).
(b) Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million, by weight, of
fat, oil, wax or grease, whether emulsified or not, or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees F (0 degrees C) and 150
degrees F (65 degrees C).
(c) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of a
garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4 hp (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Board.
(d) Any chemicals or chemical compounds of the following nature or characteristics or
having similarly objectionable characteristics: alcohols, arsenic and arsenicals, phenols or
cresols, formaldehydes, iodine, manganese, cyanide, heavy metals and other metal
finishing or plant wastes, acid pickling waste, mercury and mercurials, silver and silver
compounds, sulfonamides, toxic dyes (organic or mineral), zinc, all strong oxidizing
agents such as chromates, dichromates, permanganates, peroxide and the like, compounds
producing hydrogen sulfide, or any other toxic, inflammable or explosive gases, either
upon acidification, alkalization, oxidation or reduction, strong reducing agents such as
nitrites, sulphides, sulphites, and the like, radioactive materials or isotopes, whether
neutralized or not.
(e) Any water or wastes containing excessive settle-able solids, iron, chromium, copper,
zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine
demand, exerting an unusual chemical oxygen demand or containing any other material or
constituent in concentrations which exceed limits which may be established by the Board.
(f) Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other waste or odor producing substances,
in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the Board as
necessary, after treatment of the composite wastewater to meet the requirements of the
State, Federal or other public agencies having jurisdiction for such discharge to the
receiving waters.
(g) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed
limits established by the Board in compliance with applicable State or Federal
Regulations.
(h) Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that
unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment
137
plant.
(i) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance.
(j) Any waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the Board, that such waste
can harm the sewers, treatment plant process or equipment, would have an adverse effect
on the receiving stream, or could otherwise endanger human or animal life, limb, public
property or constitute a nuisance.
(k) Any waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or
reduction by the wastewater treatment process employed or proposed or are amendable to
treatment only to such a degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet
the requirements of its discharge permit or of other agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
(l) Materials which exert or cause:
Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime
slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride
and sodium sulfate).
Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).
Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to
constitute a significant load on the wastewater treatment works, which may cause the effluent
limitations of the discharge permit to be exceeded.
Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs".
Sec. 13-85. Conditionally Acceptable Class C Discharge
The admission into the public sewers of any Class C waters or wastes having (a) a five (5) day
BOD greater than 300 mg/l or (b) containing more than 350 mg/l of suspended solids or (c)
containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in Sec. 13-83 and 13-
84 or (d) having an average daily flow greater than two percent (2%) of the average daily
wastewater flow received at the sewage treatment plant shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Board. The Board may:
(a) Reject the wastes, or
(b) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers, or
(c) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, or
138
(d) Require a penalty to be imposed according to the severity of the problem, or
(e) Require any combination of the foregoing.
If the Board permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design, plans,
specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed equipment and facilities;
shall be submitted for the approval of the Board and the Agency of Natural Resources and no
construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals have been obtained in
writing. Further, pretreatment facilities must be consistent with the requirements of any State
pretreatment permit issued to the industry.
Sec. 13-86. Interceptors Required
Grease, oil, hair, and sand interceptors shall be provided when in the opinion of the Board, they
are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or
any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not
be required by the Board for private living quarters. Interceptors shall be located as to be readily
and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
Sec. 13-87. Minimum Standard for Interceptors.
Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding
abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, water-tight
and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gas-tight and
water-tight.
Sec. 13-88. Maintenance of Interceptors
Where installed, all grease, oil, hair, and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the Owner, at
his or her expense, in continuously efficient operation at all time. Materials collected shall not
be reintroduced into the public sewage works.
Sec. 13-89. Maintenance of Preliminary Treatment or Flow-Equalizing Facilities
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes,
they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the Owner at his
139
or her expense.
Sec. 13-90. Manhole Requirements
When required by the Board, the Owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall install a suitably controlled manhole in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be
accessible to Town officials and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans
approved by the Board. The manhole shall be installed by the Owner, at his or her expense, and
shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
Sec. 13-91. Monitoring Requirements
All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform such monitoring of their discharges
as the Board may reasonably require, including installation, use and maintenance of monitoring
equipment, keeping records and reporting the results of such monitoring to the Board. Where
industrial pretreatment permits are issued by the State of Vermont, monitoring records must also
be submitted to the State in accord with such permit. Such records of any monitoring shall be
made available upon request of the Board or the State of Vermont and/or any other agencies
having jurisdiction over discharges to receiving waters.
Sec. 13-92. Testing Requirements
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which
reference is made in this Ordinance shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of
"Standard Methods of the Examination of Water and Wastewater" published by the American
Public Health Association and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon
suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the
public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out
by customarily accepted methods to reflect the existence of hazards to life, limb and property.
(The particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty-four (24) hour flow composite
of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.)
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty-four
(24) hour proportioned composites of all outfalls whereas pH's are determined from periodic
grab samples.
Sec. 13-93. Changes in Discharges or Connections
140
Any person proposing a new discharge into the sewage works or a substantial change in volume
or character of pollutants that are being discharged into the sewage works shall obtain a written
sewer permit and notify the Board at least forty-five (45) days prior to the proposed change or
connection, and provide all laboratory analyses, technical data, engineering reports and all other
information requested by the Board at their expense. No such change or connection shall be
made without a written permit from the Board.
Sec. 13-94. Chemical Analyses Treatability Studies
The Board may require that any applicant for a permit or a sewer user provide, at his or her
expense, chemical analyses, treatability studies, engineering reports or other documentation
which shall be prepared by a professional engineer or a certified laboratory, as applicable.
Secs. 13-95--13-100. Reserved
DIVISION 6. SCAVENGER WASTE
Sec. 13-101. In General
Scavenger waste is septage, sludge, leachate or other forms of waste brought to the wastewater
facility for treatment and disposal. The waste must meet all Division V requirements.
Sec. 13-102. Permit Required
The discharge of scavenger wastes into the sewage works may be permitted. Persons desiring to
discharge scavenger wastes shall apply for a permit from the Board. The discharge of scavenger
wastes from sources outside of the State of Vermont is prohibited unless authorized by the
Board.
Sec. 13-103. Compliance with Permit Conditions
141
When a permit is issued, the discharge of scavenger wastes shall be made only at the locations
specified in the permit or as may be from time to time relocated by the Board. The wastes must
further be discharged at the times and at the rates specified in the permit.
Sec. 13-104. Permit Fee
A scavenger waste permit fee established by the Board payable to the Town shall be paid to the
Town Clerk at the time the application is filed. The applicant for a permit shall be the Owner of
the vehicle (or other duly authorized agent acceptable to the Board) to be used for the purpose of
transporting and discharging the waste.
Sec. 13-105. Tipping Fee
In addition to the permit fee, there will be a fee charged each time a load of scavenger waste is
discharged into the sewage treatment plant. Such fee will be determined by the Board and will
be based upon the quantity and quality of the discharged waste. There will be no line of credit
extended Owners and operators applying for permits under this section.
Sec. 13-106. Special Agreements.
No provision of this Division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or
arrangement between the Town and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of
unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Town for treatment, subject to payment
therefore by the industrial concern, provided that such agreements do no contravene any
requirements of existing State or Federal laws and are compatible with any user charge and
industrial cost recovery system in effect.
Secs. 13-107--13-110. Reserved
DIVISION 7. PRIVATE SEWERAGE SYSTEMS
Sec. 13-111. In General
It is the intent of this Division to insure that private wastewater systems are properly designed,
142
constructed and maintained in such a manner as approved by the Board. It shall be unlawful for
any person to operate private sewerage systems that:
Contaminates any drinking water supply.
Is accessible to insects, rodents or other possible carriers of disease which may come into contact
with food or drinking water.
Pollutes or contaminate any subsurface waters or underground water used for drinking.
Is a health hazard by being accessible to persons.
Gives rise to a nuisance due to odor or unsightly appearance.
Violates any State or Federal laws or regulations governing water pollution or wastewater
treatment.
Sec. 13-112. Existing Private Systems
Existing private systems may be required to be upgraded to standards in effect on the date of
adoption of this Ordinance or provide verification from a Vermont registered professional
engineer that the system complies with the same standards.
Secs. 13-113--13-115. Reserved
DIVISION 8. SEWER RENTS
Sec. 13-116. Fixed, Operation and Maintenance Charge
A sewer rent charge, which shall be determined by the Board, is hereby imposed upon every
person having a building or structure on their premises and that is served by the sewage works
directly or indirectly where wastewater is collected for the use of the premises by the Owners, or
other users of real property within the Town. The user charge shall be for the purpose of the
payment of the costs associated with operating, maintaining and repairing said system. The
Board may establish a separate fixed annual charge for bond payments, and for fixed operating
and maintenance costs not dependent on actual or estimated use. The charges determined by the
Board shall be filed with the Town Clerk. The fixed annual charge established by this Section
shall be charged whether or not the property is fully or partially occupied, when the property is
connected to the sewage works by the necessary building sewer as required under the terms of
143
this Ordinance. The rate structure shall incorporate the requirements of 40 CFR, S35.935-13 or
S35.2140.
Sec. 13-117. Calculation of Sewer Rent Charge
The sewer rent charge stipulated in Sec. 13-116 of this Division shall be based upon a water
meter measurement and a base charge per equivalent user. The Board will determine the actual
charge from measurements of each metered user so as to yield charges which are approximately
in proportion to the strength and quantity of waste discharged. The fixed annual charge is for
bond repayment and fixed operations and maintenance costs. No user will be billed less than the
average single family charge for the fixed charges, plus actual flow related charges. The annual
charges stipulated in Sec. 13-116 of this Division are based upon rate structure(s) established by
the Board as provided for in 24 V.S.A., Chapter 101.
Sec. 13-118. Capital Costs
The design, construction and development costs of all public wastewater system expansions and
extensions which have been approved by the Board shall be borne by the developers and
property owners requiring, requesting or directly benefiting from such extensions and/or
expansions, unless the voters of the Town shall vote at a duly warned annual or special meeting
to assume all or a portion of the costs involved. When the voters of the Town vote to assume all
or a portion of the costs, such costs will be paid from the collection of taxes unless the voters of
the Town approve some other means of raising the required monies.
Sec. 13-119. Collection
Collection of delinquent sewer rents may be enforced by the Town pursuant to 24 V.S.A.,
Chapter 129; 24 V.S.A., § 3612; and 24 V.S.A., § 3615. In the event any sewer rent is not paid
within 30 calendar days from the billing date, a late penalty charge will be added to the sewer
rent together with interest charges. The amount of the late penalty charge and the interest rate on
the overdue accounts shall be the same as those applied to the collection of taxes. If such
payment is not made, such sewer rent shall be a lien upon such real estate and shall be collected
according to all procedures allowed for in the collection of delinquent real estate taxes.
Sec. 13-120. Deposits
When a customer's credit is, or becomes impaired, the Town may, when it deems necessary to
144
guarantee payment of current bills, require a deposit. Such required deposit shall not exceed the
amount of an estimated billing period provided, however, such deposit to be refunded when the
customer has established credit.
Upon termination of service, the Town shall have the right to apply any deposit in payment of
any billing in arrears if such billing shall be unpaid for a period of thirty (30) days beyond the
due date. Retention of the deposit by the Town shall not constitute a waiver of its rights
otherwise to enforce collection of payment in accordance with the terms and conditions hereof.
Sec. 13-121. Additional Charges
In addition, the costs associated with making the tap or connection at the main, including all
costs of materials and labor to install the line to the property line shall be paid by the Applicant
proposing to connect to the Public Wastewater System.
If inspection is required by the Board, all direct costs of inspection shall be paid by the Applicant
to the Town at rates established by the Board.
Other charges shall be established by the Town as necessary. These shall be for such items as
service calls and/or broken meter calls where they are not expressly the responsibility of the
Town.
Secs. 13-122--13-125. Reserved
DIVISION 9. APPLICATIONS/PERMITS/FEES
Sec. 13-126. Application for Permit
Applications for permits shall be made on forms established and provided by the Town.
Sec. 13-127. False or Misleading Statements
Any false or misleading statement in any application for a permit will invalidate the permit and
shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance.
145
Sec. 13-128. Suspension or Revocation
Any permit issued by the Board may be suspended or revoked at any time by the Board for:
Violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance.
Violation of any specific terms and conditions of the permit.
Refusal to permit inspection by the Town or its duly authorized representatives.
Sec. 13-129. Availability for Inspection
All permits must be kept on the premises and shall be made available to the Town or its duly
authorized representatives at any time. A copy of a scavenger waste permit must be on or in the
vehicle. Failure to keep permits available shall be presumptive evidence that the work or
operation being conducted is without a permit and is in violation of this Ordinance.
Sec. 13-130. Payment of Fees
All fees provided for in this Ordinance shall be determined by the Board and shall be posted in
the office of the Clerk. All fees shall be made payable to the Town of St. Johnsbury and paid
directly to the Clerk.
Secs. 13-131--13-135. Reserved.
146
DIVISION 10. PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE
Sec. 13-136. Conduct Prohibited
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or
tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the sewage works. Any
person violating this provision shall be guilty of unlawful mischief.
Secs. 13-137--13-140. Reserved
DIVISION 11. POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS
Sec. 13-141. Entrance to Premises
The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the Town shall be permitted to enter
all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. The Superintendent or his/her representatives
shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil,
refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind
and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
Sec. 13-142. Applicability of Safety Rules
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in this Division, the
Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the Town shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the company.
Sec. 13-143. Entrance Upon Easement
The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the Town bearing proper credentials
and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the Town holds
an easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
147
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said
easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any on said easement, shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private property involved.
Secs. 13-144--13-145. Reserved
DIVISION 12. PENALTIES/MISCELLANEOUS
Sec. 13-146. Violations
(a) In General: Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance shall be punished by a
fine as provided in Section 1-13 of the code of ordinances Town of St. Johnsbury, VT. No
action may be brought under this section unless the alleged offender has had at least seven (7)
days’ notice by certified mail that a violation exists. In default of payment of the fine, such
person, the members of any partnership, or the principal officers of such corporation shall each
pay double the amount of such fine. Each day that a violation is continued shall constitute a
separate offense.
(b) Damages: In addition to any other penalty, any person violating any of the provisions of this
Ordinance shall become liable to the Town for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the
Town by reason of such offense. The extent, loss or damage shall be taken to be the extent
determined by a competent Vermont registered Professional Engineer particularly skilled in the
operation and maintenance of water transmission distribution and water treatment works.
(c) Other Remedies: In addition to invoking the penalties hereinabove provided and otherwise
available, including all legal and equitable remedies, the Board is authorized to order abatement
of any violation and to provide in said order that failure to abate said violation shall require
termination of all use and occupancy of any building not in compliance with this Ordinance. A
property Owner receiving a notice of abatement shall be entitled to a public hearing upon request
prior to the commencement of any occupancy termination.
Sec. 13-147. Separability/Saving Clause
The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this Ordinance shall not affect the
validity of any other part of this Ordinance which can be given effect without such invalid part or
148
parts.
Sec. 13-148. Effective Date
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval, recording,
and publication by law.
Sec. 13-149--13-199. Reserved
ARTICLE III. WATER SYSTEMS
Pursuant to No. 345 of the Acts of 1957, it is hereby ordained by the Town of St. Johnsbury,
Vermont that the protection of the health and safety of the Town of St. Johnsbury, its inhabitants
and the general public requires the establishment of minimum standards governing the design,
construction, installation and operation of public and private water systems.
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
Sec. 13-200 Title
All provisions contained herein, together with such additions and amendments as may be
hereafter adopted, are hereby designated as the "Ordinance Regulating the Use of Public and
Private Water Systems" hereinafter sometimes referred to as the Ordinance.
Sec. 13-201. Objective
The principal objective of the water supply and water distribution facilities is to provide the
inhabitants of the Town of St. Johnsbury with pure water for domestic, sanitary, agricultural,
commercial and industrial purposes and for supplying the Town with water for all lawful
municipal purposes.
Sec. 13-202. Inconsistent Provisions
149
Where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction or stricter standard than any other statute, bylaw,
ordinance, rule, regulation, permit, easement, or agreement, the provisions of this Ordinance
shall control.
Sec. 13-203. Definitions
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this
Ordinance shall be as follows:
(a) "ACT" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), as
amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (Pub. L. 92-
500) and (Pub. L. 93-243).
(b) "BOARD OF WATER COMMISSIONERS", hereinafter referred to as the "BOARD"
shall mean the three Water Commissioners appointed or elected in accordance with the
procedures set forth in 17 V.S.A. Chapter 55.
(c) "CUSTOMERS" means any individual, firm, company, corporation, association, or
group receiving or requesting water or sewer service from the DEPARTMENT.
(d) "DEPARTMENT" means the Water DEPARTMENT of the Town of St. Johnsbury,
Vermont acting through the BOARD, as appropriate.
(e) "EXTENSION OF EXISTING SERVICE" means any additional faucets, toilets, or
other water using facilities [on a property already served by the DEPARTMENT, other
than a residential use which does not increase the number of dwelling units] within the
same commercial unit. EXTENSION OF EXISTING SERVICE shall also mean any
change of service classification in an existing building or other change of use which the
Board of Water Commissioners determines will result in greater usage of water.
(f) "COMMERCIAL UNIT" means each individual factory, warehouse, store, shop,
office, motel unit, hotel guest room, restaurant or other commercial establishment,
whether or not individually metered. One property may contain several commercial units.
(g) "RESIDENTIAL UNIT" means a structure or part of a structure, whether or not
individually metered, occupied or intended to be occupied by one family for residential
purposes, containing full housekeeping facilities for the exclusive use of the occupants.
Residential unit shall not include units rented, or intended to be rented, for a period of
less than 30 days.
(h) "NATURAL OUTLET" means an outlet into a water course, pond, ditch, lake, or
other body of surface or groundwater.
150
(i) "PERSON" means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
(j) "pH" means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams
per liter of solution.
(k) "SHALL" means mandatory.
(l) "MAY" means permissive.
(m) "SUPERINTENDENT" means the Water DEPARTMENT Superintendent, Town of
St. Johnsbury.
(n) "WATERCOURSE" means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
(o) "WATER WORKS" means all facilities for developing, acquiring and maintaining a
supply of water and a water distribution system in the Town of St. Johnsbury.
(p) "SECRETARY" means the Secretary of the Agency of Environmental Conservation,
State of Vermont.
(q) "STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS, RULES AND REGULATIONS" means the
Water Rules, Regulations and Specifications adopted by the St. Johnsbury Board of
Selectmen and filed with Town Clerk.
Sec. 13-204. Responsibility of Existing Users
The existing users will continue to be responsible for the required system operation and
maintenance including general purpose prioritized local capital improvements to the system. All
other expansions, additions or proposed improvements that are required for or requested by new
users will be the financial responsibility of those new users. After construction, testing and
acceptance by the Town, these new expansions, additions, or proposed improvements shall
become the property of the Town of St. Johnsbury.
Sec. 13-205. Obligations of New Users
It is specifically the purpose of these procedures to assure that existing users do not sacrifice any
standard of service for the benefit of new users connecting to the system. Any reductions in
service created by expansion into new areas will be evaluated considering the total impact on the
entire system. Where an impact causes any potential reduction in the standards of service to
151
existing users, new users requesting connections will be required to complete such system
improvements to eliminate any such impacts as a condition for obtaining a water connection
permit.
Secs. 13-206--13-209. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. SYSTEM EXPANSION
Sec. 13-210. Expansions, improvements or additions
All expansions, extensions, improvements or additions to the water system shall become
property of the Town. Private systems shall not be allowed connection to the Town water
system. All design documents and construction procedures shall comply with the Water
Department Standards as set forth in the Rules, Regulations and Specifications of the Water
Department.
Secs. 13-211--13-214. Reserved
DIVISION 3. RESIDENT INSPECTIONS
Sec. 13-215. Appointments and Duties
During construction, the Superintendent or a resident inspector appointed by the Board may be
required at the work site. All cost of resident inspection will be borne by the applicant. It will be
the duty of the resident inspector to assure installation of all facilities in accordance with the
approved plans and specifications for the project. Certification of the project conformance by the
resident inspector and the applicant's engineer will be required in order to obtain permission
from the Superintendent to initiate water service for the project. Any divergence from the
approved plans must be approved by the Board.
Sec. 13-216. Scheduling Inspections
152
Where required, the Superintendent will provide persons for conducting inspections. The
developer or owner shall notify the Superintendent at least 24 hours in advance of such required
inspections; no work shall be backfilled before the required inspection is made. If the work is
backfilled, the developer or owner shall be responsible for any excavation, replacement and/or
repairs and any re-testing to assure compliance with the approved plans and specifications.
Sec. 13-217. Cost of Inspection/Fees
The developer will be responsible for direct costs of providing an inspector by the Town at the
Town's cost.
Secs. 13-218--13-220. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. APPLICATION PROCEDURE
Sec. 13-221. General
Applications will be presented to the Superintendent in a form that provides full information
necessary for adequate review of the proposed project.
Sec. 13-222. Preliminary Application
(a) Capacity Commitment: Because the water system is limited by the capacity for
service, the first step in obtaining an approval for a proposed project is to receive a
capacity commitment from the Board. If there is no capacity commitment, an application
for full approval will not be accepted until such time as the project is either reduced to
meet capacity reserves or more capacity is constructed within the system.
A preliminary application must include information necessary for the Board to make a judgment
on the capacity of the existing system to provide the capacity requirement of that project.
Included will be location of the project, projected water demands, proposed sizes of lines and a
general utility layout. A connection fee will accompany all preliminary applications. (See
schedule of charges.) Though detailed plans are not required at this stage, information must be
complete enough to enable the Board to make a decision. If capacity commitment is given, a
detailed submission of plans will be required before approval for construction.
153
(b) Water System Application/Capital Facilities Charges:
(1) Properties Subject to Water System Application/ Capital Facilities Charges
and Effective Dates:
(A) All structures not occupied before July 1, 1992 shall be subject to
Water System Application/Capital Facilities Charges except as
provided under Section 2. The date of occupancy for new structures
shall be the date of issuance of Certificate of Occupancy.
(B) All structures that have experienced a change of use after July 1, 1992
that require additional water and/or sewer services shall be subject to
Water System Application/ Capital Facilities Charges except as
provided under Section 2. New connection and/or capacity charges
will apply solely to the additional demand.
(2) Transition Rule: To provide a fair transition from the existing to new charges,
the following are exceptions to subject properties under Section 1:
(A) No structures that have received approval for connection or additional
demand as of July 1, 1992 will be subject to Water System
Application/Capital Facilities Charges if they are connected and receive
a Certificate of Occupancy on or before January 1, 1993.
(B) No occupied structures which have or receive a Certificate of
Occupancy on or before July 1, 1992 will be subject to Water System
Application/Capital Facilities Charges if they are connected by January
1, 1993.
(3) Water System Application/Capital Facilities Charges:
Applicants intending to connect to the Town's water system shall pay an initial Water System
Application/Capital Facilities Charge in addition to all other fees and charges which are in effect.
The Water System Application/Capital Facilities Charge shall be established by the Board and
posted in the Town Clerk's Office. Gallonage computation shall be based on flow quantities
utilized by the State of Vermont, Department of Environmental Conservation.
(4) Payment Policy: The Water System Application/Capital Facilities Charges
shall be paid as follows:
(A) 10% upon application for gallonage requested to be reserved, on forms
provided by the Town. This fee is non-refundable.
(B) On or before two (2) months from the date of said application, the
154
applicant shall enter into a contract with the Town to reserve and
purchase water capacity.
(C) If any State or local permits are required on a project for which a Water
System Application/Capital Facilities Charge has been assessed, an
additional 40% of the fee shall be paid within eighteen (18) months
from the date of the contract in Sec. 4B, or the date of receipt of the last
required permit, whichever first occurs. If such permit or permits are
denied, or, if the applicant abandons a project before the start of
construction because of permit denial, or for any other reasons, the
contract, if entered into, will be deemed null and void. Any payment
made, excepting the 10% paid upon application (as per sec. 4A), shall
be returned without interest, and reservation of gallonage shall be
withdrawn. For the purpose of this Policy, the applicant shall be
deemed to have abandoned a project if he fails to enter into a contract
within two (2) months of the application and payment in Sec. 4A, or
when he fails to commence construction within eighteen (18) months
from the date of the contract, or make the payment required in Sec. 4D.
(D) The remaining 50% for each unit is due prior to receiving a zoning
permit for construction for that unit.
(E) Projects may be phased only by written agreement between the Town
and the applicant, or when required by the Town because of low or
insufficient plant or System capacity. If a contract is made for one
phase, allocation of gallonage therein provided shall be only for that
phase, and the Town shall not thereby, be deemed to have bound or
committed itself, impliedly or otherwise, to enter into contracts for
additional phases, or to provide gallonage therefor, nor shall the
consumer be deemed bound or committed to construct future phases.
Such contract shall be binding only for the project therein described as
if no other phases were intended, and the Water System
Application/Capital Facilities Charges shall be computed only for such
phases. If a contract describes more than one phase of a total project,
then the Water System Application/Capital Facilities Charges shall be
computed on the entire project as described, and shall be payable as
provided here, except that the 50% payment in Sec. 4D shall be paid in
proportion to such phases, and prior to receiving zoning permits for
construction of each phase, but no later than the termination date stated
in the contract.
(F) Applicants who desire to construct residential buildings not located in,
or part of planned developments or for which no contract and/or permit
is necessary or required, shall pay 10% of the Water System
155
Application/Capital Facilities Charge upon application (as per Sec. 4A)
and shall pay the remaining 90% prior to receiving a zoning permit for
construction or within 18 months of application.
Sec. 13-223. Full Application
(a) General. A full application will be prepared by the applicant in compliance with the
Standard Specifications of the Town on forms provided by the Town. All plans are to be
prepared in accordance with these design standards. Two sets of design plans and
specifications will be submitted to the Board by the Applicant. The Board will review all
plans and specifications for conformance with its standards. This review will be made
where applicable by the Town's duly appointed engineer. The Board may take the
following actions:
(1) Approval for construction.
(2) Conditional approval for construction.
(3) Request for additional information or review comments.
(4) Rejection of Request.
(b) Acceptance of Application. Acceptance of the application by the Superintendent
obligates the applicant to pay the Town its established rates and charges and to comply
with the rules and regulations. If the rendering of service requires a new service
connection or other work on the premise, the occupant must present to the Board a permit
in writing from the owner authorizing the utility to enter the premises to do the necessary
work.
(c) Size and Location of Service. The Town reserves the right to assign size and location
for the water service.
(d) Requirement for Existing Main. Applications will be accepted subject to there being
an existing main in a street or right-of-way abutting on the premises to be served, but
acceptance shall in no way obligate the Town to extend its mains to serve the premises,
excepting as hereinafter provided.
Secs. 13-224--13-226. Reserved
156
DIVISION 5. REGULATIONS - OPERATIONS
Sec. 13-227. Procedure for Initiation and Expansion of Water Service
The Board will consider acceptance of a utility project for initiation of water service only after
completion of and providing the following has been received and is found to be satisfactory by
the Board:
Certification of the Resident Inspector and Project Engineer of conformance with the Standard
Specifications, Rules and Regulations, and approved plans and specifications.
Copies of all deeds and right of way instruments for all new water mains.
Copies of "as built" plans on 24" x 36" reproducible Mylar showing ties to all fittings, valves,
corporations, curb stops and boxes, and stubs.
Release of all liens from all subcontractors and suppliers.
Certification of the required leakage test, pressure test and chlorination procedures and results of
successful bacteriological sampling. Water only shall be supplied by the Town for these
activities.
Payment of all applicable fees.
Sec. 13-228. Conformance with Other Regulations
The proposed project will be required to obtain other applicable permits. The securing of final
approval of the project does not remove the responsibility of obtaining other permits, such as
public building permits, zoning and planning permits, Act 250, Town highway or sewer
connection permits. The applicant is advised to seek advice in compliance with all permits.
Sec. 13-229. Compliance Standards
All applications will comply with the following:
Rules, Regulations and Specifications of the Town.
American Water Works Association Standards - latest revision.
157
Ten State Standards - 1987 or latest revision.
Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation, Public Water System Regulations.
Vermont Standards for Water System Design and Construction.
National Plumbing Code 1968 or latest revision.
Sec. 13-230. Internal Improvements
Whenever a proposed water main expansion, improvement or addition to the utility causes any
other portion of the system to be inadequate or places such impact on that existing portion of the
system that it renders that portion of marginal serviceability, it shall be required that the
proposed project include such improvements required for the existing system to eliminate such
impacts.
The internal improvements shall be made in conformance with the overall master plans of the
Water System and the Municipal Development Plan. The improvements will be determined by
the Board in conformance with the master plan and after analysis of the total hydraulic effect on
the system.
Sec. 13-231. St. Johnsbury Water District Service Areas
The Board has adopted a defined a Water Service Area and it is depicted on the map entitled
"Water Service Areas" and recorded with the Town Clerk and attached hereto as part of
Ordinance. (854'MSL grade line)
It is the purpose of the service area to confine the distribution system to elevations that can be
effectively served by the existing supply system; this service area will encompass the area where
the municipal water system can provide a minimum pressure of 35 PSI at the municipal main. It
is further the purpose of the Service Area to eliminate extensive expansion of the utility until
such time as development within the Service Area has been undertaken. Current capacity of the
utility recognizes that the existing service areas can utilize all of the current capacity when fully
developed. It is the policy of the Board to phase needed improvements to the system to coincide
with capital improvement revenues.
Upon application to the Board approvals for expansion may be granted providing the Board
158
determines the following:
The expansion does not negatively affect any existing users, or
The existing system can be modified to allow the expansion without negative effect to existing
users, or
Adequate source, supply, storage, or distribution exists or can be reasonably modified to
accommodate the expansion without negative effects on the existing users.
Sec. 13-232. Meters
All water service by the Town shall be sold on the basis of meter measurements, or as otherwise
provided for in its rate schedules and the Town may install meters whenever deemed expedient.
The customer may receive water through a meter only upon written application to the Town. The
size, manufacturer and model of the meter will, in all cases, be determined by the Town.
All meters shall be set, as nearly as possible, at the point of entrance of the service pipe to the
building, and the customer shall provide and maintain a clean, dry, warm and accessible place to
service the meter. Meters, once set, may be moved in location at the request of the customer at
his or her expense, and the work may be done only by an agent of the Town or by a Vermont
Licensed Plumber registered and approved by the Town. A meter must be installed before water
service is initiated.
For new installation of meters two (2) inches and larger in nominal size, the piping arrangement
shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Town.
Remote reading registers acceptable to the Town shall be utilized. If provided by the Town as a
retrofit primarily to expedite its meter reading and billing procedures, the installation shall be at
the Town's expense.
When the customer fails or neglects to furnish a suitable location for a meter inside his building,
or when for other reasons it is necessary or expedient to locate the meter outside the building, an
underground vault acceptable to the Town shall be provided and maintained at the expense of the
customer.
Use of service pipe material which is deemed by the Town to be inferior shall constitute grounds
for requiring the use of a meter installation at an exterior location.
Meter repairs and replacements necessitated by ordinary wear will be paid for by the Town.
Those caused by freezing, hot water, or by other causes within the control of the customer will
159
be charged to the customer, including the cost of removing and replacing the damaged meter.
Meters will be carefully tested before installation. Thereafter, meters will be tested free of charge
at the request of the customer provided such request is not made more frequently than once in
twelve (12) months.
If tests are requested more than once every twelve months, the Town may require the customer
to make a deposit which will cover the reasonable cost of the test. If the meter is found to overregister
by more than two (2) percent, the deposit will be refunded together with the percentage
of error computed for the duration of the last billing period. If the meter is found to underregister
by more than two (2) percent, the customer will be charged such percentage of error
computed for the duration of the last billing period. If the meter registers with two (2) percent,
plus or minus, it will be deemed correct, and the deposit will be retained by the Town. The
customer may be present when the Town conducts the test on his or her meter, or if he or she
desires, send an expert or other representative appointed by him or her. A written report giving
the result of such test shall be made to the customer.
Metering shall be required for all connections. Meters are to be obtained and installed by the
owner in conformance with the Town standards. Once installed and approved by the Town, the
meter will be solely the responsibility of the Town and all maintenance and replacement will
thereafter be borne by the Town.
Every service must be provided with an operable stop and waste valve inside the building near
the service entrance, easily accessible, and protected from freezing. All piping shall be so
arranged as to prevent back-siphonage and to permit draining whenever necessary. Backflow
devices will be required.
Sec. 13-233. Installation of Services
The cost of service taps, installing and maintaining the pipe from the main line to the property
shall be borne by the Applicant. This pipe may be installed by a private contractor approved by
the Town. The installation must comply with Town's specifications and may not be covered until
it is inspected and approved by the Superintendent. No new installations may be made, nor
further connections made to existing installations unless approved by the Board. The Applicant
shall be responsible for securing appropriate Public Liability and All Risk "Builders Risk"
insurance and indemnify and holding harmless the Town and its agents from damages involving
or related to the connection and water line installation work.
Existing connections to the system shall remain connected, unless express permission is granted
by the Town for disconnection.
The Town shall not be responsible for damage due to escaping water or arising from the use of
water or from any damage arising from leaks in piping or equipment.
160
All new construction shall use low-flow type water fixtures as approved by the Town.
Sec. 13-234. Temporary Service
Contractors, builders and property owners desiring temporary water service for construction
purposes shall make application in writing to the Town and secure approval for this service.
Temporary water services will be supplied providing it does not interfere with use of water for
general purposes. The cost of temporary service and the cost of its removal shall be borne by the
applicant. The estimated cost of temporary service shall be payable in advance by a deposit with
Town Treasurer. Upon completion of the use of temporary service an accounting shall be made.
If the amount of deposit does not cover the actual cost, the applicant will be billed the additional
amount. If the deposit exceeds the actual cost, the applicant shall be refunded the difference.
These charges are in addition to the charge for use of water which will be billed at the published
rate.
Sec. 13-235. Winter Provisions
The Town shall not be required to install any service lines or service connections during winter
conditions, except by special arrangement, in which case the customer shall pay for the excess
over normal costs. In those cases where customer owned service pipe or main is frozen, the
thawing shall be done by the Owner at the expense of the Owner. If it is determined that the
freezing is between the main and the curb stop, it shall be the responsibility of the Town to
restore service. To avoid a recurrence, the Town may order an examination of the customer's
service pipe or main and if the same is not at a depth of five and one-half (5 1/2) feet, as
required, the Town reserves the right to require it to be so relocated before service is resumed.
Sec. 13-236. Abatement
If premises are to be vacated for a period of thirty (30) days or more, abatement of water charges
may be had by notifying the Town in writing in advance of the date such vacancy is to occur.
The Town will then discontinue service at the shutoff or in case two or more occupancies are
supplied by a single service, seals will be placed upon the stop and waste valve or fixtures of the
vacant premises. A charge will be made for each resumption of service, and a charge will be
made for each seal required. Abatement will not be available for partial vacancy of multiple
units served through a single meter.
Sec. 13-237. Sprinkler Systems
161
Application: Application for new sprinkler systems must be made by the owner of the property
or his or her authorized agent and will be subject to all provisions and specifications of the
Town. The Fire Department is hereby made a party to this review.
Plans and Specifications: The applicant must furnish complete set of drawings showing the
location of the premises, sprinkler heads and other appurtenances. These plans will remain as
property of the Town. The applicant further agrees to furnish the Town with drawings showing
revisions to piping or appurtenances whenever any revisions are made.
Criteria: No private fire connection will be made on a water main of less than six (6) inches in
diameter. The Town expressly reserves the right to determine the necessity for the advisability of
granting any application for special service, depending on the size of street main, availability of
pressure, and the nature and capacity of the fire protection equipment to be installed.
Charges and Costs: Installation of the fire protection service shall be by, or under the direction
of, the Town. All charges therefore are payable by the customer.
Inspection: All fire services shall be subject to periodic inspections by the Town. The owners of
such systems will give the Town inspectors all reasonable facilities for making the inspection
and any information concerning such system that they may require. Inspections will be made
with as little inconvenience to the owner as possible.
Illegal Use: Sprinkler system connections shall be used for fire protection only. Using such
connections for other than fire protection purposes shall constitute unauthorized use and a
violation of the Ordinance.
Additional Requirements: Backflow devices and FM rated meters are required.
Sec. 13-238. Fire Hydrants
General: Hydrants are the property of the Town. All public fire hydrants and their connections
are installed and maintained by the Town.
Obstruction Prohibited: No person or persons shall obstruct the access to any fire hydrant by
replacing or permitting snow, debris or building material or other obstruction to remain on or
about the hydrant which will in any manner interfere with its immediate use.
Use: Public fire hydrants are for the sole purpose of fire protection and, with the exception of the
Water Department, and the Fire Department operating the same for the legitimate purpose of
extinguishing fires or conducting a bona fide drill or practice, no other use shall be made without
consent of the Water Department.
162
Sec. 13-239. Interruption of Service
Disclaimers of Liability: The Town furnishes water, not pressure and does not guarantee a
continuous supply. No responsibility is assumed for any damage to any apparatus in any house or
building due to shutting off water or providing excess pressure without notice either for:
(1) Repairs; or
(2) Pipeline breaks; or
(3) Necessary operations; or
(4) Malfunction of system facilities
No Refunds: No persons shall be entitled to have any portion of a payment refunded for any
stoppage occasioned by accident to any portions of the water works, nor for stoppage for
purposes of additions or repairs, nor for non-use occasioned by absence or any other reason.
Unless the interruption is in effect for a continuous period in excess of ten (10) days, in which
case a proportional refund will be made.
Notice of Interruption: Notice of interruption of service is not required. While it is the intention
to give notice, as far as possible, in advance of any work which must be done that will
necessitate interruption of the supply, such notice is to be considered a courtesy only, and not a
requirement on the part of the Town. In case of a break in a pipeline, water may be shut off
without notice. Any announcement will be by general announcement in the local newspaper.
Failure of tenant or property owner to receive notice of interruption of service shall entail no
liability on the part of the Town, or its employees. Property owners should install range boilers,
hot water tanks and all other equipment connected with the water supply system in such a
manner that damage will not occur if the water is shut off without notice.
Maintenance of Pressure: The Town will attempt to maintain adequate system pressures and will
not be required to render service where normal system pressures may be expected to fall below
thirty-five (35) pounds per square inch. Where the superintendent determines that the system
pressures within the range provided are higher than the customer's plumbing or apparatus can
endure, it shall be the responsibility of the customer to install a suitable pressure reducing device.
Pressure reducing devices are "recommended" when the service pressure exceeds 45 psi.
Pressure reduction devices are "required" when service pressure exceeds 60 psi.
Sec. 13-240. Unauthorized Use of Water - Water Conservation Policy
General: No person shall in any way or by any device obtain the use of water without
authorization, including the operation of any valves by repairmen and plumbers or others for any
purpose.
Resale of Water: No customer shall be allowed to furnish for a fee or a charge to other persons or
163
property, water.
Waste: Water shall not be allowed to run to waste through any faucets or fixtures to prevent
freezing or kept running for any longer than necessary for its proper use. The Town is required to
restrain and prevent any and all waste of water and to that end may, when necessary, turn off the
water or take such other action as, in its judgment, appears proper. The Board of Water
Commissioners shall have the authority to limit the use of water from time to time when
conditions so warrant.
Drought/Emergencies: The Town reserves the right, in periods of drought or emergency or when
deemed essential for the protection of public health, safety, and welfare, to restrict, curtail, or
prohibit the use of water for secondary purposes, such as sprinkling, car washing, or filling
swimming pools, and shall have the right to fix the hours and periods when water may be used
for such purposes.
Right to Make Inspections: Inspectors or persons so authorized by the Town shall have free
access at all reasonable hours to all parts of every building for the purpose of inspection,
removing or replacing meters, examining fixtures, and observing the manner in which water is
used.
Request to Turn on Water: After service has been shut off because of customer's failure to abide
by any of these regulations, it shall not be turned on until a written request for service has been
submitted to and approved by the Town.
Sec. 13-241. Developments
Application for Service: Any developer, contractor or builder or any person or group of persons
who wish to supply a subdivision or development either within or outside the existing water
service area shall make a written application to the Board as detailed under Article IV, Section
1.0 "Application Procedure".
Applicable Standards: All development, subdivision or multi-building piping shall be built to the
specifications and amendments published by the Town, and any state or federal agencies having
jurisdiction over same. The Town's Engineer may review such designs as directed by the Town.
Areas Served: Service boundaries shall be defined by the Town and the furnishing of water shall
be at the discretion of the Board and as further defined in the special district provisions herein.
Approval: Developments and subdivisions to and within which water distribution mains, service
piping and hydrants are constructed to specifications of the Town and agencies mentioned in the
above paragraph shall, upon the approval of the Board, be accepted as part of the Town's system
from date of acceptance and thereafter. All provisions of Section 13-227 must be met.
Costs/Expenses: The cost of extensions shall be borne by the customer to such extent as shall be
164
determined by the Board, and no system contract work shall be executed by the customer prior to
the approval of the extension or further installation.
Limitation on Development: The Town shall at no time jeopardize its current customers by
authorizing more new water services than it can supply.
Fire Protection: Fire protection shall be provided for all developments including any waterline
extensions longer than 500 feet from existing hydrants owned by the Town. Flow requirements
shall be in accordance with the master plan for the Town and with the Insurance Services
Organization (ISO) criteria. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed system extension
or further installation does not jeopardize capacity for fire flow for existing or approved
customers within the system service area.
Sec. 13-242--13-245. Reserved
DIVISION 6. WATER RENTS
Sec. 13-246. Fixed, Operation and Maintenance Charge
A water rent charge, which shall be determined by the Board, is hereby imposed upon every
person having a building or structure on their premises and that is served by the water works
directly or indirectly for the use of the premises by the Owners, or other users of real property
within the Town. The user charge shall be for the purpose of the payment of the costs associated
with operating, maintaining and repairing said system. The Board may establish a separate fixed
annual charge for bond payments, and for fixed operating and maintenance costs not dependent
on actual or estimated use. The charges determined by the Board shall be filed with the Town
Clerk. The fixed annual charge established by this Section shall be charged whether or not the
property is fully or partially occupied, when the property is connected to the water works as
required under the terms of this Ordinance.
Sec. 13-247. Calculation of Water Rent Charge
The water rent charge stipulated in Sec. 13-247 of this Division shall be based upon a water
meter measurement. The Board will determine the actual charge from measurements of each
metered user. The fixed annual charge is for bond repayment and fixed operations and
maintenance costs. No user will be billed less than the average single family charge for the fixed
165
charges, plus actual flow related charges. The annual charges stipulated in Sec. 13-247 of this
Division are based upon rate structure(s) established by the Board as provided for in 24 V.S.A.,
Chapter 89.
Sec. 13-248. Capital Costs
The design, construction and development costs of all public water system expansions and
extensions which have been approved by the Board shall be borne by the developers and
property owners requiring, requesting or directly benefiting from such extensions and/or
expansions, unless the voters of the Town shall vote at a duly warned annual or special meeting
to assume all or a portion of the costs involved. When the voters of the Town vote to assume all
or a portion of the costs, such costs will be paid from the collection of taxes unless the voters of
the Town approve some other means of raising the required monies.
Sec. 13-249. Collection
Collection of delinquent water rents may be enforced by the Town pursuant to 24 V.S.A.,
Chapter 129; 24 V.S.A., § 3306; and 24 V.S.A., § 3311. In the event any water rent is not paid
within 30 calendar days from the billing date, a late penalty charge will be added to the water
rent together with interest charges. The amount of the late penalty charge and the interest rate on
the overdue accounts shall be the same as those applied to the collection of taxes. If such
payment is not made, such water rent shall be a lien upon such real estate and shall be collected
according to all procedures allowed for in the collection of delinquent real estate taxes.
Sec. 13-250. Deposits
When a customer's credit is, or becomes impaired, the Department may, when it deems necessary
to guarantee payment of current bills, require a deposit. Such required deposit shall not exceed
the amount of an estimated billing period provided, however, such deposit to be refunded when
the customer has established credit.
Upon termination of service, the Department shall have the right to apply any deposit in payment
of any billing in arrears if such billing shall be unpaid for a period of thirty (30) days beyond the
due date. Retention of the deposit by the Department shall not constitute a waiver of its rights
otherwise to enforce collection of payment in accordance with the terms and conditions hereof.
Sec. 13-251. Additional Charges
In addition, the costs associated with making the tap or connection at the main, including all
166
costs of materials and labor to install the line to the property line shall be paid by the Applicant
proposing to connect to the Public Water System.
If inspection is required by the Department, all direct costs of inspection shall be paid by the
Applicant to the Town at rates established by the Board.
Other charges shall be established by the Department as necessary. These shall be for such items
as service calls and/or broken meter calls where they are not expressly the responsibility
of the Department.
Secs. 13-252--13-254. Reserved
DIVISION 7. PENALTIES/MISCELLANEOUS
Sec. 13-255. Violations
In General: Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance shall be punished by a fine
as provided in Section 1-13 of the code of Ordinances, Town of St. Johnsbury, Vermont. No
action may be brought under this section unless the alleged offender has had at least seven (7)
days’ notice by certified mail that a violation exists. In default of payment of the fine, such
person, the members of any partnership, or the principal officers of such corporation shall each
pay double the amount of such fine. Each day that a violation is continued shall constitute a
separate offense.
Damages: Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall become liable to the
Town for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the Town by reason of such offense. The
extent, loss or damage shall be taken to be the extent determined by a competent Vermont
registered Professional Engineer particularly skilled in the operation and maintenance of water
transmission distribution and water treatment works.
Other Remedies: In addition to invoking the penalties hereinabove provided and otherwise
available, including all legal and equitable remedies, the Commissioners are authorized to order
abatement of any violation and to provide in said order that failure to abate said violation shall
require termination of all use and occupancy of any building not in compliance with this
ordinance. A property owner receiving a notice of abatement shall be entitled to a public hearing
upon request prior to the commencement of any occupancy termination.
167
Sec. 13-256. Repeal
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflicts herewith, are hereby repealed.
Sec. 13-257. Severability/Saving Clause
The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this ordinance shall not affect the
validity of any other part of this ordinance which can be given effect without such invalid part or
parts.
Sec. 13-258. Effective Date
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval, recording,
and publication as provided by law.
Sec. 13-259--13.299. Reserved
168
APPENDIX 1: APPLICATION FORMS, FINAL PHASE
TOWN OF ST. JOHNSBURY, VERMONT
APPLICATION FOR CONNECTION TO PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM
I. PRELIMINARY PHASE - CAPACITY ALLOCATION
APPLICANT: ___________________________________________
ADDRESS: ______________________________________________
_______________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________
PHONE: _________________________________________________
CONTACT PERSON: _______________________________________
DATE: __________________________________________________
APPLICANT'S ENGINEER: __________________________________
ADDRESS: ______________________________________________
_______________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________
PHONE: _________________________________________________
LOCATION OF PROJECT
PROPERTY MAP NUMBER: ___________________________________
_______________________________________________________
GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF
PROPOSED PROJECT: ______________________________________
_______________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________
ESTIMATED GALLONS - CONSUMPTION OF WATER PER DAY: _______________
(BASED ON STATE OF VT DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION)
SEWER NEEDED (Amount of Flow Projected) _________________________
SIZES OF LINES __________________________________________________
FIRE FLOW PROTECTION NEEDS_______________________________________
CONCEPT PLAN - PLEASE ATTACH UTILIZE 1"=200 BASE TOPOGRAPHY FOR THE
TOWN OF ST. JOHNSBURY
APPLICATION/CAPITAL FACILITIES CHARGE $__________________________
ESTIMATED TOWN INSPECTION NEEDS (hours) ______ @ $20/hr. = $ _____
-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
TOWN ACTION ONLY
169
DATE RECEIVED _______________ BY_________. FEE RECEIVED (AMT) ________
ACTION OF BOARD ___________________ APPROVED _______ DENIED __________
ACTION OF DISTRICT MEETING ___________________________________________
CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL _______________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
REASON FOR DENIAL ____________________________________________________
SUPERINTENDENT OF WATER/SEWER BOARD _________________ DATE ______
II. FINAL PHASE (COMPLETE ONLY AFTER APPROVAL OF CAPACITY)
PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS: ATTACH 2 SETS OF PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS
OF PROJECT WITH THE FOLLOWING GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
-project title
-name of entity or person responsible for project
-area to be served
-location plan at a 1"=200 feet scale
-north arrow
-elevation data shall be feet in msl; relative elevation shall not be accepted
-boundaries of project area to be served
-date, name and address of engineer
-imprint of professional engineer's seal
-legible prints for reproduction
-location and size of all existing water and sewer mains shown in plan at 1"=40'
-locations of all appurtenances included in the project
-profiles for water main are not required; required for sewer lines
-provisions for expansion into future phases
-access road
-site grading
-site drainage
-cut and fill details
-trench hydrant, thrust block, service connection, air release and surface restoration details
-driveways and walkway details
-stream crossings providing profiles and plans at 1"=10' scale
-existing and proposed topography and layout of present and planned structures at a 1"=20 feet
scale with contour intervals not greater than 2 feet
-flood elevation data from USGS or FEMA
-size, length, and identity of all sewers, drains and water mains and the location of proposed
facilities relative to such structures-schematic flow designs and diagrams with hydraulic profiles
for pressure reduction or booster pump facilities
170
-location and sizes of all taps or connections to Town facilities
-locations and number of test borings including soils data
-long-term demand requirements of the project including calculations
-fire flow requirements in compliance with I.S.O. criteria
-the Board may require other specific data or information
TOWN ACTION ONLY
FINAL PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS RECEIVED _____________ DATE BY ________
SUBMITTED TO TOWN MANAGER _____________________ DATE _________________
ACTION BY BOARD _______________________________ DATE _________________
CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL _______________________________________________
CHAIRMAN, BOARD OF WATER COMMISSIONERS ____________ DATE ____
171
APPENDIX 2: WATER TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS
The following are intended for the guidance of most regularly used applications. These
specifications are not intended to be applicable to all situations. Variations in design and
specification should be reviewed on the basis of intended application by a qualified engineering
representative.
A substitute product may be considered equal to the product identified in the Specifications if the
contractor certifies (1) it is at least equal in quality, durability, appearance, strength and design;
(2) it will perform at least equally the function imposed by the general design for the work being
contracted for or the material being purchased; and (3) it conforms substantially, even with
deviations, to the detailed requirements for the product in said Specifications.
172
APPENDIX 3: WATER & SEWER QUARTERLY BILLING PERIODS
TOWN OF ST. JOHNSBURY
WATER & SEWER QUARTERLY BILLING PERIODS
BILLINGS REPRESENTS APPROXIMATELY 90-92 DAYS CONSUMPTION OR
ACTUAL USAGE SINCE LAST READ DATE
ROUTE# MONTHS INCLUDED DUE DATE
1,11 JANUARY March 1
2,22 JANUARY March 1
3,33 FEBRUARY April 1
4,44 FEBRUARY April 1
5,55 MARCH May 1
6,66 MARCH May 1
1,11 APRIL June 1
2,22 APRIL June 1
3,33 MAY July 1
4,44 MAY July 1
5,55 JUNE August 1
6,66 JUNE August 1
1,11 JULY September 1
2,22 JULY September 1
3,33 AUGUST October 1
4,44 AUGUST October 1
5,55 SEPTEMBER November 1
6,66 SEPTEMBER November 1
1,11 OCTOBER December 1
2,22 OCTOBER December 1
3,33 NOVEMBER January 1
4,44 NOVEMBER January 1
5,55 DECEMBER February 1
6,66 DECEMBER February 1
BE IT ORDERED by the Selectmen of the town of St. Johnsbury that sewer rents established
under Section 13.116 and water rents established under Section 13.246-247 of the Ordinances of
the Town of St. Johnsbury shall be payable quarterly as listed above:
ST. JOHNSBURY BOARD OF SELECTMEN
Gabriel J. Handy, Chairman
Bryon Quatrini
Bill Thurston.
Reginald Wakeham
(Amended 11/13/00)
173
CODE INDEX
A
Section
ABANDONMENT
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
ACCIDENTS
Housing code
Generally 6-26 et seq.
See: HOUSING
ACTIONS. See: SUITS, ACTIONS AND OTHER PROCEEDINGS
ADVERTISING
Permit required for posting advertising on public property. 11-4
AFFIRMATIONS. See: OATH, AFFIRMATION, SWEAR OR SWORN
AGENCIES OF TOWN: See: DEPARTMENTS AND OTHER AGENCIES
OF TOWN
AGENTS
Keeper and proprietor; definitions and rules of construction extended
and applied to 1-2
AGREEMENTS. See: CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
AGRICULTURE
Stands
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
AIR GUNS. See: FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
ALARMS
Fire alarms 5-2 et seq.
See: FIRE PREVENTION
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Public places, consumption and possession of prohibited
Administrative remedy 8-5(b)
Generally 8-5(a)
ALLEYS. See: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS
AMENDMENTS
Code amendments 1-10
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
174
CODE INDEX
AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT PLACES Section
Dance halls and other public halls 7-46
Places of amusement, sport or recreation
Definitions 7-61
License
Application 7-63
Compliance with law 7-67
Fee 7-64
Issuance; expiration 7-65
Required 7-62
Restrictions 7-66
ANIMALS AND FOWL
Cruelty to dogs prohibited 3-31
Dogs
Control of dogs 3-30
Cruelty prohibited 3-31
Definitions 3-26
Enforcement 3-32
Fee for license 3-29
Identification of ownership and license required 3-28
Impoundment 3-33
Intent 3-27
Licenses
Dog Licenses 3-28, 3-29
Rabies control
Quarantine 3-51
Waste (excreta) 3-30(e)
ANNEXATIONS
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9(11)
APPROPRIATIONS
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9(6)
AREA
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
ASSOCIATIONS
Keeper and proprietor; definitions and rules of construction extended
and applied to 1-2
Persons; definitions and rules of construction extended and
applied to 1-2
ASTROLOGISTS
Certain occupations prohibited 8-1
175
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS. See: SERVICE STATIONS
CODE INDEX
AUTOMOBILES. See: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC Section
AVENUES. See: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS
AVOCATIONS
License requirements 7-1 et seq.
See: LICENSES AND PERMITS
B
BASEMENTS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
BATHROOMS
Housing code regulations 6-26 et seq.
See: HOUSING
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS. See: HOTELS AND MOTELS
BEVERAGES
Alcoholic beverages 8-5
BICYCLES
Sidewalks, riding bicycles on prohibited 11-6
BILLBOARDS. See: SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS
BILLIARD PARLORS. See: POOLROOMS AND BILLIARD PARLORS
BLACKSMITH SHOPS
License required for; fees; restrictions 7-7
BOARD OF SELECTMEN
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
Meetings 2-26
Ordinances and resolutions 2-27
Town clerk
Duties 2-61
BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
Board of adjustment
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
Housing board of review 6-46
Recreation board 9-41 et seq.
See: PARKS AND RECREATION
176
BODIES POLITIC AND CORPORATE
Persons; definitions and rules of construction extended and applied to 1-2
CODE INDEX
BOND ISSUES Section
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9(2)
BOOKS
Ordinance books 2-61
Resolution books 2-61
BOUNDARIES
Annexations or exclusions
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9(11)
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
BOWLING ALLEYS
License required 7-81
Places of amusement, sport or recreation 7-61 et seq.
See: AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT PLACES
BRIDGES. See: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS
BUDGET
Recreation board 9-44
BUILDINGS
Burned buildings
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
Fire prevention and protection 5-1 et seq.
See: FIRE PREVENTION
Housing code
Generally 6-26 et seq.
See: HOUSING
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
BURNING
Burned buildings
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
Open burning 5-101 et seq.
See: FIRE PREVENTION
BUSINESSES
License requirements 7-1 et seq.
See: LICENSES AND PERMITS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
177
BUTCHERS, SLAUGHTERHOUSES, ETC.
License
Fee 7-159
Required 7-156
CODE INDEX
BUTCHERS, SLAUGHTERHOUSES, ETC. (CON’T) Section
Restrictions 7-157
Permit required for slaughterhouses 7-158
BY-LAWS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
C
CABINS. See: HOTELS AND MOTELS
CABLE TELEVISION
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
CAFES
License
Fee 7-187
Required 7-186
Restrictions 7-188
CALEDONIA COUNTY. See: COUNTY
CALLINGS
License requirements 7-1 et seq.
See: LICENSES AND PERMITS
CAMPGROUNDS
Definitions 7-246
License
Fee 7-248
Required 7-247
Restrictions 7-249
CARPORTS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
CARRIAGES
License required for vehicles for hire 7-9
CARS. See: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CATS
Running at large
Animal regulations in general 3-1 et seq.
See: ANIMALS AND FOWL
178
CAUSEWAYS. See: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS
CELLARS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
CODE INDEX
CEMETERIES Section
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
CHARTER
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
CIRCUSES, FAIRS AND EXHIBITIONS
Permit required for circuses or traveling show company 7-10
CLAIRVOYANTS
Certain occupations prohibited 8-1
CLUBS
Keeper and proprietor; definitions and rules of construction extended
and applied to 1-2
Persons; definitions and rules of construction extended and
applied to 1-2
COASTING
Prohibited; exception 11-5
CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Catch lines of section 1-3
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9
Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 1-7
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
Effect of amendments to Code 1-10
Effect of repeals 1-8
General penalty 1-13
History notes 1-4
How Code designated and cited 1-1
Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances 1-6
References and editor's notes 1-5
Severability of parts of Code 1-12
Supplementation of Code 1-11
CODES74
74 The adoption, amendment, repeal, omissions, effective date, explanation of numbering system and other matters
pertaining to the use, construction and interpretation of this Code are contained in the adopting ordinance and preface which
are to be found in the preliminary pages of this volume.
179
Technical codes. See that subject
COIN-OPERATED MACHINES OR AMUSEMENT MACHINES
Definitions 7-61
License
Applications 7-63
CODE INDEX
COIN-OPERATED MACHINES OR AMUSEMENT MACHINES (CON’T) Section
Compliance with law 7-67
Fee 7-64
Issuance; expiration 7-65
Required 7-62
Restrictions 7-66
Location restricted 7-11
COMBUSTIBLES AND INFLAMMABLES
Automobile service station restrictions 7-124
Fire prevention regulations 5-1 et seq.
See: FIRE PREVENTION
Restrictions on storage of flammable liquids 5-47
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS. See: BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND
COMMISSIONS
COMPLAINTS
Housing
Service of complaint 6-52
CONDITIONAL USES
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9
Code does not affect prior contracts established or accruing 1-7
COOLING. See: HEATING AND COOLING
COPARTNERSHIPS
Keeper and proprietor; definitions and rules of construction extended
and applied to 1-2
CORPORATIONS
Keeper and proprietor; definitions and rules of construction extended
and applied to 1-2
COUNTY
180
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
COWS
Running at large
Animal regulations in general 3-1 et seq.
See: ANIMALS AND FOWL
CODE INDEX
CRUELTY Section
Dogs, cruelty to prohibited 3-31
CUL-DE-SACS
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
D
DANCES AND DANCE HALLS
License required; restrictions; fee 7-46
DEDICATIONS
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
DEEDS
Certain ordinances no affected by Code 1-9(2)
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
DEPARTMENTS AND OTHER AGENCIES OF TOWN
Delegation of authority
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
Fire Department 5-26 et seq.
See: FIRE PREVENTION
Recreation department 9-61 et seq.
See: PARKS AND RECREATION
DESIGN STANDARDS
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
DESTRUCTION
Parking meters, defacing of 12-150
Public property, damage to prohibited 11-2
DISEASE CONTROL
Animal rabies control regulations 3-51
181
Butchers, slaughterhouses, etc. 7-156 et seq.
See: BUTCHERS, SLAUGHTERHOUSES, ETC.
DISTRICTS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
DOCUMENTS
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
CODE INDEX
DOGS Section
Running at large
Animal regulations in general 3-1 et seq.
See: ANIMALS AND FOWL
DRAINS AND DRAINAGE
Storm drains
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
DRINKS
Restaurants, cafes, lunch rooms, etc. 7-186 et seq.
See: RESTAURANTS
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
DRIVEWAYS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
E
EASEMENTS
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
ELECTRICITY
Housing code
Electrical requirements 6-85
Generally 6-26 et seq.
See: HOUSING
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
EMBANKMENTS
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Housing code
Generally 6-26 et seq.
See: HOUSING
182
EMPLOYEES. See: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
ENCLOSURES. See: FENCES, WALLS, HEDGES AND ENCLOSURES
ENTERTAINMENT
Permit required for shows or entertainment 7-10
CODE INDEX
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL Section
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
EVICTIONS
Landlord eviction procedure 6-32
EXCAVATIONS
Permit required for 11-3
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
EXITS
Housing code regulations 6-75
F
FALSE ALARMS
False fire alarms 5-73
FENCES, WALLS, HEDGES AND ENCLOSURES
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
FILLING STATIONS. See: SERVICE STATIONS
FINANCES
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9
Recreation board
Accounts 9-64
Budget 9-44
Fiscal year 9-43
Fund raising 9-63
Reimbursement to town 9-65
FINES, FORFEITURES AND OTHER PENALTIES
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9
Code does not affect prior penalties or forfeitures incurred 1-7
Effect of repeal of ordinances 1-8
General penalties 1-13
183
Penalties for specific acts, omissions, violations, etc. See specific
subjects as indexed
FIRE APPARATUS
Vehicles yield right-of-way to fire apparatus 12-26
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Generally 5-26 et seq.
See: FIRE PREVENTION
CODE INDEX
FIRE HYDRANTS Section
Parking prohibited near 12-100
FIRE PREVENTION
False alarms 5-73
Fire alarms
Charges, collection of 5-75
Definition of user 5-71
Exemptions 5-74
False alarms 5-73
Tampering with prohibited 5-2
Fire department
Duties in connection with prevention of fire 5-27
Fire hazard inspector 5-26
Right to enter for inspection 5-28
Scope of inspection authorized 5-29
Housing code
Fire prohibited accumulations and storage 6-78
Fireplaces and woodstoves 6-81
Generally 6-26 et seq.
See: HOUSING
Other fire regulations 6-82
Prevention of fire 6-79
Intent 5-1
Life Safety Code 5-46 et seq.
See herein: Standards
Open burning
Permits for open burning 5-103
Permitted open burning 5-101
Prohibited open burning 5-102
Parking prohibited near fires and fire hydrants 12-100
Permits
Open burning permits 5-103
Response upon receipt of alarm 5-72
Standards
Abatement by town upon failure to comply; penalty 5-52
Adopted 5-46
184
Appeal from order to correct violation 5-51
Flammable liquids, restrictions on storage of 5-47
Method of service of order 5-49
Order to correct violations 5-48
Time for compliance 5-50
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
Tampering with fire alarm prohibited 5-2
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
Transportation and discharge of firearms prohibited in certain areas;
exception 8-2
CODE INDEX
FIREPLACES Section
Housing code regulations 6-81
FIRES
Parking prohibited near 12-100
FIRMS
Keeper and proprietor; definitions and rules of construction extended
and applied to 1-2
Persons; definitions and rules of construction extended and applied to 1-2
FLOODPLAINS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
FOOD AND FOOD SERVICES
Butchers, slaughterhouses, etc. 7-156 et seq.
See: BUTCHERS, SLAUGHTERHOUSES, ETC.
Grocery, meat and produce, etc., dealers 7-176 et seq.
See: GROCERY, MEAT AND PRODUCE, ETC., DEALERS
Restaurants, cafes, lunch rooms, etc. 7-186 et seq.
See: RESTAURANTS
FORFEITURES. See: FINES, FORFEITURES AND OTHER PENALTIES
FORTUNETELLERS
Certain occupations prohibited 8-1
FOWL. See: ANIMALS AND FOWL
FRANCHISES
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9(4)
FUND RAISING
Recreation department 9-63
G
GARAGES
185
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
GARBAGE AND TRASH
Housing code
Garbage and refuse storage and collection 6-95
Littering prohibited 8-3
GAS FUEL
Housing code regulations 6-90
GASOLINE FILLING STATIONS. See: SERVICE STATIONS
CODE INDEX
GENDER Section
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
GRADES AND GRADING
Street grades
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9(9)
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAW
GROCERY, MEAT AND PRODUCE, ETC., DEALERS
License
Fee 7-177
Required 7-176
Restriction 7-178
H
HABITABLE SPACE
Housing code regulations 6-68, 6-69
HACKS
License required for vehicles for hire 7-9
HALLS
License required for public halls; restrictions; fee 7-46
HANDICAPPED PERSONS
Parking regulations 12-121
HAWKERS. See: PEDDLERS, CANVASSERS AND SOLICITORS
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Automobile service station restrictions 7-124
Butchers, slaughterhouses, etc. 7-156 et seq.
See: BUTCHERS, SLAUGHTERHOUSES, ETC.
186
Grocery, meat and produce, etc., dealers 7-176 et seq.
See: GROCERY, MEAT AND PRODUCE, ETC., DEALERS
Housing code
Generally 6-26 et seq.
See: HOUSING
Health requirements 6-84
Running at large
Animal regulations in general 3-1 et seq.
See: ANIMALS AND FOWL
HEALTH SERVICE
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
CODE INDEX
HEATING AND COOLING Section
Housing code
Generally 6-26 et seq.
See: HOUSING
Heating requirements 6-86
Prohibited locations for heat producing equipment 6-88
HEDGES. See: FENCES, WALLS, HEDGES AND ENCLOSURES
HEIGHT
Housing code regulations 6-72 et seq.
See: HOUSING
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
HIGHWAYS. See: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS
HORSES
Running at large
Animal regulations in general 3-1 et seq.
See: ANIMALS AND FOWL
HOTELS AND MOTELS
License
Fee 7-227
Required 7-226
Restriction 7-228
HOUSING
Housing code
Adopted 6-66
Appeals 6-53
187
Application 6-28
Building structures, maintenance of 6-93
Conflict of provisions 6-33
Dwellings unfit for habitation, etc.; procedure for abatement 6-51
Electrical requirements 6-85
Enforcement 6-47
Equipment requirements 6-83
Evictions
Landlord eviction procedure 6-32
Exits 6-75
Fire safety requirements
Prohibited accumulations and storage 6-78
Fireplaces 6-81
Fires
CODE INDEX
HOUSING - Cont'd. Section
Other fire regulations 6-82
Prevention of 6-79
Garbage and refuse storage and collection 6-95
Gas fuel 6-90
General provisions relating to housing 6-67
Habitable space
Light and ventilation 6-68
Miscellaneous requirements 6-69
Health requirements 6-84
Heat producing equipment, prohibited locations for 6-88
Heating 6-86
Height
Non-inhabitable space 6-72
Public space requirements 6-70
Housing board of review 6-46
Infestation prevention; screening 6-94
Insect and rodent protection 6-77
Inspection 6-50
Inspector
Powers and duties of 6-48
Intent 6-29
Interior finishes, trim and decorative materials 6-80
Landlord eviction procedure 6-32
Liability 6-49
Light
Certain other areas, lights in 6-74
Habitable space requirements 6-68
Public space requirements 6-71
Non-inhabitable space
Height 6-72
Occupants' responsibility 6-31
Open areas, maintenance of 6-92
Owner's responsibility 6-30
188
Plumbing facilities in multiple dwellings and rooming houses 6-89
Prevention of fires 6-79
Property maintenance requirements 6-91
Public space
Height 6-70
Light and ventilation 6-71
Purpose 6-26
Scope 6-27
Service of complaint or order 6-52
Smoke control 6-87
Structural elements
Construction, installation and maintenance of 6-76
Toilet rooms and bathrooms 6-73
Ventilation
Certain other areas, ventilation in 6-74
CODE INDEX
HOUSING (CON’T) Section
Habitable space requirements 6-68
Public space requirements 6-71
Woodstoves 6-81
HUCKSTERS. See: PEDDLERS, CANVASSERS AND SOLICITORS
I
IMPOUNDMENT
Dogs 3-33
IMPROVEMENTS. See: PUBLIC WORKS AND IMPROVEMENTS
INDEBTEDNESS OF TOWN
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9(2)
INDECENCY
Public Nudity 8-6
INDIVIDUALS
Persons; definitions and rules or construction extended and
applied to 1-2
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
INFESTATION
Housing code
Infestation; screening 6-94
INSECT AND RODENT PROTECTION
Housing code
189
General regulations 6-77
INSPECTIONS
Licenses, inspections before issuance 7-5
ITINERANT VENDORS. See: PEDDLERS, CANVASSERS AND
SOLICITORS
K
KEEPER AND PROPRIETOR
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
CODE INDEX
L
LANDLORDS Section
Eviction procedure 6-32
LANDSCAPING
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
LEASES
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9(2)
LIABILITY
Housing inspector liability 6-49
LICENSES AND PERMITS
Advertising on public property, permit required for 11-4
Amusements 7-11 et seq.
See: AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT PLACES
Application 7-2
Automobile service stations 7-121 et seq.
See: SERVICE STATIONS
Bowling alleys 7-81
Butchers 7-156 et seq.
See: BUTCHERS, SLAUGHTERHOUSES, ETC.
Campgrounds and trailers 7-246 et seq.
See: CAMPGROUNDS AND TRAILERS
Coin-operated amusement machines 7-61 et seq.
See: AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT PLACES
Dance halls
License required; restrictions; fee 7-46
Dog license requirements 3-28; 3-29
190
Excavations, permit required for 11-3
Exhibits
Permits required for; fee 7-10
Fire standards, abatement by town upon failure to comply; penalty 5-52
Food establishments 7-141 et seq.
See: FOOD AND FOOD SERVICES
Grocery, meat and produce, etc., dealers 7-176 et seq.
See: GROCERY, MEAT AND PRODUCE, ETC., DEALERS
Hotels and motels 7-226 et seq.
See: HOTELS AND MOTELS
Inspections 7-5
Issuance 7-3
Livery stables and blacksmith shops, license required for; fee;
restrictions 7-7
Mobile homes and mobile home parks 7-246 et seq.
See: MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
Nontransferable; expiration 7-4
CODE INDEX
LICENSES AND PERMITS (CON’T) Section
Open burning, permits for 5-103
Parades and certain processions, permit for required 11-1
Parking in certain meter zones, permit for 12-153
Peddlers, solicitors, itinerant vendors 7-271
Poolrooms and billiard rooms 7-81
Public halls 7-46
Recreational vehicle parks 7-246 et seq.
See: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS
Required 7-1
Restaurants, cafes, lunch rooms, etc. 7-186 et seq.
See: RESTAURANTS, CAFES, LUNCH ROOMS, ETC.
Revocations 7-6
Rooming houses 7-226 et seq.
See: ROOMINGHOUSES
Sales, permit required for certain 7-10
Shows, exhibits
Permit required for; fee 7-10
Slaughterhouses 7-156 et seq.
See: BUTCHERS, SLAUGHTERHOUSES, ETC.
Theater 7-96
Tobacco products, license required for sale of; fee 7-8
Vehicles for hire, license required for; fee 7-9
Vending and other machines, location of restricted 7-11
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
LIFE SAFETY CODE
Generally 5-46 et seq.
See: FIRE PREVENTION
LIGHTS AND LIGHTING
191
Housing code regulations 6-68 et seq.
See: HOUSING
Street lighting
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
LIMOUSINES
Licenses required for vehicles for hire 7-9
LITTER AND LITTERING
Prohibited 8-3
Truck loads, littering from prohibited 12-3
LIVERY STABLES
Licenses required for 7-7
LOADING AND UNLOADING
Loads of vehicles or loading zones
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9(8)
CODE INDEX
LOADING AND UNLOADING (CON’T) Section
Zoning regulations in general. See:ZONING BY-LAWS
LOADS
Littering from truck loads prohibited 12-3
LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS. See: PUBLIC WORKS AND
IMPROVEMENTS
LODGINGHOUSES. See: HOTELS AND MOTELS
LOTS
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
M
MANURE
Blacksmith shops, license restrictions 7-7(b)
MEAT
Grocery, meat and produce, etc., dealers 7-176 et seq.
See; GROCERY, MEAT AND PRODUCE, ETC., DEALERS
METERS
Parking meters 12-145 et seq.
See: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
MISDEMEANORS
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9
Code does not effect prior misdemeanors 1-7
Effect of repeal of ordinances 1-8
192
General penalties 1-13
Penalties for specific acts, omissions, violations, etc. See specific
subjects as indexed
MIXED USE DISTRICT. See ZONING BY-LAWS
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
Definitions 7-246
Housing Code
Generally 6-26 et seq.
See: HOUSING
License
Fee 7-248
Required 7-247
Restrictions 7-249
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
MONIES OF TOWN. See: FINANCES
CODE INDEX
MONUMENTS Section
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9(8)
Coasting prohibited; exception 11-5
Damaging public property prohibited 11-2
Definitions 12-1
Entering intersections 12-27
Fire apparatus
Yield right-of-way 12-26
Firearms
Transportation of prohibited in certain areas; exception 8-2
Fires and fire hydrants
Parking prohibited near 12-100
Handicapped parking
Designated 12-121
Intersections
Entering intersections 12-27
Stop intersections 12-28
Yield intersections 12-29
Littering
Truck loads, littering from prohibited 12-3
Loads and loading
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9(8)
Littering from truck loads prohibited 12-3
Lots
Parking lots 12-136 et seq.
193
See herein: Parking, Stopping and Standing
Meters
Parking meters 12-145 et seq.
See herein: Parking, Stopping and Standing
Noise
Excessive motor vehicle noise prohibited 12-2
Obstruction of public way prohibited 8-4
One-way streets
Designated 12-61
One-way traffic
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9(8)
Parking, stopping and standing
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9(8)
Enforcement; penalty 12-101
Fires and fire hydrants, parking prohibited near 12-100
Handicapped parking
Designated 12-121
Meters
Collections and use of monies 12-151
Defacing, tampering, etc., with 12-150
CODE INDEX
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC (CON’T) Section
Definitions 12-145
Designation of area, display of instructions and use of
meter; penalty 12-146
Double parking prohibited 12-152
Enforcement; penalty 12-154
Hours 12-147
Location restriction 12-148
Permit for parking in certain meter zones 12-153
Slugs prohibited 12-149
Parking lots
Designated 12-136
Fees 12-138
Regulations 12-137
Violation; penalties 12-139
Procedure 12-96
Prohibited parking areas 12-97
Restricted parking areas and hours 12-98
Trucks, restricted parking of 12-99
Permits
Parking in certain meter zones, permit for 12-153
Removal of Motor Vehicles
Parking prohibited 12-161
Recovery of Cost and Creation of Lien 12-163
Removal of Motor Vehicles 12-162
Routes
Snowmobiles, routes designated 12-172
Slugs
Parking meters, slugs prohibited 12-149
Snowmobiles
194
Penalty 12-175
Procedure for operation 12-174
Purpose 12-171
Routes designated 12-172
Speed limit 12-173
Speed limits
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9(8)
Designated 12-76
Snowmobiles 12-173
Stop intersections 12-28
Stopping and standing. See herein: Parking, Stopping and Standing
Streets, sidewalks and other public ways 11-1 et seq.
See: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS
Through streets
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9(8)
Trucks
Littering from truck loads prohibited 12-3
Restricted parking of 12-99
Yield intersections 12-29
MOVING PICTURE HOUSES
License required 7-96
CODE INDEX
N
NOISE Section
Motor vehicle noise
Excessive noise prohibited` 12-2
Noise Control 8-8
NONCONFORMITIES
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
NON-INHABITABLE SPACE
Housing code regulations 6-72
NUDITY
Public Indecency 8-6
NUISANCES
Dwellings unfit for habitation, procedure for abatement 6-51
Fire hazard 5-46 et seq.
See: FIRE PREVENTION
Running at large
Animal regulations in general 3-1 et seq.
See: ANIMALS AND FOWL
NUMBERS AND NUMBERING
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
O
195
OATH, AFFIRMATION, SWEAR OR SWORN
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
OBLIGATIONS
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9(2)
OBSTRUCTIONS
Public ways, obstruction of prohibited 8-4
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
OCCUPANT, TENANT
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
OFFAL
Butchers, slaughterhouses, etc. 7-156 et seq.
See: BUTCHERS, SLAUGHTERHOUSES, ETC.
OFFENSES
Alcoholic beverages
Consumption and possession in public places prohibited ` 8-5
Certain occupations prohibited 8-1
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9(1)
Code does not affect prior offenses 1-7
Effect of repeal of ordinances 1-8
CODE INDEX
OFFENSES (CON’T) Section
Firearms
Transportation and discharge of prohibited in certain areas;
exceptions 8-2
General penalties 1-13
Littering prohibited 8-3
Obstruction of public ways prohibited 8-4
Penalties for specific acts, omissions, violations, etc. See specific
subjects as indexed
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Classification, salaries, etc.
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9(12)
Delegation of authority
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
Fire hazard inspector 5-26
Housing inspector 6-48
Town Clerk
Duties 2-61
OPEN BURNING
Burned buildings
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
Fire prevention regulations 5-1 et seq.
See: FIRE PREVENTION
Permits for open burning 5-103
196
Permitted open burning ` 5-101
Prohibited open burning 5-102
OPEN PORCHES
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, ETC.
Board of selectmen duties 2-27
Town clerk's duties 2-61
OVERPASSES. See: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS
OWNER
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
P
PALMISTS
Certain occupations prohibited 8-1
PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
Permit for certain parades and processions required 11-1
7-273
PARKING
Generally 12-96 et seq.
See: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
CODE INDEX
PARKS AND RECREATION Section
Alcoholic beverages, consumption and possession in public places 8-5
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
Housing code
Generally 6-26 et seq.
See: HOUSING
Places of amusement, sport or recreation 7-61 et seq.
See: AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT PLACES
Public property, damage to 11-2
Recreation board
Budget 9-44
Created; membership; terms 9-41
Fiscal year 9-43
Powers and duties 9-42
Recreation department
Accounts 9-64
Creation 9-61
Fund raising 9-63
Purpose 9-62
Reimbursement to town 9-65
Streets, sidewalks and other public ways 11-1 et seq.
See: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS
197
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
PARTNERSHIPS
Persons; definitions and rules of construction extended and applied to 1-2
PEDDLERS, CANVASSERS AND SOLICITORS
License
Required; fee 7-271
Permit required for certain sales 7-10
PENALTIES. See: FINES, FORFEITURES AND OTHER PENALTIES
PERMITTED USES
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
PERSON
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
Keeper and proprietor; definitions and rules of construction extended
and applied to 1-2
PERSONAL PROPERTY. See: PROPERTY
PERSONNEL. See: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
PHRENOLOGISTS
Certain occupations prohibited 8-1
CODE INDEX
PICTURE HOUSES Section
License required 7-96
PISTOLS. See: FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
PLANNING DEVELOPMENT
Housing code
Generally 6-26 et seq.
See: HOUSING
Planning commission
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
PLUMBING
Housing code
Generally 6-26 et seq.
See: HOUSING
Multiple dwellings and rooming or lodging houses, plumbing facilities in 6-89
198
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
POOLROOMS AND BILLIARD PARLORS
License required 7-81
Places of amusement, sport or recreation 7-61 et seq.
See: AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT PLACES
POULTRY
Running at large
Animal regulations in general 3-1 et seq.
See: ANIMALS AND FOWL
PROCEEDINGS. See: SUITS, ACTIONS AND OTHER PROCEEDINGS
PRODUCE
Grocery, meat and produce, etc., dealers 7-176 et seq.
See: GROCERY, MEAT AND PRODUCE, ETC., DEALERS
PROFESSIONS
License requirements 7-1 et seq.
See: LICENSES AND PERMITS
PROPERTY
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
Posting advertising on public property, permit required for 11-4
PROPHECY
Certain occupations prohibited 8-1
CODE INDEX
PROPRIETOR AND KEEPER Section
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
PROSECUTIONS
Effect of repeal of ordinances 1-8
PUBLIC BUILDINGS, PLACES, ETC.
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
PUBLIC SPACE
Housing code regulations 6-70, 6-71
PUBLIC WAYS. See: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS
PUBLIC WORKS AND IMPROVEMENTS
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9(10)
Housing code
199
Generally 6-26 et seq.
See: HOUSING
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
PUNISHMENTS
Effect of repeal of ordinances 1-8
Q
QUARANTINE
Animal rabies control 3-51
R
RABIES CONTROL
Animal regulations 3-51
REAL PROPERTY. See: PROPERTY
RECORDS AND REPORTS
Town clerk's duties 2-61
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Definitions 7-246
License
Fee 7-248
Required 7-247
Restrictions 7-249
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
RESOLUTIONS. See: ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, ETC.
CODE INDEX
RESORTS Section
Places of amusement, sport or recreation 7-61 et seq.
See: AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT PLACES
RESTAURANTS
License
Fee 7-187
Required 7-186
Restrictions 7-188
REVENUES OF TOWN; See: FINANCES
REVOLVERS. See: FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
RIFLES. See: FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
RIGHTS
200
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9
Code does not affect prior rights established or accruing 1-7
ROOMINGHOUSES
Plumbing facilities in 6-89
RURAL LANDS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
S
SAFETY
Fire prevention and protection 5-1 et seq.
See: FIRE PREVENTION
Housing code
Generally 6-26 et seq.
See: HOUSING
SALES
Permit required for certain sales 7-10
SCHOOLS
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
SCREENS AND SCREENING
Infestation prevention; screening 6-94
Screen service areas
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
SELECTMEN. See: BOARD OF SELECTMEN
SERVICE STATIONS
Curb pump prohibited 7-125
CODE INDEX
SERVICE STATION- Cont'd. Section
Defined 7-121
License
Fee 7-123
Required 7-122
Restrictions 7-124
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
SETBACKS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
SHEEP
201
Running at large
Animal regulations in general 3-1 et seq.
See: ANIMALS AND FOWL
SHOTGUNS. See: FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
SIDEWALKS. See: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS
SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS
Permit required for posting advertising on public property. 11-4
Street signs
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
SITE PLAN
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
SKATING RINKS
Places of amusement, sport or recreation 7-61 et seq.
See: AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT PLACES
SKETCH BONDS
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
SLAUGHTERHOUSES. See: BUTCHERS, SLAUGHTERHOUSES, ETC.
SLEIGHS
Coasting prohibited; exception 11-5
SLUGS
Parking meters, slugs prohibited 12-149
CODE INDEX
SMOKE CONTROL Section
Housing code regulations 6-87
SNOWMOBILES
Penalty 12-175
Procedure for operation 12-174
Purpose 12-171
Routes designated 12-172
Speed limit 12-173
Traffic regulations in general 12-1 et seq.
See: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
SOCIETIES
202
Persons; definitions and rules of construction extended and applied to 1-2
SOLICITORS. See: PEDDLERS, CANVASSERS AND SOLICITORS
SPORTS
Places of sport 7-61 et seq.
See: AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT PLACES
SQUARE. See: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS
ST. JOHNSBURY. See: TOWN
STATE
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
STORAGE
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
STORM DRAINAGE
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS
Advertising on public property, permit required for posting 11-4
Alcoholic beverages
Consumption and possession of in public places prohibited 8-5
Automobile service stations 7-121 et seq.
See: SERVICE STATIONS
Bicycle riding on sidewalk prohibited 11-6
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9(5)
Coasting prohibited; exception ` 11-5
Damaging public property prohibited 11-2
Excavations, permit required for 11-3
Fire prevention and protection 5-1 et seq.
See: FIRE PREVENTION
Grades
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9(9)
Housing code
CODE INDEX
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS (CON’T) Section
Generally 6-26 et seq.
See: HOUSING
Lighting
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
Obstructions
Prohibited 8-4
One-way streets 12-61
One-way traffic
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9(8)
Parades and certain processions
Permit for required 11-1
203
Parking regulations 12-1 et seq.
See: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Parks and recreation 9-1 et seq.
See: PARKS AND RECREATION
Permit
Advertising on public property, permit required for posting 11-4
Excavations 11-3
Parades and certain procession 11-1
Running at large
Animal regulations in general 3-1 et seq.
See: ANIMALS AND FOWL
Signs
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
Speed limits 12,76, 12-173
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
Through streets
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9(8)
Traffic regulations in general 12-1 et seq.
See: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
SUBDIVISIONS(Generally)
Fire prevention and protection 5-1 et seq.
See: FIRE PREVENTION
SUBDIVISIONS- The following can be found in the ZONING BY-LAWS:
Acceptance of streets, recreation areas
Access road
Bonds
Improvements and performance bond
Cable TV
Conditions
Cul-de-sac
Curbs
Definitions
Design
Modification of design of improvements
Development
Excavation and grading
Lots
CODE INDEX
SUBDIVISIONS (CON’T)
Monuments
Open space and recreation area
Restrictions on sub-divider
School site
Site preservation
Soil survey
Storm drainage
Streets
Generally
204
Lighting
Signs
Utilities
Drainage
Storm drainage
Effective dates
Electric
Embankments
Erosion and sediment control
Site preservation
Excavation and grading
Embankments
General
Side slopes
Subgrade
Suitable materials required
Final plats
Generally
Major subdivisions
Action on proposed subdivision plat
Application for approval and fee
Number of copies
Public hearing
State and municipal agencies, approval of
When officially submitted
Required submissions
Subdivisions improvements
Supporting documents
Fire protection facilities
Grading: See herein: Excavation and Grading
Improvements
Design improvements, modification of
Final subdivision plat required improvements
Improvements and performance bond
Inspection of improvements
Maintenance bond or irrevocable letter of credit
Maintenance of improvements
Proper installation of improvements
Required improvements
Inspections
Improvements
CODE INDEX
SUBDIVISIONS (CON’T)
Lighting
Street lighting
Lots
Development standards
Maintenance of improvements
Major subdivisions
Final plat for
205
Preliminary plat
Generally
Required submissions
Minor subdivisions
Action on subdivision plat
Application and fee
Approval of state and municipal agencies
Filing of approved minor subdivision plat
Number of copies
Plat
Generally
Required submissions
Public hearing
Review of approval of
Sub-divider to attend planning commission meeting
When officially submitted
Monuments
Development standards
Natural cover
Site preservation
Open space
Development standards
Parks and playgrounds
Public acceptance of
Performance bond
Plats
Approved plats
Final approval and filing
Filing of sections of subdivisions
Void if revised after approval
Final plats. See herein that subject
Preliminary plats. See herein that subject
Preliminary plats
Major subdivisions
Application and fee
Number of copies
Preliminary approval
Study of preliminary plat
Sub-divider to attend planning commission meeting
When officially submitted
Public acceptance of streets, recreation areas
Recreation areas
Development standards
Public acceptance of
CODE INDEX
SUBDIVISIONS (CON’T)
Schools
Public acceptance of
Site
Separability
Sewerage
206
Signs
Street signs
Site preservation
Erosion and sediment control
Existing features
Natural cover
Sketch plan
Required submissions
Submission of
Soil survey
Statement of purpose
Storm drainage
Drainage structure to accommodate potential development upstream
Other provisions
Removal of spring and surface water
Responsibility for drainage downstream
Uninhabitable land
Streets
Access road
Cul-de-sac
Curb and sidewalks
Layout
Lighting
Public acceptance of
Signs
Standards
Submissions, required
Final subdivision plat, subdivision improvements and
supporting documents
Major subdivision preliminary plat and vicinity map
Minor subdivision plat
Sketch plan
Telephone service
Title
Uninhabitable land
Storm drainage
Utilities
Electric, telephone, cable TV
Fire protection facilities
Sewerage
Water
Variances
Vicinity map
Major subdivisions preliminary plat requirements
Waivers
Water
CODE INDEX
SUBSTATIONS Section
Public utilities substations
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
207
SUITS, ACTIONS AND OTHER PROCEEDINGS
Effect of repeal of ordinances 1-8
SURVEYS, MAPS AND PLATS
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
SWEAR OR SWORN. See: OATH, AFFIRMATION, SWEAR OR SWORN
SWIMMING POOLS
Private swimming pools
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
T
TAVERNS
Places of amusement, sport or recreation 7-61 et seq.
See: AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT PLACES
TAXATION
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9(7)
Local improvement assessments
Certain ordinances not affected by Code 1-9(10)
TAXICABS
Traffic regulations 12-1 et seq.
See: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
TECHNICAL CODES
Housing code 6-26 et seq.
See: HOUSING
Life Safety Code 5-46 et seq.
See: FIRE PREVENTION
TELEPHONES
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
TENANT, OCCUPANT
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
TENSE
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
THEATERS
License required; restrictions; fee; 7-96
CODE INDEX
TOBACCO Section
208
License required for sale of tobacco products; fee 7-8
TOILETS
Housing code
Generally 6-26 et seq.
See: HOUSING
TORTURE
Cruelty to dogs prohibited 3-31
TOWN
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
Recreation department, reimbursement to town 9-65
TOWN CLERK
Duties 2-61
TRADES
License requirements 7-1 et seq.
See: LICENSES AND PERMITS
TRAFFIC. See: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
TRAILERS AND TRAILER PARKS
Definitions 7-246
License
Fee 7-248
Required 7-247
Restrictions 7-249
TRAVEL TRAILER AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
TRAVELING SHOWMEN
Permit required for certain sales 7-10
TREES
Appointment of town tree warden and deputy tree warden 9-66
Jurisdiction of the tree warden and/or deputy tree warden 9-69
Protection of public trees 9-70
Removal or pruning of trees 9-68
Tree preservation program 9-67
TRUCKS. See also: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
License required for vehicles for hire 7-9
Littering from truck loads prohibited 12-3
Restricted parking of 12-99
TUNNELS. See: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS
CODE INDEX
209
U
UNDERPASSES. See: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS Section
UTILITIES
In General 13-1--13-10
Water and Sewer
Appendix I Application Forms Final Phase 13-56--13-58
Appendix 3 Water Technical Specifications 13-59
Appendix 4 Billing Periods(ordered 4-30-94) 13-60
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
Substations
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
V
VARIANCES
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
License required for vehicles for hire; fee 7-9
Parking or traffic regulations 12-1 et seq.
See: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
VENDING MACHINES
Location restricted 7-11
VENTILATION
Housing code
Generally 6-26 et seq.
See: HOUSING
VERMONT: See: STATE
210
VIADUCTS. See: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS
VISION OBSTRUCTIONS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
V.S.A. (Vermont Statutes Annotated)
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
W
WAIVERS
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
WALLS. See: FENCES, WALLS, HEDGES AND ENCLOSURES
CODE INDEX
Section
WASTEWATER SYSTEM 13-11--
13-149
Application Permit/Fees 13-126--
13-135
Building Sewers & Connections 13-51--
13-80
Capacity Allocations 13--31-
-13-50
In General 13-11--
13-20
Penalties/Miscellaneous 13-146--
13-199
Powers & Authority of Inspectors 13-141--
13-145
Private Sewerage System 13-111--
13-115
Protection from Damage 13-136--
13-140
Scavenger Waste 13-101--
13-110
Sewer Rents 13-115--
13-125
Use of Public Sewer 13-81--
13-100
Use of Public Sewer Required 13-21--
13-30
WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION
Butchers, slaughterhouses, etc. 7-156 et
211
seq.
CODE INDEX
WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION (CON’T) Section
See: BUTCHERS, SLAUGHTERHOUSES, ETC.
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
WATER SYSTEMS 13-200--
13-299
Application Procedure 13-221--
13-226
General 13-200--
13-299
Penalties/Miscellaneous 13-255--
13-299
Regulations-Operations 13-227--
13-245
Resident Inspections 13-215--
13-220
Systems Expansion 13-210--
13-214
Water Rents 13-246--
13-254
WEAPONS. See: FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
WOODSTOVES
Housing code regulations 6-81
WRITTEN AND IN WRITING
Definitions and rules of construction 1-2
Y
YARDS AND OPEN SPACES Section
Housing Code
Maintenance of open areas 6-92
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
Zoning regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
Z
ZONING
Fire prevention and protection 5-1 et seq.
See: FIRE PREVENTION
Housing code
Generally 6-26 et seq.
See: HOUSING
212
Parking meters, restriction on location 12-148
Subdivision regulations in general. See: ZONING BY-LAWS
ZONING AND
SUBDIVISION
CODE OF
ORDINANCES
Town of
St. Johnsbury, Vermont
Adopted March 27, 1973
Amendments: December 27, 2005; January 17, 2006; February 24, 2014;
December 8, 2014; July 13, 2015; September 15, 2015; October 7, 2015; August 8,
2016; July 12, 2017; April 30, 2018; May 28, 2019
2
Date of Approval Summary of Amendment Revision History
February 24, 2014 Planning Commission the revision to the Zoning By-laws with support from a
Municipal Planning Grant awarded by the Department of Economic, Housing &
Community. Jon Anderson, Esq. was contracted through this grant to assist the
Planning Commission in a thorough review and re-write of the Zoning By-laws.
December 8, 2014 Amendments to Section 311 Mixed Use District of the town bylaws to include
six(6) additional conditional uses as they are currently defined in Article VIII of
the Bylaws in effect:
i. Club
ii. Community Care Home
iii. Dormitory
iv. Funeral Home
v. Taxi
vi. Auto Service Station
July 13, 2015 Clarify the definitions of Medical Office and differentiate Medical Laboratories
from Research Laboratories; add medical labs to appropriate zoning districts
based upon risk level of laboratory.
September 16, 2015 1. Add definitions for Residential Care Home for clarity and parlance with the
Department of Health: These include level I, II, III, and IV facilities as
licensed by the State of Vermont; Nursing Home: A level I or II; Level III
Community Care Home; and, Level IV Community Care Home.
2. Modify Residential Town to add Office as a conditional use
3. Mixed Housing: The Planning Commission has been informed by the
Agency of Commerce and Community Development that although the
intent of this language was to create mixed use housing and mixed
economic neighborhoods, the use of by-laws to accomplish this is illegal.
The Select Board and the Planning Commission will work together to
accomplish this end goal in another way.:
A. Remove Section 421 that was approved February 24, 2014
B. Remove Section 503.2 that was approved February 24, 2014
October 5, 2015 A. Adjust the language and placement of Transitional Shelter for clarity and
consistency throughout the zoning districts.
B. Change the definition of Transitional Shelter to be titled “Transitional
Residence”;
C. Add a definition for Temporary Overnight Shelter;
D. Added permitted and/or conditional uses in each appropriate Zoning
District section(s)
August 8, 2016 A. Amend Section 303 Generally Permitted Uses: to read: “The following uses
are generally permitted in all zoning districts. [add: “A zoning permit is
required in accordance with Section 202.1.]
B. Section 311 Mixed Use: Change Retail sale to Retail Store (to fit with
definition) this will stay in Permitted Uses; Add Motor Vehicle Sale and
Repair to Conditionally permitted
C. Amend Definitions for Large Retail Store, Retail Service and Retail Store:
D. And amend appropriate zoning districts for permitted and Conditional Use.
E. Added the definition of Commercial Event Venue
October 8, 2016
July 12, 2017 Added definitions for Shipping Containers Self Storage Units, Pet Services and
Veterinary Services; added permitted and/or conditional uses in each
appropriate Zoning District section(s)
April 30, 2018 Removed amendments dated July 12, 2017and footnoted changed sections.
“July 12, 2017 Amendments declared null and void without legal force or effect
per Order of Vermont Superior Court, Environmental Division, in Re: Lucille
B. Oakes Conditional Use Application 20170901-082 for a Conditional Use as a
Self-Storage Facility, Docket No.: 153-11-17 Vtec”
3
May 28, 2019 Added Funeral home with or without residence to Conditional Uses in the
Industrial districts, section 313; and expanded the area of the Design Control
District, section 316.3
This document was prepared with support from a Municipal Planning
Grant awarded by the Department of Economic, Housing & Community
Development in January, 2012; approved February 24, 2014.
4
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 101 ENACTMENT, NAME, AUTHORITY AND EFFECTIVE AREA ............................................................. 6
SECTION 102 PLANNING COMMISSION ............................................................................................................... 6
SECTION 103 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER ........................................................................................................... 7
SECTION 104 DEVELOPMENT REVIEW BOARD ................................................................................................... 9
SECTION 105 DESIGN ADVISORY COMMITTEE ................................................................................................. 11
SECTION 106 FEES ............................................................................................................................................ 12
SECTION 107 SEVERABILITY ............................................................................................................................ 12
ARTICLE II ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT .......................................................................... 13
SECTION 201 USE AND DEVELOPMENT OF LAND .............................................................................................. 13
SECTION 202 ZONING PERMITS ........................................................................................................................ 13
SECTION 203 SITE PLAN REVIEW ..................................................................................................................... 16
SECTION 204 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USE REVIEW ............................................................................. 17
SECTION 205 DESIGN CONTROL ....................................................................................................................... 19
SECTION 206 VARIANCES ................................................................................................................................. 19
SECTION 207 CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE ..................................................................................... 21
SECTION 208 ENFORCEMENT ............................................................................................................................ 22
ARTICLE III ZONING DISTRICTS .................................................................................................................. 24
SECTION 301 CREATION, MAP AND INTERPRETATION ...................................................................................... 24
SECTION 302 SETBACKS ................................................................................................................................... 25
SECTION 303 GENERALLY PERMITTED USES .................................................................................................... 26
SECTION 304 CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES ............................................................................................. 26
SECTION 305 ZONING DISTRICT OBJECTIVES, LAND USES AND QUANTITATIVE STANDARDS .......................... 27
SECTION 306 RURAL LAND ONE (“RL-1”) ....................................................................................................... 28
SECTION 307 RURAL LAND TWO (“RL-2”) 29
SECTION 308 RESIDENTIAL TOWN (“R-T”) 31
SECTION 309 RESIDENTIAL A (“R-A”) ............................................................................................................. 32
SECTION 310 RESIDENTIAL B (“R-B”) ............................................................................................................. 33
SECTION 311 MIXED USE (“MU”) .................................................................................................................... 34
SECTION 312 COMMERCIAL (“COM”) ............................................................................................................. 36
SECTION 313 INDUSTRIAL (“IND”) .................................................................................................................. 38
SECTION 314 HEALTH SERVICES (“HS”) .......................................................................................................... 40
SECTION 315 CONSERVATION DISTRICT (“C-D”) ............................................................................................. 41
SECTION 316 OVERLAY DISTRICTS .................................................................................................................. 41
ARTICLE IV SPECIAL ISSUES......................................................................................................................... 45
Part 1 Non-Conformities ...................................................................................................................... 45
SECTION 401 EXISTING SMALL LOTS ............................................................................................................... 45
SECTION 402 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES ................................................................................ 45
Part 2 Performance Standards ............................................................................................................ 47
SECTION 408 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS ....................................................................................................... 47
Part 3 Design Standards ...................................................................................................................... 47
SECTION 410 OFF-STREET PARKING ................................................................................................................ 47
SECTION 411 LANDSCAPING ............................................................................................................................. 51
SECTION 412 OFF-STREET LOADING ................................................................................................................ 53
SECTION 413 OUTDOOR LIGHTING ................................................................................................................... 53
SECTION 414 REQUIRED STORAGE ................................................................................................................... 56
SECTION 415 MOTOR VEHICLE STORAGE AND USE .......................................................................................... 56
SECTION 416 REQUIRED ACCESS TO PUBLIC ROADS OR PUBLIC WATERS ........................................................ 57
SECTION 417 LOCATION OF DRIVEWAYS .......................................................................................................... 57
SECTION 418 PRESERVATION OF VISION AT INTERSECTIONS AND DRIVEWAYS ................................................ 57
SECTION 419 SCREENED SERVICE AREA REQUIREMENTS ................................................................................ 57
SECTION 420 GRADING .................................................................................................................................... 58
5
Part 4 Special Uses .............................................................................................................................. 58
SECTION 430 AUTO SERVICE STATIONS AND CONVENIENCE STORES/MINIMARTS .......................................... 58
SECTION 431 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES .................................................................................... 59
SECTION 432 WOOD-FIRED FURNACES, BOILERS, AND STOVES ....................................................................... 66
SECTION 433 MOBILE HOME PARKS ................................................................................................................. 68
SECTION 434 TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS ............................................................................................................ 69
SECTION 435 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE DISPENSARIES ................................................................................... 70
SECTION 436 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ............................................................................................................ 70
SECTION 437 STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS AND OTHER HAZARDOUS MATERIAL ................................... 71
SECTION 438 REMOVAL OF EARTH RESOURCES ............................................................................................... 71
SECTION 439 JUNK YARDS/SALVAGE YARD .................................................................................................... 72
SECTION 440 DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT AND FREE-STANDING RETAIL STANDS .................................................... 72
SECTION 441 TEMPORARY OVERNIGHT SHELTER ............................................................................................ 72
SECTION 442 TRANSITIONAL RESIDENCE ......................................................................................................... 73
Part 5 Flood Hazard ............................................................................................................................. 73
SECTION 450 FLOOD HAZARD REGULATION .................................................................................................... 73
Part 6 Other Permitted Structures .................................................................................................... 77
SECTION 460 MOBILE BUILDING ...................................................................................................................... 77
SECTION 461 SIGNS .......................................................................................................................................... 77
461.9 Sign Location, Design, Safety and Maintenance ........................................................................ 84
SECTION 462 FENCES ....................................................................................................................................... 86
SECTION 463 SOLAR COLLECTORS ................................................................................................................... 88
SECTION 464 WIND TURBINES ......................................................................................................................... 88
SECTION 465 PUBLIC UTILITY SUBSTATIONS ................................................................................................... 89
ARTICLE V SUBDIVISION OF LAND ........................................................................................................... 90
SECTION 501 DRB APPROVAL ......................................................................................................................... 90
SECTION 502 PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION ........................................................................................................ 90
SECTION 503 FINAL SUBDIVISION .................................................................................................................... 92
SECTION 504 SECURITY FOR COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS ........................................................................ 97
SECTION 505 PLATS ......................................................................................................................................... 98
SECTION 506 MODIFICATION OF DESIGN IMPROVEMENTS ................................................................................ 98
SECTION 507 INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS .................................................................................................. 98
SECTION 508 PROPER INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS ................................................................................ 99
SECTION 509 MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS ............................................................................................. 99
SECTION 510 PUBLIC ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS, RECREATION AREAS ............................................................ 99
ARTICLE VI PLANNED RESIDENTIAL AND UNIT DEVELOPMENTS ................................................ 100
SECTION 601 GENERAL CONDITIONS.............................................................................................................. 100
SECTION 602 APPLICATIONS .......................................................................................................................... 100
SECTION 603 SPECIAL REVIEW CRITERIA ....................................................................................................... 100
ARTICLE VII DEFINITIONS ....................................................................................................................... 101
6
ARTICLE I Enactment, Creation of Necessary Offices and
General Provisions
Section 101 Enactment, Name, Authority and Effective Area
101.1 This ordinance is enacted pursuant to 24 V.S.A., Chapter 117, sub-chapter 6, §4410 and §4411 which
constitute and are set forth in the text hereof and the official maps hereby adopted. It shall be known and
cited as the Town of St. Johnsbury Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance and shall be effective for all land in
the Town of St. Johnsbury, Vermont.
101.2 It is the intent of these Town of St Johnsbury Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance to provide for
orderly community growth; to promote the preservation and conservation of the natural environment in
concert with the comprehensive town plan and to further each of the purposes established in 24 V.S.A.
§4302, which are incorporated herein by reference.
101.3 These Town of St Johnsbury Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance:
a) Implement the goals, policies, and recommendations in the current municipal plan;
b) Avoid and minimize the loss of life and property, the disruption of commerce, the impairment
of the tax base, and the extraordinary public expenditures and demands on public services that
result from flooding related inundation and erosion;
c) Ensure that the selection, design, creation, and use of development in hazard areas is reasonably
safe and accomplished in a manner that is consistent with public wellbeing, does not impair
stream equilibrium, flood plain services, or the stream corridor,
d) Manage all flood hazard areas designated pursuant to 10 V.S.A. Chapter 32 § 753, the municipal
hazard mitigation plan; and make the Town of St. Johnsbury, its citizens, and businesses eligible
for federal flood insurance, federal disaster recovery funds, and hazard mitigation funds as may
be available.1
Section 102 Planning Commission 2
102.1 Establishment. A planning commission is created pursuant to 24 V.S.A. § 4321.
102.2 Composition and Terms. The planning commission shall consist of seven (7) members who
shall be residents of the town. Planning commission members shall be appointed by the select
board for three (3) year terms ending on the last day of June. Vacancies may be filled for unexpired
terms by the select board.
102.3 Organization. At its first meeting in July of each year, the planning commission shall, by
majority vote of its members (excluding vacant seats), elect one (1) of its members to serve as
chairperson, one (1) member to serve as vice-chairperson, and one (1) member to serve as clerk.
102.4 Powers and Duties. The planning commission shall exercise all duties of planning
commissions specified in 24 V.S.A., Chapter 117, as well as any duties specified in the town
charter or appropriately requested of it by the select board.
1 New 2014: NFIP required statement of purpose
2 New 2014; No comparable provision.
7
Section 103 Administrative Officer 3
103.1 Establishment. An administrative officer shall be appointed pursuant to 24 V.S.A. § 4448.
103.2 The administrative officer shall administer this ordinance literally and shall not have the
power to permit any land development that is not in conformance with this ordinance.4
103.3 Application Requirements. The administrative officer may waive any application filing
requirements or require additional information or materials to be filed as reasonably necessary to
consider any application. If the administrative officer reasonably determines that an application is
incomplete, the administrative officer shall provide the applicant with a written list of the required
additional information. If, instead of supplying the additional information, the applicant requests
the administrative officer to deny the permit application, the administrative officer shall do so.5
103.4 Action by the Administrative Officer. Except as provided in this ordinance for land
development in areas identified by this ordinance as areas of special flood hazard, the
administrative officer shall, within thirty (30) days of receiving a complete application, either issue
or deny the requested permit or refer the application to the DRB. If denied, the administrative
officer shall so notify the applicant in writing, stating the reasons therefore. 24 V.S.A. §4448(d).
103.5 Notice of Permit Issuance. Each permit issued shall contain a statement of the period of
time within which an appeal may be taken and shall require posting of a notice of permit on a form
prescribed by the town within view from the public right-of-way most nearly adjacent to the
subject property until the time for appeal has passed. Within three (3) days following the issuance
of a permit, the administrative officer shall post a copy of the permit in at least one (1) public place
in the town until the expiration of the applicable appeal period.6
103.6 Effective Date of Permits. No permit shall take effect until the time for appeal has passed,
or in the event that a notice of appeal is properly filed, no such permit shall take effect until
adjudication of that appeal by the DRB is complete and the time for taking an appeal to the
environmental division has passed without an appeal being taken. If an appeal is taken to the
environmental division, the permit shall not take effect until the environmental division rules in
accordance with 10 V.S.A. §8504 on whether to issue a stay, or until the expiration of fifteen (15)
days from such appeal, whichever comes first.7
103.7 Decisions. The administrative officer may also issue decisions concerning the application
of the provisions of this Ordinance to the proposed activity or construction, such as a determination
that a project does not require a zoning permit or is located in a particular zoning district. Each
decision issued by the administrative officer shall contain a statement of the period of time within
which an appeal may be taken. Within three (3) days following the issuance of a decision, the
3 Comparable to 1973 Section 801.
4 Comparable to 1973 Section 802.1.
5 Expanded 2014 from 1973 Sections 802.2 and 802.3.
6 Added 2014. See 24 V.S.A. § 4449(b) and 4449(c).
7 Added 2014. See 24 V.S.A. §4449(a)(3).
8
administrative officer shall post a copy of the decision in at least one (1) public place in the town
until the expiration of the applicable appeal period.
103.8 Appeals. Pursuant to 24 V.S.A. §§ 4465(a) and (b) and 4466, an interested person may
appeal within fifteen (15) days to the DRB any decisions or act taken by the administrative officer.8
Note: 24 V.S.A. § 4465(a) and (b) and 4466 provide in relevant part as follows:
§ 4465. Appeals of decisions of the administrative officer
A. An interested person may appeal any decision or act taken by the administrative
officer in any municipality by filing a notice of appeal with the secretary of the
development review board of that municipality or with the clerk of that municipality
if no such secretary has been elected. This notice of appeal must be filed within 15
days of the date of that decision or act, and a copy of the notice of appeal shall be
filed with the administrative officer.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, an interested person means any one of the
following:
(1) A person owning title to property, or a municipality or solid waste
management district empowered to condemn it or an interest in it, affected by a
bylaw, who alleges that the bylaw imposes on the property unreasonable or
inappropriate restrictions of present or potential use under the particular
circumstances of the case.
(2) The municipality that has a plan or a bylaw at issue in an appeal brought
under this chapter or any municipality that adjoins that municipality.
(3) A person owning or occupying property in the immediate neighborhood of
a property that is the subject of any decision or act taken under this chapter, who
can demonstrate a physical or environmental impact on the person's interest under
the criteria reviewed, and who alleges that the decision or act, if confirmed, will
not be in accord with the policies, purposes, or terms of the plan or bylaw of that
municipality.
(4) Any ten persons who may be any combination of voters or real property
owners within a municipality listed in subdivision (2) of this subsection who, by
signed petition to the appropriate municipal panel of a municipality, the plan or a
bylaw of which is at issue in any appeal brought under this title, allege that any
relief requested by a person under this title, if granted, will not be in accord with
the policies, purposes, or terms of the plan or bylaw of that municipality. This
petition to the appropriate municipal panel must designate one person to serve as
the representative of the petitioners regarding all matters related to the appeal.
(5) Any department and administrative subdivision of this state owning
8 Added 2014
9
property or any interest in property within a municipality listed in subdivision (2)
of this subsection, and the agency of commerce and community development of this
state.
. . .
§ 4466. Notice of appeal
A notice of appeal shall be in writing and shall include the name and address of the
appellant, a brief description of the property with respect to which the appeal is taken, a
reference to the regulatory provisions applicable to that appeal, the relief requested by the
appellant, and the alleged grounds why the requested relief is believed proper under the
circumstances.
103.9 Filing and Recording of Municipal Land Use Permits. Within thirty (30) days after a
zoning permit is no longer subject to appeal, the administrative officer shall deliver the original or
a legible copy of the municipal zoning permit or a notice of zoning permit generally in the form
set forth in 24 VSA §1154(c) to the town clerk for recording as provided in 24 VSA §1154(a); and
file a copy of that municipal land use permit or notice of zoning permit in the offices of the town
in a location where all town land use permits shall be kept and deliver a copy of such permit to the
town assessor.9
103.10 Zoning Permit. The administrative officer may issue a zoning permit amendment if and
only if the proposed change does not adversely affect the project’s compliance under any of the
applicable review criteria. Otherwise, the administrative officer shall consider a proposed change
as a new application for a zoning permit.
Section 104 Development Review Board
104.1 Establishment. A development review board (“DRB”) is created pursuant to 24 V.S.A.
§ 4460.10
104.2 Composition and Terms. The DRB shall consist of seven (7) members and two (2)
alternates who shall be residents of the town. DRB members and alternate members shall be
appointed by the select board for three (3) year terms ending on the last day of June. In years
divisible by three (3), three (3) members shall be appointed. In all other years, two (2) members
and one (1) alternate shall be appointed. Alternates may be assigned to serve when one (1) or more
members of the DRB are disqualified or are otherwise unable to serve. Vacancies shall be filled
by the select board for the unexpired terms. All members shall continue to serve until a successor
is appointed.11
104.3 Organization. At its first meeting in July of each year, the DRB shall, by majority vote of
its members (excluding vacant seats), elect one (1) of its members to serve as chairperson, one (1)
member to serve as vice-chairperson, and one (1) member to serve as clerk.
9 New 2014. See 24 V.S.A. § 4449(c).
10 Comparable to 1973 Section 805.
11 Comparable to 1973 Section 805. Expanded to add allowance for alternates.
10
104.4 Public Notice. Public hearings that require public notice shall be advertised not less than
fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the public hearing by all of the following means:
a) Publication of the date, place and purpose of the hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation in the town;
b) Posting of the same information in three (3) or more public places within the town in
conformance with location requirements of 1 V.S.A. § 312(c)(2), including in or near
the town clerk’s office;
c) Written notification to the applicant and to owners of record of all properties adjoining
the property subject to development, without regard to any public right-of-way. The
notification shall include a description of the proposed project and shall be accompanied
by information that informs the recipient where additional information may be obtained,
and that participation in the local proceeding is a prerequisite to the right to take any
subsequent appeal.
d) Posting a sign obtained from the administrative officer on the property. The sign shall
include the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing, shall be posted in a
location visible to the public from a public right-of-way, and shall be removed within
two (2) days of the close of the public hearing.12
104.5 Use of Alternate Members. When a DRB member is unable to hear a particular matter, an
alternate shall be designated by the chair to participate in the consideration of that matter.
Alternates may also be requested by the chair to temporarily replace a member if the member is
not able to attend meetings on a long-term basis.
104.6 Evidence and Testimony. The DRB, in connection with any of its proceedings, may
examine, or cause to be examined, any property, maps, books or records bearing upon the matters
considered in such proceeding, may require the attendance of any person having knowledge of the
premises, may take testimony and require proof material for its information, and may administer
oaths or take acknowledgment in respect of such matters.13
104.7 Technical Assistance.13
a) In accordance with 24 VSA §4407(17), the DRB may request expert consultation
with respect to its review of any application for land development. The applicant
shall be required to pay to the town the estimated cost for such services prior to the
completion of the DRB’s review.
b) Funds received from the applicant by the town pursuant to this section shall be held
in a separate account. The sum may be used for the payment of consultants hired
by the town to assist the DRB in reviewing a project. Any balance remaining no
later six (6) months after final action on the application by the DRB shall be
returned to the applicant.
12 a) -c) Comparable to 1973 Section 806; d) added 2014 as required by 24 V.S.A. § 4464(a)(1)(B).
13 Added 2014
11
104.8 Ex Parte Communication. When operating in a quasi-judicial capacity, no DRB member
shall communicate, directly or indirectly, with any interested persons or their representatives,
except during properly noticed DRB hearings.
104.9 Decisions.
a) The DRB may recess its proceedings on any application, pending submission of
additional information. It shall close the evidence promptly after all parties have
submitted the requested information. It shall then adjourn the hearing and issue a
decision within forty-five (45) days after the adjournment of the hearing. Decisions
shall be issued in writing and shall include a statement of the factual basis on which
the DRB has made its conclusions and a statement of the conclusions. The minutes
of the meeting may suffice, provided the factual basis and conclusions relating to
the review standards are provided in conformance with this subsection.
b) In rendering a decision in favor of the applicant, the DRB may attach additional
reasonable conditions and safeguards as the DRB deems reasonably necessary to
implement the purposes of 24 V.S.A., Chapter 117, this ordinance and the
municipal development plan then in effect.14
c) Within the period set forth in subdivision (a) of this subsection, any decision shall
be sent by certified mail to the applicant and the appellant in matters on appeal.
Copies of the decision shall also be mailed to every person or body appearing and
having been heard at the hearing and a copy of the decision shall be filed with the
administrative officer. See § 4464(b)(3).
104.10 Appeals. An interested person may appeal a decision of the DRB to the environmental
division of the Vermont superior court pursuant to 24 V.S.A. § 4471.15
Note: See Note after Section 103.8 for a definition of interested person.
Section 105 Design Advisory Committee
To advise the DRB, the select board shall appoint an advisory commission on design review
composed of eight (8) persons having a knowledge of and interest in design, architecture,
landscape design, historic development and/or the community. Members of the advisory
committee shall have such term of office, and such procedural rules, as the select board shall
determine.16
14 Comparable to 1973 Section 205.2.3.
15 New 2014; No comparable provision.
16 Adapted from 1973 Section 402.3.
12
Section 106 Fees17
The fees for all services provided under this ordinance, including fees for permit review and
issuance, hearing notice, and review, and permit recording shall be as set from time to time by the
select board and published on a schedule of fees. No action shall be taken on any matter before
the payment of applicable fees.
Section 107 Severability18
If any article, part, section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is declared
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction in a valid judgment or
decree, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining articles, parts,
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this ordinance.
17 Comparable to 1973 Sections 801 and 807.
18 Comparable to 1973 Section 904.
13
ARTICLE II Administration and Enforcement
Section 201 Use and Development of Land19
Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, no person may use or occupy any land or
buildings or authorize or permit the use or occupancy of land or buildings under his or her
control except in accordance with the applicable provisions of this ordinance.
Section 202 Zoning Permits
202.1 Permits Required for Land Development. Unless specifically exempted or to the extent
limited by this ordinance or applicable statute, no land development may be commenced without
a zoning permit theretofore issued by the administrative officer.
202.2 Exempt Activities.20 Except as otherwise provided by Section 450 Flood Hazard
Regulations, a zoning permit shall not be required for the following activities:
a) Accepted agricultural practices and accepted management practices for silviculture,
in accordance with 24 V.S.A. § 4413(d).
b) Power generation and transmission facilities that are regulated under 30 V.S.A.
§ 248 by the Vermont public service board.
c) Hunting, fishing, and trapping as specified under 24 V.S.A § 2295 on private or
public land. This does not include facilities supporting such activities, such as
firing ranges or rod and gun clubs, which for the purposes of these regulations are
defined as recreational facilities.
d) Normal maintenance and repair of an existing structure that does not result in
exterior alterations or expansion or a change of use.
e) Interior alterations or repairs to a structure that do not alter or expand the exterior
of the structure or result in a different or expanded use.
f) Exterior alterations to structures that are not located within designated design
review districts and that do not result in any change to the footprint or height of the
structure or a different or expanded use.
g) Minor grading and excavation associated with road and driveway maintenance, and
lawn and yard maintenance, which is otherwise incidental to an approved use.
h) Outdoor recreational trails that do not require the installation of structures or
parking areas.
19 New 2014; No comparable section.
20 2014 Replaces 1973 Section 301.8.
14
i) Small accessory structures associated with residential uses which are less than one
hundred (100) square feet of floor area, less than ten (10) feet in height with a flat
roof or less than twelve (12) feet in height with a peaked roof, and are not located
within required setback areas.
j) Garage sales, yard sales, auctions, or similar activities that do not exceed five (5)
consecutive days, nor more than twelve (12) days in any calendar year.
k) Road, sidewalk, bridge, infrastructure, and utility improvements and maintenance,
and related appurtenances within existing public rights-of-way.
l) Except to the extent the bylaws protect historic landmarks and structures listed on
the site or national register of historic places; the largest face of the antenna is not
more than 15 square feet; and, the antenna and mast supporting it does not extend
more than 12 feet about the roof of that portion of the building to which the mast is
attached, the following types of antennas or dishes, which are placed on properties
for the owners’ or occupants’ exclusive use and control:
i. A “dish” antenna one (1) meter (39.37 inches) or less in diameter designed
to receive direct broadcast satellite television service or to receive and
transmit fixed wireless signals via satellite;
ii. An antenna one (1) meter in diameter or less designed to receive wireless
cable or to receive or transmit fixed wireless signals other than by satellite;
iii. Commercially-available analog and digital television antennas;
iv. Ground or building mounted radio or television antenna, or satellite dishes
not exceeding one (1) meter in diameter, which are intended solely for
residential use, and which do not, as mounted, exceed forty (40) feet in
height above the lowest grade at ground level;
v. Single use local business radio dispatch equipment;
vi. Citizens band radio antennas operated by federally licensed amateur (ham)
radio operators which do not exceed a height of fifty (50) feet above the
grade level, whether free standing or mounted, and which meet all setback
requirements for the district in which they are located; and
vii. Police, fire ambulance, and other emergency dispatch telecommunications
facilities.21
m) The addition of floor space at any residence without changing (1) the land surface
area covered or occupied by a structure and (2) the number of dwelling units in any
structure.
21 New 2014; No comparable section.
15
202.3 Applications. Applications for zoning permits shall be made to the administrative officer
on forms provided by the town for that purpose. A zoning permit application shall include the
following:
a) Completed zoning application form.
b) Completed application form(s) for other approval(s) applicable to the application
and supporting information.
c) A Vermont Agency of Natural Resources Project Review Sheet for the
proposal. The Project Review Sheet shall identify all State and Federal agencies
from which permit approval is required for the proposal, and shall be filed as a
required attachment to the municipal permit application. The identified permits, or
letters indicating that such permits are not required, shall be submitted to the ZA
and attached to the permit before work can begin.22
202.4 Duration of Zoning Permits.
a) Zoning permits shall expire three (3) years after the date of issuance by the
administrative officer. An approved project must be completed prior to the
expiration of the permit, unless a later completion date has been approved during
the initial approval process. Once a permit has expired, a new permit must be
obtained prior to initiating or recommencing the project. Reestablishment of an
expired permit is considered a new application and shall be subject to the review
process in effect at the time of reestablishment. If construction commences, the
failure to complete construction in accordance with the zoning permit within three
(3) years after a zoning permit is issued or as otherwise provided during the initial
approval process shall constitute a violation of the zoning permit subject to
enforcement action by the administrative officer.23
b) Prior to expiration of a zoning permit, and upon written request from the applicant,
the administrative officer may extend, for good cause, a zoning permit for a period
not to exceed one (1) year.24
c) Abandonment of Structures - Within one (1) year after work on an excavation for
a building has begun or within six (6) months after a permanent or temporary
building or structure has been destroyed, demolished, or abandoned, all structural
materials shall be removed from the site and the site shall be restored to a normal
grade and planted with grass or other suitable vegetation.25 The DRB, after public
notice and hearing, may extend these deadlines for good cause shown.
22 New 2014: Vermont Model Flood Hazard Regulations, v.4 in Section VIII.A.2
23 New 2014.
24 New 2014.
25 Expanded in 2014 from 1973 Section 802.3 and Section 312
16
Section 203 Site Plan Review
203.1 Prior to the issuance of a zoning permit, the applicant shall deliver to the administrative
officer evidence of site plan approval including the approval of waivers as applicable by the DRB,
after public notice and hearing. Notwithstanding the foregoing, and pursuant to Section 450 Flood
Hazard Areas, site plan approval by the DRB shall not be required for the following land
developments unless a waiver of any requirement herein is requested for such land development:
a) One (1) family and two (2) family dwellings;
b) Land development where the proposed use or structure is reasonably determined by the
DRB without a public hearing not to affect the adequacy of (1) traffic access, (2)
circulation and parking, (3) landscaping and screening, (4) utilization of renewable
energy resources; and (5) adequacy of storm water drainage and run off including the
absence of flooding and ponding.
c) Any land development otherwise exempted from site plan approval.26
203.2 Application. An applicant seeking site plan approval shall submit two (2) sets of site plans,
surveys and supporting data to the DRB which shall include the following information presented
in drawn form and accompanied by written text:
a) Name and address of the owner of record of the land in question and of all adjoining
properties including properties that would be contiguous to the property subject to
development but for the interposition of a highway or other public right-of-way.
b) Survey of the land in question showing existing features, including contours, structures,
large trees, streets, utility and other easements of record, rights of way, and land use
and deed restrictions, name and address of person or persons preparing the survey, the
scale of survey, north point and date.
c) Site plan showing proposed structures, location and elevations thereof and use to be
made of other land subject to application; streets, driveways, traffic circulation, parking
and loading spaces, pedestrian walks and snow storage areas.
d) A table listing applicable area, density, dimensional, parking requirements and
describing the extent of compliance with each such requirement.27
e) Evidence demonstrating compliance with the parking, outdoor lighting and landscaping
standards of this ordinance.
203.3 Review Criteria. In considering whether to approve or disapprove any site plan submitted
pursuant to this section, or to grant any waiver allowed by this ordinance, the DRB shall consider,
and may impose appropriate conditions and safeguards with respect to a project’s compliance with
the provisions of this ordinance, the adequacy of traffic access, circulation and parking, adequacy
26 Expanded 2014 from 1973 Section 401.
27 Expanded 2014 from 1973 Section 401.1.
17
of pedestrian circulation, landscaping and screening, exterior lighting, snow storage areas,
utilization of renewable energy resources, storm water drainage and run-off, including freedom
from flooding and ponding.
203.4 Duration of Site Plan Approval. Site plan approval shall expire one (1) year after such
approval is no longer subject to appeal.28 At the request of the applicant, the DRB, after public
notice and a hearing, may extend this deadline to the extent that the applicant is diligently pursuing
any Act 250 permit that is required for the proposed land development. In the event the proposed
land development is subject to Act 250 review, site plan approval shall expire one (1) year after
the required Act 250 approval is no longer subject to appeal.
Section 204 Permitted and Conditional Use Review
204.1 Any use designated as a "Permitted Use" in the table relating to a particular zoning
district is a use that may be commenced, enlarged or altered, in such district provided that the
applicable provisions of these zoning by-laws are met. Unless a variance or other special action
by the Development Review Board must first be obtained, the necessary zoning permit may be
issued by the administrative officer, pursuant to Section 103 of this by-law.
204.2 If a use is permitted only upon conditional use approval, prior to the issuance of a zoning
permit, the applicant shall deliver to the administrative officer evidence of conditional use approval
by the DRB after public hearing and notice.29
204.3 Application. In connection with conditional use approval, in addition to the materials
required for site plan review, an applicant shall submit two (2) copies of elevations for any
structure that is proposed.
204.4.1 Conditional Use Review Criteria. A conditional use may be approved, with appropriate
conditions or without, only if the DRB determines that the proposed use complies with any other
conditional use standards adopted by this ordinance and does not adversely affect the following:
a) the capacity of existing or planned community facilities;
b) the character of the area affected, as defined by the purpose or purposes of the
zoning district within which the project is located, and specifically stated policies
and standards in the town plan;
c) traffic on roads and highways in the vicinity;
d) the zoning and subdivision regulations in effect; and
e) the utilization of renewable energy resources.30
204.4.2 In determining whether a proposed conditional use will adversely affect the character of
the area involved, Development Review Board shall be required to give substantial weight to the
28 New 2014; No comparable 1973 section.
29 New 2014; No comparable 1973section.
30 Comparable to 1973 Section 205.2.1.
18
views of any person who would be classified as an "interested person" by 24 V.S.A. §4465(b)
with respect to such proposed use.
204.4.3 In permitting a conditional use, the Development Review Board may impose in addition
to the requirements and standards expressly specified by this by-law, other conditions found
necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding property, the neighborhood, or the town
as a whole. These conditions may include the following:
a) Increasing the required lot size or yard dimensions in order to protect adjacent
properties;
b) Limiting the building coverage or height of buildings or modification in construction
materials because of obstruction to view, reduction of light and air, or potential for
increased radiant heat to adjacent property;
c) Controlling the location and number of vehicular access points to the property;
d) Increasing the street width;
e) Increasing the number of off-street parking or loading spaces required;
f) Limiting the number, location, and size of signs;
g) Requiring suitable landscaping where necessary to reduce noise and glare and to
maintain the property in a character in keeping with the surrounding area;
h) Specifying a specific time limit for construction, alteration, or enlargement to begin
for a structure to house a conditional use; and
i) Requiring that any future enlargement or alteration of the use be reviewed by the
Development Review Board to permit the specifying of new conditions.
204.4.4 As a condition of the grant of a conditional use, the Development Review Board may
attach such additional reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of the Act and these zoning by-laws.
204.4.5 A change in use, expansion or contraction of land, area, or alteration of structures or
uses which are designated as a conditional use within the district in which they are located and
are existing therein prior to the effective date of this by-law shall, subsequent to said effective
date, conform to all requirements herein pertaining to conditional uses.
204.4.6 In the case of any use designated as a "Conditional Use" because it does not meet the minimum
set back requirements set forth in the Table relating to a particular district a zoning permit may be issued
without a variance if the requirements of this Section are satisfied and if there exists a setback of not less
than five (5) feet; except that in the Mixed Use District designated as such on the Zoning Map entitled "St.
Johnsbury Zoning Map", the Development Review Board may eliminate the setback requirements entirely.
204.5 Duration of Conditional Use Approval. The necessary zoning permit for a conditional use may
be issued by the administrative officer, pursuant to Section 103 of this by-law any time within one (1) year
of the granting of the conditional use subject to any applicable requirement for first obtaining a variance or
19
other special action by the Development Review Board. If the zoning permit is not issued within one (1)
year, the conditional use permit shall become null and void and re-application shall be required prior to the
issuance of a zoning permit.31
Section 205 Design Control
205.1 Prior to the issuance of a zoning permit for any land development located within the design
control district, the applicant shall deliver to the administrative officer evidence of design control
approval by the DRB after public notice and hearing.32
205.2 Application. In addition to applicable fees and the materials required for site plan review,
an applicant seeking design review approval shall submit the following: two (2) copies of
proposed elevations and a description of the materials to be used on the exterior of any structure.33
205.3 Review Criteria. The DRB shall consider and may impose conditions with respect to the
following:
a) Preservation or reconstruction of historic style and intended use.
b) Harmony of exterior design with other properties in the neighborhood.
c) Compatibility of the exterior materials and color schemes to be used with other
properties in the neighborhood.
d) Whether landscaping is maintained in the entire required front setback area.
e) Compatibility of the proposed landscaping and screening with other properties in
the neighborhood.
f) Location and appearance of all utilities, including lighting.
g) Compatibility with uses of neighboring properties.34
205.4 Duration of Design Review Approval. Design review approval shall expire one (1) year
after the date such approval is no longer subject to appeal.35
Section 206 Variances
31 2014 Adapted from 1973 section 401.3.
32 New 2014; No comparable 1973 section.
33 2014 Adapted from 1973 Section 402.4.
34 2014 Adapted from 1973 Section 402.2(a)-(g).
35 New 2014
20
206.1 Prior to the issuance of a zoning permit for any project requiring the issuance of a variance,
the applicant shall deliver to the administrative officer evidence of the DRB’s approval of the
variance after public notice and hearing.36
206.2 Application. In addition to applicable fees and the materials required for site plan review,
an applicant seeking a variance shall submit a commentary demonstrating satisfaction of each
criterion for the issuance of a variance.
206.3 Notice. In addition to all other applicable requirements, written notification shall be given
to the Vermont Secretary of Transportation of any application seeking a variance of a required
setback from a State highway.
206.4 Any variance issued in the Special Flood Hazard Area will not increase flood heights, and
will inform the applicant in writing over the signature of a community official that the issuance of
a variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation increases risk to life and property
and will result in increased flood insurance premiums up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of
coverage. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions.37
206.5 Review Criteria. The DRB shall review a variance application in accordance with 24
V.S.A. § 4469.38
Note: 24 V.S.A. § 4469 provides that for any structure that is not primarily a renewable
energy resource structure the DRB shall grant variances and render a decision in favor of
the appellant, if all the following facts are found, and the finding is specified in its decision.
§ 4469. Appeal; variances
(a) On an appeal under § 4465 or § 4471 of this title in which a variance from the
provisions of a bylaw or interim bylaw is requested for a structure that is not
primarily a renewable energy resource structure, the board of adjustment or the
development review board or the environmental division created under 4 V.S.A.
chapter 27 shall grant variances and render a decision in favor of the appellant, if
all the following facts are found, and the finding is specified in its decision:
(1) There are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including
irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional
topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property, and
that unnecessary hardship is due to these conditions, and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of the bylaw in the neighborhood or
district in which the property is located.
(2) Because of these physical circumstances or conditions, there is no
possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the
provisions of the bylaw, and that the authorization of a variance is therefore
necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property.
36 New 2014; No comparable 1973 section.
37 New 2014: Required for NFIP, 44 CFR Section 60.6 (a) (5)
38 New 2014; Adapted from 1973 Section 401.3
21
(3) Unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant.
(4) The variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located, substantially or
permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property,
reduce access to renewable energy resources, or be detrimental to the public
welfare.
(5) The variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that will
afford relief and will represent the least deviation possible from the bylaw and from
the plan.
(b) 24 V.S.A. § 4469 further provides that for any structure that is primarily a
renewable energy resource structure, the DRB shall grant variances and render a
decision in favor of the appellant, if all the following facts are found, and the finding
is specified in its decision:
(1) It is unusually difficult or unduly expensive for the appellant to build a
suitable renewable energy resource structure in conformance with the bylaws.
(2) The hardship was not created by the appellant.
(3) The variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located, substantially or
permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property,
reduce access to renewable energy resources, or be detrimental to the public
welfare.
(4) The variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that will
afford relief and will represent the least deviation possible from the bylaws and
from the plan.
(c) In rendering a decision in favor of an applicant under this Section, the DRB may
attach such conditions to variances as it may consider necessary and appropriate
under the circumstances to implement the purposes of this ordinance and the town
plan.
206.6 Duration of Review Approval. A variance shall expire one (1) year after the date on which
its approval is no longer subject to appeal.39
Section 207 Certificates of Zoning Compliance40
207.1 It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any land or structure,
or part thereof to the extent it is created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered
39 2014 Adapted from 1973 Section 401.3
40 2014 Adapted from 1973 Section 803; removed residential exception; clarified that building codes are not in the
scope of certification.
22
or enlarged in its use or structure after the effective date of this ordinance, until a certificate of
zoning compliance is issued therefore by the administrative officer stating that the use of the
structure or land conforms to the requirements of this ordinance and conditions of the permit.
207.2 Applications for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be made to the administrative
officer on forms provided by the town for that purpose.
207.3 The administrative officer shall issue a certificate of zoning compliance if the use of the
structure or land conforms to the requirements of the zoning permit and this ordinance. The
administrative officer may condition the issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance on the
completion of certain requirements within a specified time.
Section 208 Enforcement41
208.1 Entrance Upon Premises. The administrative officer may enter upon any land in the town
to make examinations and surveys pursuant to 24 V.S.A. § 4325(9). When entrance upon property
is refused or denied, the administrative officer may seek a warrant for the purposes of conducting
an examination of the premises. A warrant shall only be requested on the basis of administrative
officer observations, when another municipal official has provided credible information to the
administrative officer or upon notification by verified written complaint that a zoning violation
allegedly exists.
208.2 Persons Liable. The owner, tenant, or occupant of any structure or land or part thereof who
participates in, assists, directs, creates or maintains any situation that is contrary to the
requirements of this ordinance, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who
knowingly participates in, assists, directs, creates, or maintains any situation that is contrary to the
requirements of this ordinance, may be held responsible for the violation and suffer the penalties
and be subject to the remedies herein provided.
208.3 Civil Offense, Penalties. A violation of this ordinance shall constitute a civil offense. Each
day that a violation is continued shall constitute a separate offense. If an alleged violation is
determined to exist, a formal notification shall be issued in either of two (2) forms as follows:
a) Municipal civil complaint ticket:
The administrative officer may issue a municipal complaint ticket for zoning
violations. The administrative officer shall follow the procedure set forth by the
judicial bureau for municipal complaint tickets.
The first offense ticketed for a violation shall be punishable by a fine of one hundred
dollars ($100.00), the waiver fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00); a second
offense ticketed for the same violation shall be punishable by a fine of one hundred
and fifty dollars ($150.00), the waiver fee shall be one hundred and fifty dollars
($150.00); a third offense ticketed for the same violation shall be punishable by a
fine of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00), the waiver fee shall be two hundred
and fifty dollars ($250.00). Upon the fourth offense, the town may request that the
41 2014Adapted from 1973 Section 804. Adds municipal ticketing authority.
23
case be transferred from the judicial bureau to the environmental division, or any
other court of competent jurisdiction.
b) Enforcement action:
An enforcement action may be brought for any violation of this ordinance.
Pursuant to an enforcement action, any person who violates this ordinance shall be
fined not more than the maximum amount authorized by statute for each offense.
No action may be brought under this subsection unless the alleged offender has had
at least seven (7) days’ warning notice by certified mail. An action may be brought
without the seven (7) day notice and opportunity to cure if the alleged offender
repeats the violation of the ordinance after the seven (7) day notice period and
within the next succeeding twelve (12) months. The seven (7) day warning notice
shall state that a violation exists, that the alleged offender has an opportunity to cure
the violation within the seven (7) days and that the alleged offender will not be
entitled to an additional warning notice for a violation occurring after the seven (7)
days. In default of payment of the fine, such person, the members of any
partnership, or the principal officers of such corporation, shall each pay one point
five (1.5) times the amount of such fine. Each day that a violation is continued
shall constitute a separate offense. All fines collected for the violation of
ordinances shall be paid to the town.
24
ARTICLE III Zoning Districts42
Section 301 Creation, Map and Interpretation
301.1 Zoning districts and a design control overlay are hereby created as depicted on the zoning
map entitled “St. Johnsbury Zoning Map,” which is incorporated herein by reference.
301.2 Interpretation and Application.43
a) The administrative officer shall interpret the location of district boundaries subject to
appeal to the DRB as provided in section 103.5 of this ordinance.
b) Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district shown on the official
zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
(i) Where district boundaries appear to approximately follow the center line of
highways, roads, alleys, railroads, streams, other bodies of water, civil
division lines, land lot lines, property lines or contour lines, such lines or
center lines shall be construed to be such boundaries as they existed at the
time of the first adoption of the subject boundary; and
(ii) Where district boundaries are indicated as being measured from or being
parallel to the center line of highways, roads, alleys, railroads, civil division
lines, land lot lines, or property lines, such boundaries shall be construed as
being measured from or being parallel thereto and at a distance therefrom
as indicated or as determined by the scale shown on the zoning map.
c) Where the common district boundary line between the R-L 1 district and the R-L 2
district intersects with the terminus of a town road, the provisions of the R-L 2 district
shall extend beyond the terminus of the town road into the R-L 1 district for a distance
which is equal to the width of the R-L 2 district on either side of said town road at the
point of intersection.44
d) Where a district boundary line divides a lot of record on the effective date of the
creation of such boundary line, the landowner may choose to have applied the standards
of either district up to thirty (30) feet into the other district.45
e) Notwithstanding what is shown on the “St. Johnsbury Zoning Map,” the design control
district hereby established by the select board and indicated on said map shall
encompass and include: all lots a) facing to any extent on Arnold Park, b) facing to
any extent Main Street along its entire length between Spruce Street to and including
the entire St. Johnsbury Academy property, c) facing, to any extent Fairbanks Drive
along its entire length, d) facing to any extent Eastern Avenue along its entire length
42 2014 Adapted from 1973 Article II.
43 2014 Adapted from 1973 Section 203.
44 2014 Same as 1973 Section 303A.
45 2014 Adapted from 1973 Section 303.
25
between Main Street and the right of way of Northern Vermont Railroad (Newport and
Richford Railroad); and e) facing to any extent, Railroad Street along its entire length
between Federal Street and Maple Street. In the event that any such lot is less than
seventy-five (75) feet in depth, any lot to the immediate rear thereof is also included in
the district hereby established.46
Section 302 Setbacks
302.1 Riverfront. No structure shall be placed and no land shall be excavated, filled, graded or
paved within the area designated by this section as riverfront setback from the natural bank of the
following rivers and streams: (i) the Passumpsic River; (ii) the Moose River, (iii) the Sleepers
River; and (iv) the Houghton Brook/Burrows Brook. The riverfront setback in each zoning district
shall be the same as the minimum front setback specified for that zoning district. The DRB may
waive some, or all of the riverfront setback requirement after public notice and hearing upon a
showing by the applicant that the proposed development adequately provides for (a) appropriate
landscaping and screening, (b) an adequate vegetative buffer between the development and the
river, (c) erosion control, and (d) control of storm water drainage and run-off.47
302.2 Front Setbacks on Narrow Streets. On streets or roads with less than a fifty (50) foot rightof-
way front setbacks shall be measured from the center line of the street or road, and twenty-five
(25) feet shall be added to the front yard setback requirement.
302.3 Rear and Side Setback Waiver. The DRB may approve, as a conditional use, a reduced
rear or side setback.
302.4 Corner Lots. For any lot abutting more than one (1) street for more than the minimum
front setback, front setbacks shall be measured from each such street and only the side
setback requirement shall apply to the remaining sides.
302.5 Lots which abut on more than one (1) street shall provide the required frontage along
every street.
302.6 For the purpose of determining setbacks, a lot with access from a private right-of-way
will be considered to front on the lot line where the right-of-way gives access to the lot.
302.7 Projections from structures may extend two feet into the required minimum setback of a
required yard space. Allowed projections are limited to eaves, chimneys, pilasters, cornices, sills.
302.8 Subject to the provisions of Section 302.7 of this by-law, all structures, whether attached
to the principal structure or not, and, whether open or enclosed, including porches, carports,
balconies, or platforms above normal grade level, shall not project into any minimum front,
side, or rear yard.
302.9 Fences shall be permitted within any required yard and minimum setback requirements
shall not be applicable to such fences subject to section 302.10.
46 2014 Adapted from 1973 Section 402.
471973 Section 302B.
26
302.10 Clear sight triangles must be maintained when a property is located at the intersection of
two streets or at driveway and street intersections. A clear sight triangle is measured along
the property line 25 feet in both directions from the intersection. Within this area there can
be no obstruction higher than three (3) feet including see through fences like chain link or
picket fences.
Section 303 Generally Permitted Uses
The following uses are generally permitted in all zoning districts. A zoning permit is required in
accordance with Section 202.1.48
303.1 Accessory Dwelling Units. One (1) accessory dwelling unit may be located, in compliance
with applicable setback standards and building coverage requirements, within or appurtenant to an
owner occupied one (1) family dwelling provided that (1) the habitable area of the accessory
dwelling unit does not exceed thirty (30) percent of the habitable floor area of the one (1) family
dwelling and (2) parking is provided in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance.
303.2 A residential care home or group home operated under state licensing or registration,
serving not more than eight (8) persons who have a handicap or disability as defined in 9 V.S.A.
§ 4501, shall be considered as a one (1) family residential use of property unless such home is
proposed for location within one thousand (1,000) feet of another such existing or permitted home.
303.3 Home Occupations. Any resident may use up to seven hundred and fifty (750) square feet
or thirty (30) percent of the habitable area of any dwelling unit, whichever is less, for an occupation
that is customary in residential areas and that does not have an undue adverse effect upon the
character of the residential area in which the dwelling is located. Adequate parking must be
provided in compliance with this ordinance.49
303.4 Residential Accessory Structures and Uses.
303.5 Non-residential Accessory Structures and Uses in the Following Zoning Districts: Mixed
Use; Commercial; Industrial; Health Service.
303.6 Essential Services.
303.7 Municipal Uses.
303.8 Emergency Shelter. In all zoning districts, existing buildings may be used to provide
shelter for up to ten (10) days in response to any single emergency.
Section 304 Conditionally Permitted Uses
48 Added August 8, 2016; no petitions were filed.
49 2014 Adapted from 1973 Section 301.4.
27
Non-residential accessory uses and structures are conditionally permitted uses in all zoning
districts where they are not generally permitted. Adequate parking must be provided in compliance
with this ordinance. Non-commercial wall paintings are allowed as a conditional use in all
districts.
Ornamental and symbolic features of buildings and structures, including spires, cupolas, bell
towers and domes, where such features are not used for occupancy or commercial identification
that exceed the height limitations in any zoning district, may be approved as a conditional use by
the DRB. The footprint of such architectural features exceeding the height limitation shall not
exceed ten (10) percent of the coverage of the building they adorn. No such architectural feature
shall exceed a total height of one hundred and fifty (150) feet above the average elevation of the
ground surrounding the building on which it is constructed.
Section 305 Zoning District Objectives, Land Uses and Quantitative Standards50
Permitted and conditional uses may be established in any zoning district in accordance with the
area, density and dimensional standards for that zoning district. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
area, density and dimensional standards may be modified for planned residential and unit
developments as provided in Article VI of this ordinance. Uses that are not designated as either
permitted uses or conditional uses are prohibited.
50 2014 Adapted from 1973 Section 204.
28
Section 306 Rural Land One (“RL-1”) 51
306.1 Objective: Land classified as “RL-1” should have the lowest intensity of use including
primarily such uses as agriculture and forestry with a maximum residential density of one (1)
family per ten (10) acres. Criteria considered in designating land within this district are the lack
of roads or road network within the area; the topography of the land; the availability of water and
sewer and, if such utilities are not available, the suitability or unsuitability of the land for sewage
drainage fields; and the remoteness of the land from population centers.
306.2 Uses:
Permitted Uses Permitted upon issuance of a
conditional use permit
Agriculture
Bed and breakfast
Child care (Classes I, II and III)
Forestry
One (1) family dwelling
Animal hospital
Campground
Commercial Event Venue52
Commercial horse farm
Earth resources removal
Incinerator
Kennels
Neighborhood commercial facility
Planned residential development
Public building or facility
Recreation facility
Riding academy
Sanitary landfill
Stump dump
Taxi
Two family dwelling
Water storage facility
Wireless communication facility
306.3 Area, density and dimensional standards.
Minimum lot
area per family
in acres
Minimum lot
size in acres
Minimum
width of lot in
feet
Minimum setback in feet
Front Each
Side
Rear
10 10 300 50 50 100
51 Removed July 12, 2017 Amendments declared null and void without legal force or effect per Order of Vermont
Superior Court, Environmental Division, in Re: Lucille B. Oakes Conditional Use Application 20170901-082 for a
Conditional Use as a Self-Storage Facility, Docket No.: 153-11-17 Vtec
52 Added August 8, 2016; No petitions were filed
29
306.4 Pre-existing lots. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, a lot that existed
at the time of the first adoption of this ordinance comprising between thirteen (13) and twenty (20)
acres may be divided into two lots comprising at least three (3) acres each.
.
Section 307 Rural Land Two (“RL-2”)53
307.1 Objective: Land classified as “RL-2” is land that is rural in character with forestry and
agricultural uses as its present primary use. The area is served by adequate town roads and
generally the soils and slopes are suitable for rural residential development. The maximum
residential density should be dependent on the source of domestic water supply and method of
sewage disposal. In addition, RL-2 residential development should not be allowed to expand so as
to be a hindrance to active farming operations.
307.2 Uses:
Permitted Uses Permitted upon issuance of a
conditional use permit
Agriculture
Bed and breakfast
Child care (Classes I, II and III)
Commercial horse farm
Forestry
Nursery
One (1) family dwelling
Riding academy
Animal hospital
Campground
Cemetery
Commercial Event Venue 54
Community care home
Composting facility
Drive-in theater
Earth resources removal
Incinerator
Kennels
Mobile home park
Neighborhood commercial facility
Planned residential development
Public building or facility
Recreation facility
Sanitary landfill
Stump dump
Summer camp and retreat
Taxi
Two family and multi-family dwelling
Water storage facility
307.3 Area, density and dimensional standards.
Water and Sewer
Service
Minimum lot
area per
family in
acres
Minimu
m lot
size in
acres
Minimum
width/street
frontage of lot in
feet
Minimum setback in feet
Front Each
Side
Rear
53 Removed July 12, 2017 Amendments declared null and void without legal force or effect per Order of Vermont
Superior Court, Environmental Division, in Re: Lucille B. Oakes Conditional Use Application 20170901-082 for a
Conditional Use as a Self-Storage Facility, Docket No.: 153-11-17 Vtec
54 Added August 8, 2016; No petitions were filed
30
Both off lot ¾ 1 150 25 25 50
One (1) on lot 1 1/2 2 200 25 25 100
Both on lot 2 3 300 50 50 100
31
Section 308 Residential Town (“R-T”)55
308.1 Objective: Land classified as “R-T” is land, located outside of the present urban area, that
is most suitable for medium density residential development use because it is located on or near
existing or proposed public sewer and water systems, highway transportation systems and
convenient to community and shopping facilities.
308.2 Uses:
Permitted Uses Permitted upon issuance of a
conditional use permit
One (1) family dwelling
Two family dwelling
Bed and breakfast
Child care (Class III)
Agriculture
Assisted living facility
Boarding or lodging house
Child care (Class II)
Church
Commercial Event Venue 56
Community care home
Dormitory
Forestry
Mobile home park
Multi-family dwelling
Neighborhood commercial facility
Office 57
Planned residential development
Public facility
Recreation facility
School
Taxi
Water storage facility
308.3 Area, density and dimensional standards.
Water and
Sewer
Service
Minimum
lot area per
family in sq.
feet
Minimum lot
size in
Square feet
Minimum
width/street
frontage of lot
in feet
Minimum setback in
feet
Front Each
Side
Rear
Both off lot 7,500 10,000 100 25 15 35
One (1) on lot 15,000 20,000 125 25 15 50
Both on lot 30,000 43,560 150 25 15 50
308.4 Other.
Maximum Allowed Building Coverage: Thirty (30) percent
Maximum Allowed Building Height: Forty-five (45) feet
55 Removed July 12, 2017 Amendments declared null and void without legal force or effect per Order of Vermont
Superior Court, Environmental Division, in Re: Lucille B. Oakes Conditional Use Application 20170901-082 for a
Conditional Use as a Self-Storage Facility, Docket No.: 153-11-17 Vtec
56 Added August 8, 2016; No petitions were filed.
57 Added September 15, 2015; no petitions were filed
32
Section 309 Residential A (“R-A”)58
309.1 Objective: Land classified as “R-A” is land developed or to be developed on relatively
larger lots predominantly for one (1) family and also for two (2) family dwellings and certain other
uses compatible with a residential neighborhood.
309.2 Uses:
Permitted Uses Permitted upon issuance of a
conditional use permit
One (1) family dwelling
Child care (Class III)
Two (2) family dwelling
Bed and breakfast
Boarding or lodging house
Commercial Event Venue59
309.3 Area, density and dimensional standards:
Water and
Sewer Service
Class
Minimum
lot area per
family in sq.
feet
Minimum lot
size in
Square feet
Minimum
width/street
frontage of
lot in feet
Minimum setback in feet
Front Each
Side
Rear
Both off lot 10,000 15,000 150 20 15 25
One (1) on lot 15,000 20,000 150 20 15 25
Both on lot 20,000 43,560 175 20 15 25
309.4 Other.
Maximum Allowed Building Coverage: Thirty (30) percent
Maximum Allowed Building Height: Forty-five (45) feet
58 Removed July 12, 2017 Amendments declared null and void without legal force or effect per Order of Vermont
Superior Court, Environmental Division, in Re: Lucille B. Oakes Conditional Use Application 20170901-082 for a
Conditional Use as a Self-Storage Facility, Docket No.: 153-11-17 Vtec
59 Added August 8, 2016; no petitions were filed.
33
Section 310 Residential B (“R-B”)60
310.1 Objective: Land classified as “R-B” is land developed or to be developed on relatively
smaller lots predominantly for one (1) family and also for two (2) family dwellings and certain
other uses compatible with a residential neighborhood.
310.2 Uses:
Permitted Uses Permitted upon issuance of a
conditional use permit
One (1) family dwelling
Two (2) family dwelling
Child care (Class III)
Assisted living facility
Bed and breakfast
Boarding or lodging house
Child care (Classes I and II)
Commercial Event Venue 61
Community care home
Cultural facilities
Dormitory
Funeral home
Neighborhood commercial facility
Multi-family dwelling
Office
Private club
Public building
School
Taxi
310.3 Area, density and dimensional standards:
Water and
Sewer
Service
Class
Minimum
lot
area per
family in
square feet
Minimum
lot size in
square feet
Minimum
Width/frontage
of
lot in feet
Minimum setback in
feet
Front Each62
Side
Rear
Both off lot 1,500 9,000 90 20 15 25
One (1) on
lot
15,000 20,000 125 20 15 25
Both on lot 20,000 43,560 175 20 15 25
310.4 Other.
Maximum Allowed Building Coverage: Thirty-five (35) percent
Maximum Building Height: Forty-five (45) feet
60 Removed July 12, 2017 Amendments declared null and void without legal force or effect per Order of Vermont
Superior Court, Environmental Division, in Re: Lucille B. Oakes Conditional Use Application 20170901-082 for a
Conditional Use as a Self-Storage Facility, Docket No.: 153-11-17 Vtec
61 Added August 8, 2016; no petitions were filed.
62 2014 Consistent with 1973 R-B
34
Section 311 Mixed Use (“MU”)63 64
311.1 Objective: Land classified as “MU” will accommodate mixed-use buildings that may
include neighborhood-serving retail, service, and other uses on the ground floor and residential
units above the non-residential space; encourage compatible and cohesive development that
exhibits the physical design characteristics of pedestrian-oriented, storefront-style shopping
streets; and promotes the health and well-being of residents by encouraging physical activity,
alternative transportation and greater social interaction.
311.2 Uses:
Permitted Uses Permitted upon issuance of a conditional
use permit
One (1) family dwelling
Two (2) family dwelling
Multi-family dwelling located above the
ground floor
Animal hospital
Artist work space
Bank
Bed and breakfast
Child care (Classes I, II and III)
Church
Cultural exhibit
Hotels
Indoor theaters
Library
Light industrial
Medical office
Motels
Office
Public building or facility
Recreation facility
Restaurant
Retail store65
Retail service
School
Assisted living facility
Auto Service Station66
Boarding or lodging house
Club67
Commercial Event Venue68
Commercial parking
Community Care Home69
Cultural facilities
Dormitory70
Drive-through facility
Extended care facility
Funeral Home71
Level I Laboratory within Medical Office
72**
Motor Vehicle Sale and Repair73
Nursing home
Restaurant/bar
Taxi74
63 New 2014
64 Removed July 12, 2017 Amendments declared null and void without legal force or effect per Order of Vermont
Superior Court, Environmental Division, in Re: Lucille B. Oakes Conditional Use Application 20170901-082 for a
Conditional Use as a Self-Storage Facility, Docket No.: 153-11-17 Vtec
65 Amended Aug. 8, 2016; no petitions were filed.
66 Added Dec. 8, 2014. No petitions were filed.
67 Added Dec. 8, 2014. No petitions were filed.
68 Added August 8, 2016; no petitions were filed.
69 Added Dec. 8, 2014. No petitions were filed.
70 Added Dec. 8, 2014. No petitions were filed.
71 Added Dec. 8, 2014. No petitions were filed.
72 Added July 13, 2015; no petitions were filed.
73 Added August 8, 2016; no petitions were filed.
74 Added Dec. 8, 2014. No petitions were filed.
35
311.3 Area, density and dimensional standards:
Water and Sewer
Service Class
Minimum lot
size in square
feet
Minimum width of
lot/frontage in feet
Minimum setback in feet
Front Each Side Rear
Both off lot 6,000 75 15 15 15
One (1) on lot 60,000 100 20 20 20
Both on lot 120,000 200 20 20 20
Maximum Building Height: Eighty (80) feet. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the DRB may
approve as a conditional use building heights up to one hundred twenty (120) feet.
36
Section 312 Commercial (“COM”) 75 76
312.1 Objective: Land classified as “COM” is land that will serve as a business district for the region,
the community or a sizable portion of the community to include retail and wholesale establishments, offices
and limited high density residential use.
312.2 Uses:
Permitted Uses Permitted upon issuance of a conditional use permit
Bank
Bed and breakfast
Club
Community center
Dormitory use
Funeral home
Hotel
Indoor recreation
Indoor theater
Motel
Medical office
Motor vehicle sale and repair
facility
Newspaper and job printing
Office
Parking
Personal service
Private club
Public building or facility
Restaurant/bar
Retail service
Retail store
Wholesale distribution
service (non-petroleum)
Wireless communication
facility (co-located)
Auto service station
Bulk storage of Hazardous materials
Car wash
Child Care (Classes I, II and III)
Commercial Event Venue 77
Community care home
Convenience store
Drive-in restaurant
Drive-in theater
Incinerator
Large retail store
Level I Laboratory within Medical Office 78
Multi-family dwelling
Recycling center
Sale of Hazardous materials
service (petroleum)
Taxi
Transfer station
Trucking terminal
Warehouse
Wholesale distribution
Wireless communication facility
(free-standing, i.e. towers)
Other commercial uses upon the finding by the DRB that such
use is of the same general character as those permitted and
which will not be detrimental to the other uses within the
district or to the adjoining land uses.
75 2014 combines All 1973 commercial (Commercial; Commercial Light Industrial; Highway Commercial)
*Added July 13, 2015; no petitions were filed. ** Added August 8, 2016; no petitions were filed. *** Added July 12,
2017; no petitions were filed.
76 Removed July 12, 2017 Amendments declared null and void without legal force or effect per Order of Vermont
Superior Court, Environmental Division, in Re: Lucille B. Oakes Conditional Use Application 20170901-082 for a
Conditional Use as a Self-Storage Facility, Docket No.: 153-11-17 Vtec
77 Added August 8, 2016; no petitions were filed.
78 Added July 13, 2015; no petitions were filed.
37
312.3 Area, density and dimensional standards:
Water and Sewer
Service Class
Minimum lot
size in square
feet
Minimum width
of lot/street
frontage in feet
Minimum setback in feet
Front Each Side Rear
Both off lot 20,000 100 20 10 20
One (1) on lot 60,000 100 20 10 20
Both on lot 120,000 200 20 20 20
Maximum Building Height: Eighty (80) feet. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the DRB may
approve as a conditional use building heights up to one hundred twenty (120) feet.
38
Section 313 Industrial (“IND”)79
313.1 Objective: Land classified as “IND” is land designed to provide a location for the establishment
of industry to provide employment opportunities and a broadening of the tax base in the town. Potential
good highway access and water and sewer services are major considerations. A variety of types of
manufacturing and offices are permitted, provided they are in keeping with the goal of making the town an
attractive community and provided the performance standards of the ordinance are satisfied. This area does
not conflict with major residential areas.
313.2 Uses:
Permitted Uses Permitted upon issuance of a conditional use
permit
Any manufacturing, compounding,
processing, packing, treatment, or
warehousing of goods and products,
provided the use meets standards of
performance of this ordinance.
Research or testing laboratory
Office
Public building or facility
Trucking terminals
Warehouse
Adult entertainment
Auto service station
Blast furnace
Bulk storage of Hazardous materials
Child care (Classes I, II and III)
Commercial Event Venue 80
Commercial use
Contractor’s yard
Funeral home with or without residence 81
Hot-mix plant
Incinerator
Junk yard
Large retail store
Manufacturing or processing of petroleum,
gas, fertilizer, bone, rubber, asphalt, ammonia,
chlorine or explosives
Recycling center
Rendering plant
Secure residential facility
Slaughter house
Smelter
Transfer station
Wholesale distributors (petroleum)
Wireless communication facility
79 Removed July 12, 2017 Amendments declared null and void without legal force or effect per Order of Vermont
Superior Court, Environmental Division, in Re: Lucille B. Oakes Conditional Use Application 20170901-082 for a
Conditional Use as a Self-Storage Facility, Docket No.: 153-11-17 Vtec
80 Added August 8, 2016; no petitions were filed.
81 Added May 28, 2019; no petitions were filed.
39
313.3 Area, density and dimensional standards:
Water and Sewer
Service Class
Minimum lot
size in square feet
Minimum width/street
frontage of lot in feet
Minimum setback in feet
Front Each Side Rear
Both off lot 30,000 150 20 10 20
One (1) on lot 60,000 150 20 20 20
Both on lot 120,000 200 20 20 20
40
Section 314 Health Services (“HS”)82
314.1 Objective: Land classified as “HS” is land that will serve as a center for the delivery of
Health Care Services for the region.
314.2 Uses:
Permitted Uses Permitted upon issuance of a conditional use
permit
Community care home
Extended care facility
Health training facility
Hospital
Medical Laboratory (Level I)83
Medical office
Nursing home
Rehabilitation center
Assisted living facility
Child care (Classes I, II and III)
Commercial Event Venue 84
Controlled substance dispensary
Hotel
Medical Laboratory (Levels II, III, and IV)85
Motel
Temporary Overnight Shelter86
Transitional Residence 87
314.3 Area, density and dimensional standards.
Water and Sewer
Service Class
Minimum lot
size in square
feet
Minimum
width/street
frontage of lot in
feet
Minimum setback in feet
Front Each Side Rear
Both off lot 6,000 75 15 15 15
One (1) on lot 60,000 100 20 20 20
Both on lot 120,000 200 20 20 20
82 Removed July 12, 2017 Amendments declared null and void without legal force or effect per Order of Vermont
Superior Court, Environmental Division, in Re: Lucille B. Oakes Conditional Use Application 20170901-082 for a
Conditional Use as a Self-Storage Facility, Docket No.: 153-11-17 Vtec
83 Added July 13, 2015; no petitions were filed. Medical Laboratory Level II, III, and IV only with adequate
controls, structural and otherwise, as defined and certified by State and Federal Health Organizations.
84 Added August 8, 2016; no petitions were filed.
85 Added July 13, 2015; no petitions were filed. Level II, III, and IV only with adequate controls, structural and
otherwise, as defined and certified by State and Federal Health Organizations.
86 Added October 5, 2015; no petitions were filed. Removed from Residential and Commercial Districts.
87 Added October 5, 2015; no petitions were filed. Removed from Residential and Commercial Districts.
41
Section 315 Conservation District (“C-D”)
315.1 Objective: Land classified as “C-D” is land subject to conservation rights and interests held
by: 1) a municipality; 2) the State of Vermont including any of its departments, boards,
instrumentalities or agencies; 3) an organization qualifying under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code, provided one of the stated purposes of the organization is to acquire or hold
property or rights and interest in property in order to preserve historic, agricultural, forestry or
open space resources; 4) an organization qualifying under Section 501(c)(2) of the Internal
Revenue Code, provided that the organization is controlled exclusively by an organization or
organizations described in subsection 3) above; and 5) the United States of America.
315.2 Uses:
Permitted Uses Permitted upon issuance of a
conditional use permit
Recreation Municipal
Forestry
315.3 Area density and dimensional standards:
All Water and Sewer Service Classes Minimum Setback in feet
Front Side Rear
50 50 50
Section 316 Overlay Districts
316.1 Objective: The objective of overlay districts is to establish special zoning district(s), An
overlay district is placed over an existing base zone(s), (base zones are defined in section 306
through 315) and identifies special provisions in addition to those in the underlying base zone. The
overlay district can share common boundaries with the base zone or cut across base zone
boundaries. Regulations or incentives are attached to the overlay district to protect a specific
resource or guide development within a special area.
316.2 Historic Districts:
a) St Johnsbury Railroad Street Historic District was entered into the National Register on June
25, 1974 and amended, April 4, 1980, to include the full length of the Railroad Street
Commercial District from Eastern Avenue to Portland Street, and the length of Eastern
Avenue to the Main Street Historic District.
b) St Johnsbury Main Street Historic District, entered into the National Register on May 28,
1976, is situated along Main Street, Eastern and Western Avenues, Park and Belvedere
Streets, and around Summer Street Common. The bounds of this district can be found at
the US Dept. of the Interior, National Park Service, and Register of Historic Places.
42
c) St Johnsbury Maple Street and Clark Avenue Historic District, entered into the National
Register on May 5, 1994, is situated along the length of Maple Street, Clarks Avenue to
Main Street, and includes Idlewood Terrace. The bounds of this district can be found at the
US Dept. of the Interior, National Park Service, and Register of Historic Places.
d) Other buildings listed on the National Register of Historic Places are:
i. Benoit Apartment House - 74 Pearl Street – now 439 Pearl St.
ii. Benoit Apartment House -76 Pearl Street – now 439 Pearl St.
iii. Cote Apartment House - 16 Elm Street – now 20 Cote Court
iv. Marshall, Caleb H., House - 53 Summer Street – now 426 Summer St.
v. Morency Paint Shop and Apartment Building - 73-77 Portland Street – now 390
Portland St.
vi. St. Johnsbury Federal Fish Culture Station - 374 Emerson Falls
vii. Shearer and Corser Double House - 81-83 Summer Street – now 606 Summer St.
316.3 Design Control District:
Compliance with the provisions of 24 V.S.A. §4414(E) having occurred in connection with:
a) The adoption of the 1972 St. Johnsbury Master Plan, which included a report
describing planning and design problems associated with the design Control District
therein proposed; and
b) The approval by the Planning Commission on January 23, 2003 of a Design District
report, and subsequent Planning Commission Report dated January 31, 2019
recommending an expansion of the original Design Control District, there is hereby
established an expanded Design Control District to the extent and as indicated on the
Zoning Map as the “Design Control Districts Overlay”. The designation of the Design
Control District hereby established by the Select board and indicated on said map is
intended to encompass and include all lots:
(i) facing to any extent on Arnold Park,
(ii) facing to any extent Main Street along its entire length between Spruce Street to
and including the entire St Johnsbury Academy property,
(iii) facing to any extent Fairbanks Drive along its entire length,
(iv) facing to any extent Eastern Avenue along is entire length between Main Street
and the right of way of Northern Vermont Railroad (Newport and Richford
Railroad);
(v) facing to any extent, Railroad Street along its entire length between Pearl
Street and a point approximately 300 feet north of Maple Street;
(vi) facing to any extent on Maple Street from Main Street to Railroad Street;
(vii) facing to any extent on Central Street from Main Street to Summer Street;
(viii) facing to any extent on Summer Street from Central Street to Webster Street,
including property on the east side of Summer approximately 100 feet south of Central
Street, and excluding properties on the east side of Summer Street a distance farther than
250 feet north of Winter Street;
(ix) facing to any extent on Winter Street from Summer Street to Main Street;
(x) facing to any extent on Bay Street from a point approximately 250 feet south of Town
Hwy 540 to the intersection of St. Mary Street;
43
(xi) facing to any extent on St. Mary Street from Bay Street to a point approximately 400
feet north of Bay Street.
(xii) facing to any extent Cherry Street from Eastern Avenue to Maple Street;
(xiii) facing to any extent on Charles Street;
(xiv) facing to any extent on Prospect Street; and
(xv) facing to any extent on Pearl Street from Federal Street to Maple Street to include 12
North Avenue and 186 Clarks Avenue.
In the event that any such lot is less than seventy five (75) feet in depth, any lot to the immediate
rear thereof is also included in the district hereby established. The indication of the boundary of
the Design Control District hereby established on said map is intended to be representational
only. When the administrative Officer cannot definitely determine the location of the boundary
of the district hereby established by reference to this Section 316.1.1, he or she shall refuse
action and the Development Review Board shall determine the boundary of such district with
reference to the purposes to be served by the creation of such district.88
316.4 Floodway and Flood Hazard Areas:89 Floodway and Flood Hazard Areas are areas
designated along rivers, streams, and shorelines that are subject to periodic flooding. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has assigned risk zones to more than 19,000
communities in the United States. This system of classification allows each community to
participate in the agency's National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) with premium rates
determined based upon the zone classification.
The land area covered by the floodwaters of the base flood is the “Special Flood Hazard Area”
(SFHA) on NFIP maps. The SFHA is the area where the National Flood Insurance Program's
(NFIP's) floodplain management regulations must be enforced and the area where the mandatory
purchase of flood insurance applies. The SFHA includes Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR,
AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE, and V.
The Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) show areas within a 100-year flood boundary. A 100-
year flood area does not refer to a flood that occurs every 100 years but refers to a level of flooding
that has a 1 percent or greater probability of occurring or being exceeded in any given year. These
100-year flood areas are termed "Special Flood Hazard Areas” (SFHAs). SFHAs are further
divided into insurance risk rate zones. Areas between the 100-year and 500-year flood boundaries
are classified as moderate flood hazard areas. Minimal flood hazard areas represent those
remaining areas that lie above the 500-year flood level. Surprisingly, about one-third of all claims
paid by the NFIP are for areas identified as minimal or moderate risk for flooding, largely the
result of inadequate drainage systems.
A "Regulatory Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing
the water surface elevation more than a designated height. Communities must regulate
development in these floodways to ensure that there are no increases in upstream flood elevations.
For streams and other watercourses where FEMA has provided Base Flood Elevations (BFEs), but
no floodway has been designated, the community must review floodplain development on a case-
88 Boundary amended; May 28, 2019; no petitions were filed.
89 New 2014; FEMA definitions
44
by-case basis to ensure that increases in water surface elevations do not occur, or identify the need
to adopt a floodway if adequate information is available.
316.4.1 Summary Table: Development Review in Hazard Areas
The hazard areas are not appropriate sites for new structures nor for development that increases
the elevation of the base flood or obstructs the ability of streams to establish and maintain
geomorphic equilibrium.
316.4.2 Performance: In Zones AE, AH, and A1 – A30 where base flood elevations and/or
floodway limits have not been determined, development shall not be permitted unless it is
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated encroachment, will not increase the base flood elevation more than
1.00 foot at any point within the community. The demonstration must be supported by technical
data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles and certified by
a registered professional engineer.90
90 New 2014: From FEMA Title 44, Chapter 1, Part 60.3(d)(3): Criteria for Land Management; Flood Plain
Management Regulations.
# # Activity
P Permitted
C Conditional Use Review
X Prohibited
A Exempted
Special
Flood
Hazard
Area
Floodway
FEH Zone FEH Zone
1 New Structures X X X
2 Storage X X X
3 Improvements to Existing Structures P, C C C C C
4 Small Accessory Structures P X C
5 At Grade Parking P C C
6 Replacement water supply or septic systems C C C
7 Fill as needed to elevate existing structures C C C
8 Fill X X X
12 Grading C C C
13 Road maintenance A A A
14 Road improvements C C C
15 Bridges and culverts C C C
16 Channel management C C C
17 Recreational vehicles P P P
18 Open space, recreation A A A
19 Forestry A A A
20 Agriculture A A A
Hazard Zone
45
ARTICLE IV Special Issues
Part 1 Non-Conformities
Section 401 Existing Small Lots91
401.1 Any lot that is legally subdivided, is in individual and separate and nonaffiliated ownership
from surrounding properties, and is in existence on the date of enactment of any provision of this
ordinance first requiring a minimum lot size larger than such lot may be developed for the purpose
permitted in the district in which it is located, even though such lot no longer conforms to minimum
lot size requirements of this ordinance. Notwithstanding the foregoing, development of such a lot
shall be prohibited if:
a) The lot is less than one-eighth (1/8) acre in area; or
b) The lot has a width or depth dimension of less than forty (40) feet.
401.2 If an existing small lot subsequently comes under common ownership with one (1) or more
contiguous lots, the nonconforming lot shall be deemed merged with the contiguous lot. However,
a nonconforming lot shall not be deemed merged and may be separately conveyed if all the
following apply:
a) The lots are conveyed in their preexisting, nonconforming configuration.
b) On the date of the enactment of any provision of this ordinance requiring a larger
lot size, each lot was developed with water supply and wastewater disposal system.
c) At the time of transfer, each water supply is not a failed water supply and each
wastewater system is not a failed wastewater system as such terms are defined by
10 V.S.A. § 1972.
Section 402 Nonconforming Uses and Structures92
a) Any use of land existing on or permitted as of the effective date of any provision
of this ordinance and not conforming thereto:
(i) Shall not be moved, enlarged, altered, extended, reconstructed or restored
nor shall any external evidence of such use be increased by any means
whatsoever, except to the extent provided in this ordinance.
(ii) Shall not be changed to another nonconforming use without approval by the
DRB, after public notice and hearing, and then only to a use which, in the
determination of the DRB, is of the same or more in keeping with the
objective of the zoning district.
91 1973 Section 301.2.
92 1973 Article VI.
46
(iii) Shall not be re-established if such use has been discontinued for a period of
one (1) year or has been changed to, or replaced by, a conforming use.
Intent to resume a nonconforming use shall not confer the right to do so.
(iv) Shall not be restored to other than a conforming use after damage from any
cause, unless the nonconforming use is reinstated within one (1) year of
such damage. If the restoration of such building is not completed within
one (1) year, the nonconforming use of such building shall be deemed to
have been discontinued, unless such nonconforming use is carried on
without interruption in any undamaged part of the building. The DRB, after
public notice and hearing, may extend such one (1) year deadline for good
cause shown.
b) Any structure existing on or permitted as of the effective date of any provision of
this ordinance and not conforming thereto:
(i) Shall not be moved, enlarged, altered, extended, reconstructed, or restored
nor shall any external evidence of such use be increased by any means
whatsoever, except to the extent provided in this ordinance, except that nonconforming
buildings may be relocated without creating new setback or
height violations as long as applicable density and coverage standards are
either satisfied or the level of violation is not increased.
(ii) Shall not be restored so as to continue the non-conformance unless such
restoration is completed within one (1) year of such damage. The DRB,
after public notice and hearing, may extend such one (1) year deadline for
good case shown.
c) If a mobile home park, as defined in 10 V.S.A., Chapter 153, is a nonconformity
pursuant to this ordinance, the entire mobile home park shall be treated as a
nonconformity, and individual lots within the mobile home park shall in no event
be considered nonconformities.93
d) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent ordinary course maintenance and
repair of a nonconforming structure provided that such action does not increase the
degree of nonconformity.
e) After public notice and a hearing, the DRB may waive applicable restrictions and
allow the expansion of any nonconforming use or nonconforming structure if such
nonconformity combined with the proposed expansion does not adversely affect
the character of the surrounding area as it would exist without such nonconformity.
f) The administrative officer may issue for a period not exceeding one (1) year, a
zoning permit for nonconforming structures or uses incidental to construction
projects, conditioned upon removal of the structure or use upon completion of the
93 Adapted from 1973 Section 301.7(b).
47
project. Such permits may be renewed upon application for an additional period
not exceeding one (1) year.94
g) Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to restrict the authority of the town to
abate public nuisances or to abate or remove public health risks or hazards or to
enforce performance standards.95
Part 2 Performance Standards96
Section 408 Performance Standards
In accordance with 24 V.S.A. § 4414(5), in all districts the following performance standards,
together with all applicable State standards, shall be met. No use shall:
a) Emit noise in excess of seventy (70) decibels at any property line.
b) Emit any odor that is considered offensive.
c) Emit dust or dirt that is considered offensive.
d) Emit any smoke, in excess of Ringlemann Chart No. 2.
e) Emit any noxious gases that endanger the health, comfort, safety or welfare of any
person, or which have a tendency to cause injury or damage to property, business
or vegetation.
f) Cause, as a result of normal operations, a vibration which creates displacement of
0.002 of one (1) inch.
g) Create glare that could impair the vision of a driver of any motor vehicle.
h) Cause a fire, explosion or safety hazard.
Part 3 Design Standards
Section 410 Off-Street Parking 97
410.1 Parking Required. Except in the downtown district designated pursuant to 24 V.S.A.,
Chapter 76A, no structure shall be erected or altered or any use changed, expanded or established
without the development of off-street parking as required by this section.
410.2 Existing Structures-Change or Expansion of Use. Whenever there is an alteration or
conversion of a structure or a change or expansion of a use requiring a permit hereunder that
94 1973 Section 311.
951973 Section 301.7(c).
96 1973 Section 324
97 2014 Adapted from 1973 Section 321
48
increases the parking requirements, the total additional parking requirements for the alteration,
conversion, change, or expansion shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this
section.
410.3 Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements. Parking for all uses and structures shall be
provided in accordance with the following:
Use
Bed and breakfast, hotel and motel
Dwellings, mobile home park and
campground, summer camp or retreat
Church, school or community center, health
training facility
Club
Theater except drive-in theater
Hospital, community care home, convalescent
home, assisted living, transitional residence,
transitional shelter, homes for aging,
rehabilitation center, temporary overnight
shelter, nursing home
Office, business service & medical clinic
including municipal and public office and
building or facility and bank
Retail sales, service & personal service
establishment including neighborhood
commercial facility, artist work space, motor
vehicles sales and repair and adult
entertainment and controlled substance
dispensary
Restaurant/bar
Industrial and light industrial including earth
resources removal, incinerator, nursery,
commercial horse farm, drive-in theater,
drive-through facility, newspaper or job
printing, car wash, warehouse, trucking
terminal, wholesale distributor (petroleum),
research or testing laboratory, contractor’s
Parking Spaces Required
One (1) for each lodging unit
One plus one (1 + 1) for each dwelling unit or
camp site
One (1) per three (3) attendees based on the
largest number expected on site at any time.
One (1) per six (6) members
One (1) per six (6) seats
One (1) per three (3) beds plus one (1) for each
one point two (1.2) employees based on the
largest number expected on site at any time
One (1) for every two hundred fifty (250) sq.
ft. of gross floor area
One (1) for each three hundred (300) sq. ft. of
gross floor area
One (1) for every three (3) seats
One (1) for each one point two (1.2)
employees, based on the largest number
expected on site at any time
49
yard, transfer station, smelter, rendering plant,
bulk storage facility
Funeral home
Child care
Recreation facility
Dormitory
Library, museum and cultural exhibit
One (1) for each seventy-five (75) sq. ft. of
floor space in slumber rooms, parlors, &
individual service rooms
One (1) for each two (2) children of licensed
attendance
One (1) for every two (2) attendees and
members anticipated at most attended event
One (1) per every room expected to be
occupied by students over 18 plus (one) 1 for
each one point two (1.2) employees, based on
the largest number expected on site at any
time
One (1) for every three (3) seats in largest
assembly or reading room plus one (1) for
each one point two (1.2) employees, based on
largest number expected on site at any time
Where no requirement is designated and the use is not comparable to any of the listed uses, parking
requirements shall be as reasonably determined by the DRB based upon a consideration of the size
of the proposed facility and its associated uses.
When the calculation yields a fractional number of required spaces, the number of spaces shall be
rounded to the nearest whole number. Space used for fueling vehicles may not also be counted as
parking spaces. The DRB may reduce or increase the amount of required parking, after public
notice and a hearing for good cause shown. In reducing the amount of required parking, the DRB
may require an area up to the size necessary to provide the reduced amount of parking to be
maintained as green space on condition that it shall be converted to parking as necessary.
410.4 Parking Dimensional Requirements. Except to the extent waived by the DRB in
consideration of topography, location of existing or proposed structures, lot configuration, or the
reasonable desire to preserve existing trees and mature vegetation, the following parking lot design
and dimensional standards shall apply:
50
Minimum Parking Dimensions
Angle of Parking Space Width of
Space
Length of
Space
Width of
Angled
Space
Length of
Angled
Space
Minimum
Back-Up
Length
Parallel Parking 9.0’ 22.0’ - - -
45° Angle 9.0’ 20.0’ 12.7’ 20.5’ 15.0’
60° Angle 9.0’ 20.0’ 10.4’ 21.8’ 18.0’
90° Angle 9.0’ 20.0’ 9.0’ 20.0’ 24.0’
Aisle width (one-way) 10’
Aisle width (two-way) 20’
410.5 Except for one (1) and two (2) family dwellings, required parking may be located within
five hundred (500) feet from the use it serves on another parcel of land.
410.6 Parking for Disabled Persons. Parking spaces for disabled persons shall comply with the
current Americans with Disabilities Act guidelines and shall be at least eight feet (8’) wide with
an adjacent access aisle at least five feet (5’) wide. Parking access aisles shall be part of an
accessible route to the building or facility entrance. Accessible parking spaces shall be designated
as reserved for the disabled by a sign showing the symbol of accessibility. Painting of the paved
area for the dedicated parking spaces alone shall not be sufficient as the sole means of identifying
these spaces.
410.7 Front Yard Parking Restricted. Required parking in all residential zoning districts shall
not be located in a required front yard setback area abutting a public street, except alleys. This
prohibition extends from the edge of the public right-of-way into the required front yard setback
for the entire width of the property with the exception of a single access drive no more than twenty
feet (20’) or less in width. Where parking is provided outside the required front yard setback, but
either partially or entirely between the principle structure and the street, such parking shall be
screened to the extent practicable from view from the public street.
410.8 Stacked or Tandem Parking Restrictions. Except as otherwise provided below, all parking
facilities shall be designed so that each motor vehicle may proceed to and from the parking space
provided for it without the moving of any other motor vehicle.
a) Stacked or valet parking may be allowed if an attendant is present to move vehicles. If
stacked parking is used for required parking spaces, a written commitment must be
filed with the town ensuring that an attendant will always be present when the lot is in
operation. The requirements for minimum spaces continue to apply for stacked
parking.
b) Tandem parking may be allowed for one (1) family detached dwelling units, accessory
apartments, duplex dwelling units, and dedicated employee-only parking signed as
such. In no case shall more than four (4) parking spaces (two (2) pairs) in total be
provided in tandem on any one lot.
410.9 Pedestrian Safety. Insofar as practical, pedestrian and bicycle circulation shall be separated
from motor vehicle circulation. Safe and convenient pedestrian circulation, including appropriate
51
sidewalks, shall be provided on the site and its approaches. The pedestrian circulation plan shall
be designed to minimize conflicts with vehicular traffic.
410.10 Provision for Alternative Modes of Transportation. For any project where land
development costs are expected to exceed one million dollars ($1,000,000), the DRB may require
the provision of a bus stop and parking for bicycles.
Section 411 Landscaping
411.1 Landscaping Plan. Except for non-commercial residential properties and in conformance
with any other ordinance, landscaping plans prepared by a landscape architect, master gardener,
nursery professional, arborist, professional landscape designer or other landscape professional,
including the following information, shall be submitted for site plan review:
a) All proposed physical improvements, such as buildings, walls, parking areas,
sidewalks, etc.
b) Proposed landscaping materials, including vegetation to remain, types of new plant
materials, identified by common name and botanical name, sizes of all new plant
materials by height and/or diameter at time of planting and at maturity, quantities of
each of the planting materials, and treatment of the ground surface (paving, seeding, or
groundcover).
c) The location of existing natural features, such as streams, wetlands, and rock
outcroppings.
411.2 Standards. Proposed landscaping shall comply with the following:
a) A landscaping budget as follows:
Land development costs Landscaping Budget
First $250,000 3%
Next $250,000 2%
Thereafter 1%
Reasonable credit shall be given for maintaining significant natural vegetation
existing at the site. After public notice and a hearing, the DRB may reduce such
budget for good cause shown.
b) One (1) major deciduous tree, whose caliper is at least three (3) inches, measured at a
point six (6) inches above finished grade level, shall be planted no nearer than five (5)
feet to any lot line for each three hundred (300) square feet of landscaped area; and one
(1) deciduous shrub or evergreen shall be planted for each two hundred (200) square
feet of landscaped area.
c) Where any land use in a nonresidential district abuts land in a residential district, a strip
of land, at least twenty-five (25) feet in width, shall be maintained as a landscaped area
in the front yard, side yards and rear yard adjoining these other districts, except to the
52
extent, after public notice and hearing, the DRB determines that a lesser buffer is
sufficient to screen non-residential uses from residences.
d) In the Mixed Use, Commercial and Health Services zoning districts, to the extent
feasible, each lot shall have strips of land at least ten (10) feet in width in the front yard
and at least five (5) feet in the side and rear yards, which strips shall be maintained as
a landscaped area.
e) In the Industrial zoning district, to the extent feasible, each lot shall have a strip of land
at least fifteen (15) feet in width in the front yard and at least five (5) feet in width in
the rear and side yards, which strips shall be maintained as a landscaped area.
f) One (1) major deciduous tree, whose caliper is at least three (3) inches measured at a
point six (6) inches above finished grade level, shall be planted as close to every thirty
(30) feet as feasible along any road frontage.
g) New planting species shall be as recommended by the following:
(i) Recommended Trees for Vermont Communities: A Guide to Selecting and
Purchasing Street, Park, and Landscape Trees, published by Vermont Urban
and Community Forestry Program.
(ii) Planting Sustainable Landscapes – A Guide for Plan Reviewers, prepared by
the Vermont Department of Forests, Parks and Recreation and the Vermont
Chapter of the American Society of Landscape Architects – Section III.
(iii) Street Tree Factsheets – edited by Henry D. Gerhold, Norman L. Lacasse and
Willet N. Wandell, published by the Municipal Tree Restoration Program with
support from the USDA Forest Service, Northeastern Area State and Private
Forestry.
411.3 External Landscaping of Parking Areas. Except for parking spaces accessory to a one (1)
family or two (2) family dwelling, all off-street parking areas shall be landscaped with appropriate
trees, shrubs, and other plants including ground covers, as approved by the DRB. The DRB shall
consider the adequacy of the proposed landscaping to assure the establishment of a safe,
convenient, and attractive parking area and the privacy and comfort of abutting properties.
Screening shall be provided where headlights from vehicles on site may be visible and project
parallel to a public street.
411.4 Internal Landscaping of Parking Areas. In all newly reconstructed off-street parking areas
containing twenty (20) or more parking spaces:
a) At least ten (10) percent of the interior of the parking area shall be landscaped with
trees, shrubs, and other plants as follows: At least one (1) major deciduous shade tree,
whose caliper is at least three (3) inches measured at a point six (6) inches above the
finished grade level, shall be provided within each parking area for every three
thousand (3,000) square feet of paved area or every ten (10) parking spaces, whichever
53
ratio results in a greater amount of landscaping. A mix of large canopy tree species
shall be spaced evenly throughout the lot interior to provide shade and reduce glare.
b) Planting islands shall be provided. Such islands and the landscaping within them shall
be designed and arranged in such a way as to define major circulation aisles, entrances,
and exits, to channel internal traffic flow, to prevent indiscriminate diagonal movement
of vehicles, and to provide relief from the visual monotony and shade-less expanse of
a large parking area. All islands shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, grasses, and/or
ground covers. Curbs of such islands shall be constructed of concrete, stone, or
bituminous material and shall be designed to facilitate surface drainage and prevent
vehicles from overlapping sidewalks and damaging the plants. Notwithstanding the
forgoing, the DRB may allow curb-less parking areas and planting islands that are
designed to provide for storm water run-off into vegetated areas for treatment.
411.5 Landscape Maintenance. All plantings shown on an approved site plan shall be maintained
by the property owner.
Section 412 Off-Street Loading
Off-street loading, which is spaced logically, conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries,
scaled to the delivery vehicles expected to be used, and accessible to such vehicles when required
off-street parking spaces are filled, shall be provided for all commercial and industrial uses. Offstreet
loading space is not to be counted as off-street parking space.98
Section 413 Outdoor Lighting99
413.1 Outdoor Lighting Requirements. All outdoor light fixtures, other than those serving one
(1) and two (2) family dwellings, shall comply with the following:
a) Where used for security purposes or to illuminate walkways, roadways and parking
lots, only shielded light fixtures shall be used.
b) Where used for commercial and industrial purposes such as in merchandise display
areas, work areas, platforms, signs, architectural, landscape or sports or recreational
facilities, all light fixtures shall be equipped with automatic timing devices and
comply with the following:
(i) Light fixtures used to illuminate flags, statues or any other objects mounted
on a pole, pedestal or platform, shall use a narrow cone beam of light that
will not extend materially beyond the illuminated object.
(ii) Other upward directed architectural, landscape or decorative direct light
emissions shall have at least ninety (90) percent of their total distribution
pattern within the profile of the illuminated structure.
98 1973 Section 322.
99 New 2014
54
(iii) Recreational and sports facility lighting shall be shielded whenever
possible. Such lighting shall have directional and glare control devices,
when necessary, to prevent light trespass.
(iv) All other outdoor lighting shall use shielded light fixtures.
c) All floodlight type fixtures, once properly installed, shall be permanently affixed in
the approved position.
d) Foundations supporting lighting poles not installed four (4) feet behind the curb,
shall not be less than twenty-four (24) inches above ground.
e) When fifty (50) percent or more of existing outdoor light fixtures are being replaced
or modified, then all lighting must be made to conform to the provisions of this
lighting ordinance.
413.2 Light Trespass (Nuisance Light). All light fixtures, except street lighting, shall be
designed, installed and maintained to prevent light trespass, as specified in (a) and (b) below.
a) At a height of five (5) feet above the property line of subject property, illuminations
from light fixtures shall not exceed 0.1 foot candles in a vertical plane on
residentially zoned property.
b) Outdoor light fixtures properly installed and thereafter maintained shall be directed
so that there will not be any objectionable direct glare source visible above a height
of five (5) feet from any property or public roadway.
413.3 Illuminance and Luminance Requirements. Illuminance and luminance requirements shall
be as set forth in the current editions of the IESNA Lighting Handbook and other IESNA
publications.
a) Street lighting – Average IESNA illuminance recommendations should not be
exceeded. IESNA average to minimum illuminance uniformity ratios are to be used
as a guide for designing safe and adequate roadway lighting.
b) Outdoor parking facilities – Outdoor parking lot illuminance shall be based on
certain illuminance specifications recommended by the IESNA, as follows:
Maintained Illuminance for Parking Lots
Basic Enhanced Security
Horizontal Illuminance
Minimum 0.2 fc 0.5 fc
Average 1.0 fc 2.5 fc
55
Uniformity Ratios
Average to Minimum 5:1 5:1
Maximum to Minimum 20:1 15:1
Minimum Vertical Illuminance 0.1 fc 0.25 fc
1. Minimum horizontal illuminance shall be no lower than 0.2 fc.
2. Average horizontal illuminance shall not exceed 2.5 fc.
3. Uniformity ratios are to be used as a guide.
4. Minimum vertical illuminance shall be measured at 5.0 feet above parking surface at the
point of lowest horizontal illuminance, excluding facing outward along boundaries.
5. For typical conditions. During periods of non-use, the illuminance of certain parking
facilities should be turned off or reduced to conserve energy. If reduced lighting is to be
used only for the purpose of property security, it is desirable that the minimum (low point)
not be less than 0.1 fc in susceptible areas of the property. Reductions should not be applied
to facilities subject to intermittent night use, such as apartments, hospitals and active
transportation areas.
6. If personal security or vandalism is a likely and/or severe problem, an increase above the
Basic level may be appropriate.
7. High vehicular traffic locations should generally require the Enhanced Level of
illumination. Exits, entrances, internal connecting roadways and such would be some
examples.
8. Increasing the above illuminance is not likely to increase safety and security. Variance
requests for higher levels will generally be for “retail” reasons and should not be granted
unless shown to be necessary and at an average illuminance not to exceed 3.6 fc.
413.4 Electric Utility Floodlights. No electric utility flood light intended for property
illumination shall be located within the public right-of-way on any public roadway or on any
property unless the luminaire is sufficiently shielded and aimed so that no objectionable direct
glare source is visible at any point on the roadway where the viewing height is five (5) feet or
greater and when the distance from the mounting pole is seventy (70) feet or greater.
413.5 On Site Outdoor Lighting Energy Conservation. The design and installation of outdoor
lighting on the site of a subdivision or site plan shall be constructed so as to conform to the
standards specified herein.
a) All outdoor lighting not necessary for security purposes shall be reduced, activated
by motion sensor devices or turned off during non-operating hours. Illuminated
signs are excluded from this requirement.
56
b) All lighting shall be designed to prevent misdirected or excessive artificial light and
to maximize energy efficiency.
413.6 Lighting Plan. The following information shall be submitted for review in any site
application proposing the installation of outdoor lighting:
a) Description of outdoor light fixtures including component specifications such as
lamps, reflectors, optics, angle of cutoff, supports, poles, and manufacturers catalog
cuts.
b) Location and description of every outdoor light fixture and hours of operation.
c) Horizontal illuminance shown as foot candles (after depreciation).
(i) Maximum
(ii) Minimum
(iii) Average, during operating and non-operating hours.
(iv) Average to minimum uniformity ratio.
(v) Maximum to minimum uniformity ratio.
d) Computer-generated photometric grid showing foot candle readings every ten (10)
feet and the average foot candles.
e) Foundation details for light poles.
f) When not following IESNA recommendations, a description of reason therefore
and supply supporting documentation.
413.7 Prohibitions. Searchlights or flashing or animated signs are prohibited, other than for a
period of seven (7) days from the date of the opening of a new establishment.
Section 414 Required Storage100
Any residential multi-family building or planned unit development that does not have a permanent
basement or cellar at least one hundred (100) square feet of floor area per residential unit in the
building shall have a storage or accessory building having a minimum floor area of three hundred
(300) square feet in a building located to the side or rear of the residential building.
Section 415 Motor Vehicle Storage and Use101
100 2014 Adapted from 1973 Section 304.
101 2014 Combined 1973 Sections 316 and 504.3
57
Motor vehicles, trailers and water craft shall not be parked in the front, side or rear yard except in
locations approved therefore. No more than two (2) unregistered vehicles may be parked outside
a building on a lot in the Residential Town, Residential A, Residential B, Mixed Use and Health
Services zoning districts. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following may be parked in the side
or rear yards no closer than six (6) feet to any lot line: (a) not more than two (2) stock or drag
racing cars, (b) currently licensed water craft, (c) currently licensed snow machines, (d) currently
licensed trailers, (e) currently licensed travel trailers. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the DRB,
after public notice and a hearing, may allow (a) vehicles to be parked closer than six (6) feet to lot
lines to the extent such vehicles are screened from view off site and (b) more unregistered vehicles
to be parked on a lot. A travel trailer so parked shall not be used as living quarters and shall not
be attached to any utilities except for periods of less than two (2) weeks when a visitor may utilize
a camper for sleeping purposes only.
Section 416 Required Access to Public Roads or Public Waters
Land development may be permitted on lots only (a) if access to such land is safely located within
the required frontage on a public road or public waters or (b) if it is not feasible to do so, access is
provided by any permanent easement or right-of-way at least twenty (20) feet in width providing
access to such a road or waters.102
Section 417 Location of Driveways
For all uses except one (1) and two (2) family dwellings, all driveways shall be located at least
seventy-five (75) feet from intersection of two (2) or more streets. After public notice and hearing,
the DRB may waive this requirement to the extent that such waiver does not materially harm safety
or traffic flow.103
Section 418 Preservation of Vision at Intersections and Driveways104
a) Within the triangular area formed by the intersection of two (2) street property lines and a
third line joining them at points twenty-five (25) feet away from their intersection, there
shall be no objects obstructing vision between the height of three (3) feet and ten (10) feet
above the average grade of each street. (See Clear Sight Triangle Definition.) After public
notice and hearing the DRB may waive this requirement to the extent that such waiver does
not materially harm safety.
b) Driveways within the triangular area formed by a street property line and an edge of a
driveway and a third line joining them at fifteen (15) feet away from their intersection,
there shall be no objects obstructing vision between the height of three (3) feet and ten (10)
feet above the average grade of each street. After public notice and hearing the DRB may
waive this requirement to the extent such waiver will not materially harm safety.
Section 419 Screened Service Area Requirements
102 2014 Adapted from 1973 Section 301.3.
103 2014 Adapted from 1973 Section 310.
104 2014 Adapted from 1973 Section 314.
58
All areas designated, used or intended to be used as service areas for any building or land use,
other than one (1) family and two (2) family dwellings, shall be screened from view with either a
wall, a solid fence or a fence and evergreens to a height of at least five (5) feet above grade level,
on all sides, where any adjacent land is in a residential district or in residential use.105
Section 420 Grading
No grading, cut or fill shall be carried out in any district which leaves the slope of the finished
grade (rise to run) in excess of one (1) to two (2).106
Part 4 Special Uses
Section 430 Auto Service Stations and Convenience Stores/MiniMarts107
In all districts where permitted, auto service stations and convenience stores/mini marts shall
comply with the following requirements:
a) A lot used for an auto service station or convenience stores/mini marts lot shall not
be located within three hundred (300) feet of any lot occupied by a school, hospital,
library or religious institution.
b) An auto service station serving as a Vermont State Inspection Station shall have a
current Vermont Zoning Compliance Certification approved by the Zoning
Administrator and a copy on file in the zoning office.
c) Lot size shall be at least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
d) Lot frontage shall be at least one hundred fifty (150) feet.
e) Lot depth shall be at least one hundred twenty-five (125) feet.
f) Pumps, lubricating and other service devices shall be located at least thirty (30) feet
from the street line and thirty (30) feet from the side and rear lot lines.
g) All above-ground fuel and oil shall be stored at least twenty (20) feet from any
property line.
h) All automobile parts and dismantled vehicles shall be stored within a building.
i) No more than two (2) access driveways shall be located on any primary street and
no more than one (1) access driveway shall be located on any secondary street on
which an auto service station or convenience store/mini mart is permitted. The
maximum width of each access driveway shall be forty (40) feet.
1051973 Section 328.
106 1973 Section 329.
107 2014 Adapted from 1973 Section 320.
59
j) A suitably curbed, landscaped area shall be maintained at least five (5) feet in depth
along all street frontage not used as driveway.
Section 431 Wireless Communication Facilities108
431.1 Applicability. The requirements of this section shall apply to all wireless communications
facilities except to the extent limited by federal or state law.
431.2 Permits. Applicants for wireless communications facilities are required to obtain a zoning
permit and a conditional use permit to the extent necessary.
431.3 Locations of Facilities:
a) Zoning districts. Wireless communications facilities will be permitted as a
conditional use in one (1) of the following districts designated on the St. Johnsbury
Zoning Map, in accordance with other provisions of the zoning ordinance:
Rural Lands 1 Industrial
Commercial
Wireless communications facilities may not be approved within any other zoning
district unless location in another district has been clearly demonstrated to be the
only feasible way to provide adequate service; and that the standards and criteria
applicable to conditional uses have been satisfied.
b) Minimizing impact. Due to their importance to the aesthetic quality of the town,
wireless communications facilities may not be placed on the following natural
features: the Knob, Harris Hill, the unnamed hill three fourths (3/4) of a mile southsouthwest
of Harris Hill at the end of Parker Ave., on the ridge abutting Interstate
91 immediately northwest of Interchange 20, and the Town Forest. In addition, no
wireless communication facilities may be placed on Crow Hill, or the two (2)
hilltops north of Crow Hill if they would be visible from the Portland Street Bridge.
The DRB shall have the authority to impose conditions consistent with the purpose
of this section in approving a proposed facility. Furthermore, the DRB may
designate an alternative location for the tower to be evaluated by the applicant if it
is determined that the proposed location would result in undue adverse aesthetic
impacts. In consideration of this, the applicant may revise its application to include
such a site, assuming it is available to the applicant and reasonably technically
feasible to meet the applicant's communication objectives.
Wireless communication facilities will be located so as to minimize the following
potential impacts:
(i) Visual/aesthetic: Wireless communication facilities shall, when possible, be
sited off ridgelines, and where their visual impact is least detrimental to
108 2014 Adapted from 1973 Section 405; adapted for consistency.
60
scenic areas. In determining whether or not a wireless communication
facilities will have undue adverse visual impact on the scenic or natural
beauty the DRB shall consider:
(A) The period of time during which the proposed wireless
communication facilities would be viewed by the public on a public
highway, path, or body of water;
(B) The frequency of the view of the proposed wireless communication
facilities as experienced by the public;
(C) The degree to which the view of the wireless communication
facilities is screened by topographical features;
(D) Background features in the line of sight to the proposed wireless
communication facilities that obscure the facility or make it more
conspicuous;
(E) The distance of the proposed wireless communication facilities from
the viewing vantage point and the proportion of the facility that is
visible above skyline; the number of vehicles and/or viewers
traveling on a public highway, path or waterway at or near the
critical vantage point; and
(F) The sensitivity or unique value of the particular view affected by the
proposed development.
(ii) Property values: The facility will not have an undue adverse impact on
surrounding property values.
(iii) Safety hazards: In the case of structural failure, ice accumulation and
discharge and attractive nuisance.
(iv) Electromagnetic radiation: In the case of wireless communication facilities
is found to exceed the FCC guidelines.
431.4 Permitting Priority. Wireless communication facilities are permitted according to the
following priority:
a) Co-located with an existing wireless communications facility
b) Concealed within existing structures
c) Camouflaged and within an existing structure
d) Camouflaged, or camouflaged on an existing structure such as, but not limited to an
existing electric transmission tower, or an existing radio antenna, a water tower, or
building and of compatible design.
61
e) On land owned by the town which complies with other requirements of this section,
and where visual impact can be minimized and mitigated.
f) If demonstrated to the DRB that each of the above five (5) types of locations is not
feasible, but complies with the other requirements of this section and where visual
impact can be minimized.
431.5 Co-location Requirements. Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangements
of antennas on the tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights where overall
permitted height allows. Towers shall be designed structurally, electrically and in all respects to
accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and additional antennas where overall permitted height
allows.
An application for a new telecommunications tower shall not be approved unless the DRB finds
that the facilities planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower or structure due to one (1) of the following reasons:
a) The proposed antennas and equipment would exceed the structural or spatial capacity
of the existing or approved tower or facility as documented by a qualified engineer
licensed to practice in the state of Vermont. Additionally, the existing or approved
tower cannot be reinforced, modified or replaced to accommodate planned or
equivalent equipment, at a reasonable cost, to provide coverage and capacity
comparable to that of the proposed facility.
b) The proposed antennas and equipment would cause interference materially impacting
the usefulness of other existing or permitted equipment at the existing or approved
tower or facility as documented by a qualified engineer licensed to practice in the state
of Vermont and such interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
c) The proposed antennas and equipment - either alone or together with existing facilities,
equipment or antennas - would create radio frequency interference (RFI) in violation
of federal standards or requirements.
d) The proposed antennas and equipment either alone or together with existing facilities,
equipment antennas would create radio frequency radiation (RFR) in violation of
federal standards or requirements.
e) Existing or approved towers and structures cannot accommodate the planned
equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably or are too far from the area of
needed coverage to function reasonably as documented by a qualified engineer licensed
to practice in the state of Vermont.
f) Aesthetic reasons make it unreasonable to locate the planned telecommunications
equipment on an existing or approved tower or building.
g) There is no existing or approved tower in the area in which coverage is sought.
62
h) Other unforeseen specific reasons make it unreasonable to locate the planned
telecommunications equipment on an existing or approved tower or building.
431.6 Other provisions and dimensional standards
a) Free-standing telecommunications towers or antennas over thirty-five (35) feet in
elevation may not be located within three hundred (300) feet horizontally from any
historic district or property eligible to be listed on the federal historic register.
b) Free-standing telecommunications towers or antennas over thirty-five (35) feet in
elevation may not be located within three hundred (300) feet horizontally from any
structure existing at the time of the application which is used as either a primary or
secondary residence, the property of any school, or any other building.
c) Free-standing telecommunications towers or antennas over thirty-five (35) feet in
elevation may not be located within three hundred (300) feet horizontally of any river
or perennial stream.
d) Free-standing telecommunications towers or antennas over thirty-five (35) feet in
elevation may not be located within three hundred (300) feet horizontally of any
designated scenic road or highway.
e) Design Compatibility: Equipment shelters and accessory buildings must be designed
to be architecturally similar and compatible with the surrounding area.
f) New Towers: Any new free-standing tower shall be of a monopole construction. New
towers shall not exceed the minimum height necessary to provide adequate coverage
within the town. If attached to an existing structure, the height of the antennas is limited
to no more than twenty (20) feet above the upper elevation, and, in the case of a freestanding
structure, to a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet. Construction of a new tower
that exceeds these height restrictions is not permitted unless the applicant demonstrates
during the permitting process that adequate coverage within the town cannot be met for
the locations permitted.
g) Setback and height: New towers and antennas must be set back from each lot line at
least a distance equal to the height of the tower. The DRB may grant a conditional use
permit to allow a lesser setback.
h) Security, signs, noise and lighting: The area around the wireless communications
facility must be secure from trespass or vandalism. A sign not larger than one (1) square
foot must be posted adjacent to the entry gate indicating the name of the facility
owner(s), a twenty-four (24) hour emergency telephone number, and the presence of
RFR. No advertising is allowed. No lighting is allowed except as required by the federal
aviation administration and except for manually operated emergency lights for use by
operation personnel. The town may impose conditions to minimize the effect of noise
at the site perimeter from the operation of any machinery or equipment.
63
i) Reporting Requirement: Once every two (2) years, and by January 15th (or sooner, if
specified in the permit), the wireless communications carriers must file with the town
information demonstrating that they are in compliance with FCC standards and
requirements regarding RFR. The applicant shall provide a list of RFR readings, their
distances from the tower/transmitter, dates of the readings and the name of the person
or company who took the readings.
j) Removal Requirement: All structures associated with a wireless communications
facility are to be removed within one (1) year of the cessation of use. At the time of
removal, the site must be re-mediated and all equipment removed. If all facilities on a
tower have ceased to operate, the tower (including the foundation) shall also be
removed and the site shall be re-vegetated. The applicant, as a condition of the permit
must provide a financial surety or other form of financial guarantee acceptable to the
town to cover the cost of the removal of the facility and the re-mediation of the
landscape should the facility cease to operate.
k) Justification of Need: If a permit is required for the installation of as wireless
communications facility, the applicant for the permit is required to justify the need for
that facility. The applicant is required to file documentation on the coverage area of the
proposed facility, whether other facilities controlled by the applicant would be capable
of providing the coverage, the capacity of the other facilities controlled by the applicant
that could provide the coverage and whether other technology could be used to increase
the coverage without the necessity of constructing the proposed facility.
l) Contracted Leasers: Documentation that the applicant is not building the proposed
tower on speculation and has contracted leasers for the use of the tower.
m) In addition to information otherwise required in this ordinance, applicants for wireless
communication towers or facilities shall include the following supplemental
information:
(i) The name and address of the applicant, the record landowners and any
agents of the landowners or applicants as well as an applicant’s registered
agent and registered office. If the applicant is not a natural person, the name
and address of the business and the state in which it is incorporated and has
its principal office shall be provided.
(ii) The name, address, telephone number of the person to be contacted and who
is authorized to act in the event of an emergency regarding the structure or
safety of the facility.
(iii) The names and addresses of the record owners of all abutting property.
(iv) A report from qualified and licensed professional engineers that:
(A) Describes the facility height, design and elevation.
64
(B) Documents to the height above grade for all proposed mounting
positions for antennas to be co-located on a telecommunications
tower or facility and the minimum separation distances between
antennas.
(C) Describes the tower’s proposed capacity, including the number,
height and type of antennas that the applicant expects the tower to
accommodate.
(D) Documents steps the applicant will take to avoid interference with
any established public safety telecommunications.
(E) Describes the output frequency, number of channels and power
output per channel for each proposed antenna.
(F) Includes a written five (5) year plan for use of the proposed
telecommunications facility, including reasons for seeking capacity
in excess of immediate needs if applicable, as well as plans for
additional development coverage within the town.
(G) Demonstrates the tower’s compliance with the town’s structural
standards for setbacks for towers and support structures.
(H) Describes the radio frequency radiation at the site, whether or not
the applicant is regulated by the FCC and the basis for the statement
pertaining to RFR.
(I) Provides proof that at the proposed site, the applicant will be in
compliance with all FCC regulations, standards, and requirements
regarding radio frequency interference.
(J) Includes other information required by the town that is necessary to
evaluate the request.
(K) Includes an engineer’s stamp and registration number.
(v) For all telecommunication towers or facilities, the applicant shall provide a
letter of intent committing the tower owner and his or her successors to
permit shared use of the tower if the additional user agrees to meet
reasonable terms and conditions for shared use, including compliance with
all applicable FCC regulations, standards and requirements and the
provisions of this ordinance.
(vi) An applicant for a permit for a facility to be installed on an existing structure
shall provide a copy of its executed contract with the owner of the existing
structure to the administrative officer at the time an application is submitted.
65
(vii) To the extent required by the National Environmental Policy Act and as
administered by the FCC, A COMPLETE environmental Assessment draft
or final report describing the probable impacts of the proposed facility.
(viii) A copy of the application or draft application for an Act 250 permit, if
applicable.
431.7 Site Plan Requirements for Wireless Communications Facilities Not Covered Above. In
addition to the site plan requirements found elsewhere in the town’s zoning ordinances, site plans
for wireless communication facilities shall include the following supplemental information:
a) Location map: a copy of a portion of the most recent USGS Quadrangle map
showing the area within at least a two (2) mile radius of the proposed facility site.
b) Vicinity map, showing the entire vicinity within a two thousand five hundred
(2,500) foot radius of the facility site, including the facility or tower, topography,
public and private roads and driveways, buildings and structures, water bodies,
wetlands, landscape features, historic sites and habitats for endangered species. It
shall indicate the property lines of the proposed facility site parcel and all easements
or rights of way needed for access from a public way to the facility.
c) Proposed site plans of the entire development indicating all improvements
including landscaping, utility lines, guy wires, screening and roads.
d) Elevations showing all facades and indicating all exterior materials and color of
towers, buildings and associated facilities.
e) Computer generated photo simulations of the proposed facility showing the facility
from all public rights of way and adjacent property from which it may be visible.
Each photo must be labeled with the line of sight elevation and the date taken
imprinted on the photograph.
f) In the case of a proposed site that is forested, the approximate average height of the
existing vegetation within two hundred (200) feet of the tower base.
g) Construction sequence and time schedule for completion of each phase of the entire
project.
431.8 Access Roads and Above Ground Facilities. Where the construction of new wireless
communication facilities requires construction of or improvement to access roads, to the extent
practical, roads shall follow the contour of the land, and be constructed or improved within forest
of forest fringe areas and not in open fields. Utility or service lines shall be designed and located
so as to minimize or prevent disruption to the scenic character or beauty of the area. The town may
require closure of access roads to vehicles following facility construction where it is determined
that site conditions warrant the same and where maintenance personnel can reasonably access the
facility site on foot.
66
431.9 Amendments to Existing Telecommunications Facility Permit. An alteration or addition to
a previously approved telecommunications facility shall require a permit amendment when any of
the following are proposed:
a) Change in the number of buildings or facilities permitted on the site;
b) Material change in technology used by the telecommunications facility;
c) Addition or change of any equipment resulting in greater visibility or structural wind
loading, or additional height of the tower, including profile of additional antennas, not
specified in the original application.
431.10 Temporary Wireless Communication Facilities. Any telecommunications facility designed
for temporary use is subject to the following:
a) Use of a temporary facility is permitted only if the owner has received a temporary use
permit from the town.
b) Temporary telecommunication facilities are permitted for no longer than five (5) days
use during a special event.
c) The maximum height of a temporary facility is fifty (50) feet from grade.
d) Temporary facilities must comply with all applicable portions of these regulations.
431.11 Maintenance of Telecommunications Facilities Insurance. The telecommunications
facility owner shall maintain adequate insurance on all telecommunication facilities.
431.12 Provision for Hiring Independent Consultants. In connection with review of an application
for a permit under this ordinance, the DRB may determine that it needs the assistance of an
independent consultant or consultants to evaluate the application under applicable standards of this
ordinance. Upon making such determination, the Board may hire independent consultants, the
reasonable costs of whose services shall be paid for by the applicant. These consultants shall be
qualified professionals with an appropriate combination of training, record of service and/or
certification.
Section 432 Wood-Fired Furnaces, Boilers, and Stoves109
432.1 Permit and Application Requirements. The installation of outdoor wood-fired, but not
pellet-fired, furnaces, boilers and stoves shall require the issuance of a zoning permit before
installation. A zoning permit application for an outdoor wood-fired furnace, boiler or stove shall
include:
a) A completed application form, signed by the property owner;
109 New 2014.
67
b) A scaled diagram showing the location of the proposed wood-fired furnace, boiler or
stove and the location of all dwellings within five hundred (500) feet; and
c) The manufacturer’s specifications for the proposed wood-fired furnace, boiler or stove.
432.2 Prohibited Locations. An outdoor wood-fired furnace, boiler or stove shall not be located:
a) Outside the RL-1 and RL-2 zoning districts;
b) Within three hundred (300) feet of any dwelling except those located on the same lot
as its proposed location; or
c) Within fifty (50) feet of any lot line.
432.3 Installation and Operation.
a) An outdoor wood-fired furnace, boiler, or stove shall have a chimney that extends
at least fifteen (15) feet above the ground surface. If there are any residences within
five hundred (500) feet, the chimney shall also extend at least as high above the
ground surface as the peak of the roofs of all such residences. The administrative
officer may approve or require a lesser or greater height on a case-by-case basis if
necessary:
(i) To comply with manufacturer’s recommendations;
(ii) To obtain a sufficient height to effectively disperse smoke; or
(iii) If the smoke from the lower chimney height does not create a nuisance for
neighbors.
b) Outdoor wood-fired furnaces, boilers, or stoves and any electrical, plumbing,
mechanical or other apparatus or device in connection with an outdoor wood-fired
furnace, boiler, or stove shall be installed, operated, and maintained in conformity
with the manufacturer’s specifications and recommendations and all local, state,
and federal codes, laws, rules, and regulations.
c) An outdoor wood-fired furnace, boiler, or stove shall not be used to burn refuse,
leaves, green vegetative matter and noxious plants.
d) Only products designed and manufactured to be utilized in the outdoor wood-fired
furnace, boiler, or stove may be burned in the unit.
e) Existing outdoor wood-fired furnaces, boilers, or stoves that are located less than
three hundred (300) feet away from a dwelling that is not on the same property as
the outdoor wood-fired furnace, boiler, or stove may not be operated during the
months of May, June, July, August, and September.
68
Section 433 Mobile Home Parks110
433.1 No person shall develop or expand a mobile home park without site plan and conditional
use approval following the process and applying the standards for the subdivision of land except
that the following standards shall apply instead:
a) A mobile home park shall comprise at least fifteen (15) acres.
b) Each mobile home lot shall be at least seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square
feet in area, and be at least sixty (60) feet wide and at least one hundred twenty
(120) feet deep, and shall front on an access road.
c) Each lot within the mobile home park may be served from a privately owned access
road rather than from a publicly dedicated street.
d) At least one all-weather walkway at least five (5) feet wide shall be provided along
and within the right-of-way of each access road.
e) Two (2) parking spaces for each mobile home lot shall be provided, at least nine
(9) feet wide by twenty two (22) feet long. Adequate parking shall also be provided
for all amenities such as recreation areas and laundry facilities located within the
mobile home park.
f) No recreation area shall be less than three thousand (3,000) square feet.
g) A suitable nonporous pad shall be provided for each mobile home.
h) Each mobile home lot shall have attachments for water supply and for sewage
disposal.
i) No mobile home, office or service building shall be closer to a publicly owned
street right-of-way line than eighty (80) feet or closer to a property line than fifty
(50) feet.
j) A strip of land at least twenty-five (25) feet in width shall be maintained as a
landscaped area abutting all mobile home park property lines.
k) At least one hundred (100) square feet of conveniently located accessory storage
shall be provided for each individual mobile home lot.
l) Individual outdoor faucets with hose hook-ups shall be provided for each mobile
home space.
m) Unless trash pick-up service is provided to each lot weekly, a centralized refuse and
trash storage area(s) shall be provided and be readily accessible to all mobile home
110 2014 Modified 1973 Sections 502 and 503.
69
lots. Trash storage areas shall be concealed from any public and private street and
enclosed by a six (6) foot solid wall or fence.
n) The applicant is not required to record approved subdivision plats.
o) The applicant shall not be required to comply with Section 509 of this ordinance.
p) Accessory uses that serve park residents and which shall not be available for use by
the general public, including coin operated machines for laundry, soft drinks,
cigarettes and similar uses, shall be permitted on condition that such uses shall be
located in the interior of the park and shall not occupy more than five hundred (500)
square feet of area for each fifty (50) mobile homes or fraction thereof.
q) For those mobile home parks that are in a flood prone area assurance that such
proposals meet minimum development requirements to minimize flood damage.
[60.3(a)(4)(i)]111
433.2 Maintenance. The owner of the mobile home park shall be responsible for maintaining the
park including snow removal, road maintenance and regular mowing and compliance with all
conditions of its zoning permit and all sections of county, state, and of other pertinent laws and
regulations pertaining to the use, operation, and maintenance of such mobile home park. Nothing
contained in this section shall be construed to abrogate, void or minimize such other pertinent
regulations.
Section 434 Travel Trailer Parks112
No person shall develop or expand travel trailer parks without site plan and conditional use
approval. In addition to other applicable standards, the DRB shall apply the following:
a) Trailer camps shall provide for individual trailers, access roads and parking.
b) Each trailer lot shall be at least two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in area,
and at least twenty (20) feet in width.
c) All access roads within a trailer camp must be at least thirty (30) feet in width and have
a compacted gravel surface at least twenty (20) feet in width.
d) Each trailer lot shall have an attachment for water supply and sewage disposal.
e) No trailer lot or service building shall be closer to a public street right-of-way line than
eighty (80) feet, or closer than fifty (50) feet from a residential dwelling.
f) For those subdivisions that are in a flood prone area assurance that such proposals meet
minimum development requirements to minimize flood damage. [60.3(a)(4)(i)]113
111 New 2014: NLIP (FEMA) regulations 60.3(a)(4)(i)
112 2014 Modified 1973 Sections 505 and 506.
113 2014 New: NLIP (FEMA) regulations 60.3(a)(4)(i)
70
Section 435 Controlled Substance Dispensaries114
435.1 No person shall operate, develop or expand a controlled substance dispensary without site
plan and conditional use approval. In addition to other applicable standards, the DRB shall apply
the following:
a) A controlled substance dispensary shall be located in a permanent building and shall
not be located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or modular unit, mobile home, motor
home or other motor vehicle.
b) A controlled substance dispensary shall have an interior customer waiting area equal
to a minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area.
c) A controlled substance dispensary shall not have a drive-through service.
d) A controlled substance dispensary shall not have outdoor seating areas.
e) A controlled substance dispensary shall not offer a service that provides offsite delivery
of the medical marijuana or methadone.
f) A controlled substance dispensary shall be set back a minimum of one thousand (1,000)
feet from a public, private or charter school or a licensed childcare center, measured in
a straight and direct horizontal line from the closest exterior wall of the controlled
substance dispensary to the closest property line of a school or childcare center.
g) A controlled substance dispensary shall be set back a minimum of one thousand (1,000)
feet from a church, library or public park and a minimum of three hundred (300) feet
from a licensed residential substance abuse diagnostic and treatment facility or other
licensed drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility, measured in a straight and direct
horizontal line from the closest wall of the controlled substance dispensary to the
closest property line of a church, library, public park, licensed residential substance
abuse diagnostic and treatment facility or other licensed drug or alcohol rehabilitation
facility.
Section 436 Adult Entertainment115
No person shall develop or expand an adult entertainment establishment without site plan and
conditional use approval. In addition to other applicable standards, the DRB shall apply the
following: An adult entertainment establishment shall not be located within one thousand (1,000)
feet of a public, private or charter school, a childcare center, a church, or another adult
entertainment establishment measured in a straight line between the closest exterior walls of the
114 2014 New.
115 2014 New. Adapted from medical marijuana regulations 18 V.S.A. Ch. 86.
71
adult entertainment establishment and the property line of the school, childcare center, church or
other adult entertainment establishment.
Section 437 Storage of Flammable Liquids and other Hazardous Material116
The storage of any flammable liquid in tanks above ground with unit capacity greater than five
hundred fifty (550) gallons shall be prohibited, unless such tanks up to and including ten thousand
(10,000) gallon capacity are placed not less than eighty (80) feet from all property lines, and unless
all such tanks of more than ten thousand (10,000) gallon capacity are placed not less than two
hundred (200) feet from all property lines.
All tanks having a capacity greater than five hundred fifty (550) gallons shall be properly restrained
with dikes having a capacity not less than one and one-half (1 ½) times the capacity of the tanks
surrounded.
No commercial storage or sales of hazardous materials shall be permitted other than in the COM
and IND districts.
Section 438 Removal of Earth Resources
In any district, the removal of soil, sand or gravel for sale, except when incidental to construction
of a building on the same premises, shall be permitted only upon approval of a plan by the DRB
for the rehabilitation of the site, after public notice and hearing. In any district, the following
provisions shall apply:
438.1 Before approval of any new or extension to a sand or gravel operation, a performance bond
shall be secured from the applicant sufficient to ensure that upon completion of the extraction
operations the abandoned site will be left in a safe, attractive and useful condition in the interest
of public safety and general welfare. The owner shall submit a plan of proposed improvements to
accomplish this end. The bond shall be sufficient to cover the cost of redevelopment of the site as
a park, lake recreation area or other usable open space.
438.2 The removal of all material shall be so conducted so as to result in the improvement of the
land, giving due regard to the contours in the vicinity, such as leveling slopes and removing hills.
The digging or creating of pits or steep slopes shall not be permitted, unless provision is made to
refill such pits or level such slopes.
438.3 The excavation operation sites shall be graded smooth and left in a neat condition. Cut
slopes and spoil banks shall not be allowed to remain. The operation site shall be fertilized,
mulched and reseeded so as to establish a firm cover of grass or other vegetation sufficient to
prevent erosion under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the administrative officer.
438.4 All surface drainage affected by excavation operations shall be controlled by the owner to
prevent erosion debris and other loose materials from filling any drainage course, street or private
116 2014 Modified 1973Section 325
72
property. All provisions to control natural drainage water shall meet with the approval of the
administrative officer.
438.5 No excavation or blasting, or removal of vegetation shall take place within one hundred
(100) feet of any street or other property line.
438.6 No power-activated sorting machinery or equipment shall be located within three hundred
(300) feet of any street or other property line, and all such machinery shall be equipped with
satisfactory dust elimination devices.
438.7 All excavation of slopes in excess of one (1) to two (2) shall be protected from
encroachment by a fence at least five (5) feet in height.
438.8 Extension of an existing nonconforming operation shall not be permitted, except after
compliance with all of the provisions of this section.
438.9 Stripping of topsoil for sale or for use on other premises, except as may be incidental to a
construction project, shall be prohibited.
Section 439 Junk Yards/Salvage Yard
All Junk Yards and Salvage yards shall be owned, established, operated and maintained in
accordance with State regulation 24 V.S.A Chapter 61 §2247. A current “certificate of approval
for location of a salvage yard” shall be on file with the Zoning Administrator.
Section 440 Drive-in restaurant and free-standing retail stands
Plans for the erection or structural alteration of any drive-in restaurant or free-standing retail stand
shall be submitted to the development review board for approval. The DRB may require such
changes or additions in relation to yard, driveways, driveway entrances and exits, and landscaping,
and the location and height of buildings and enclosures to ensure safety, to minimize traffic or
difficulties, and to safeguard adjacent properties.
Section 441 Temporary Overnight Shelter117
No person shall establish a Temporary Overnight Shelter without site plan and conditional use
approval. In addition to other applicable standards, the DRB shall apply the following:
1. All Temporary Overnight Shelters must be located at least one thousand (1000) feet away
from any school or playground.
2. All Temporary Overnight Shelters must include operational procedures which provide for
the safe transportation of all guests to a place where guests may receive services or have
their needs met.
3. All Temporary Overnight Shelters must include operational procedures which keep
guests from forming lines or loitering in the front of the building.
117 Approved October 7, 2015; no petitions were filed.
73
4. All Temporary Overnight Shelters should be on an available public transportation route.
5. The DRB may ask for detailed safety protocol which may include:
a. Emergency Service Access
b. Volunteer Training
c. Number of volunteers on site at all times
d. Availability of paid staff
6. In addition to the “character of the area affected” (See Section 204.4.1b), the DRB may
consider other factors in the appropriateness of location including impact on economic
development.
Section 442 Transitional Residence118
No person shall establish a Transitional Residence without site plan and conditional use approval.
In addition to other applicable standards, the DRB shall apply the following:
1. The DRB may ask for detailed safety protocol which may include:
a. Emergency Service Access
b. Volunteer Training
c. Number of volunteers on site at all times
d. Availability of paid staff
2. In addition to the “character of the area affected” (See Section 204.4.1b), the DRB may
consider other factors in the appropriateness of location including impact on economic
development.
Section 443 Freight Storage Containers119 120
Part 5 Flood Hazard121
Section 450 Flood Hazard Regulation
In accordance with 10 V.S.A. Chapter 32, and V.S.A. Chapter 117 §4424, §4411 and §4414,
there is hereby established a bylaw for areas at risk of flood damage in the Town of St. Johnsbury,
Vermont. Except as additionally described below, all administrative procedures
follow municipal procedures under 24 VSA Chapter 117., within all areas hereinafter described,
the following provisions shall apply in addition to all other applicable standards.122
450.1 Land to Which These Regulations Apply. These regulations shall apply for development
in all areas in the town identified as areas of special flood hazard on the “Flood Insurance Rate
Map” and the “Floodway Map” accompanying the Flood Insurance study for the Town of St.
Johnsbury, Vermont dated July 3, 1986 which are hereby adopted by referenced and declared to
be part of this ordinance.
118 Approved October 7, 2015; no petitions were filed.
119 Approved July 12, 2017; no petitions were filed.
120 Removed July 12, 2017 Amendments declared null and void without legal force or effect per Order of Vermont
Superior Court, Environmental Division, in Re: Lucille B. Oakes Conditional Use Application 20170901-082 for a
Conditional Use as a Self-Storage Facility, Docket No.: 153-11-17 Vtec
121 2014 Modified 1973 Section 330 with conforming changes.
122 2014 New: VT NLIP Review
74
450.2 Precedence of Bylaw. The provisions of these flood hazard bylaws shall not in any way
impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any other local, state, or federal laws or
regulations. Where this flood hazard regulation imposes a greater restriction the provisions here
shall take precedence.
450.3 Review Procedures.
a) Prior to issuing a zoning permit for the construction of new buildings, the
substantial improvement of existing buildings in the flood hazard area, or for land
development in the floodway, a copy of the application shall be submitted to the
Vermont Agency of Natural Resources (“ANR”) in accordance with 24 V.S.A.
§ 4424(2)(D)(i). A zoning permit may be issued only following receipt of
comments from the ANR or the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date the
application was mailed to ANR, whichever is sooner.
b) Adjacent communities and ANR shall be notified at least fifteen (15) days prior to
issuing any zoning permit for the alteration or relocation of a watercourse and
copies of such notification shall be submitted to the Administrator of the Federal
Insurance Administration.
c) Proposed development shall be reviewed to assure that all necessary permits have
been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required
by federal or state law.
450.4 Flood Hazard Area and Floodway Limits.
a) Where available, i.e.; Zones A1-A30, AE, and AH, the base flood elevations and
floodway limits provided by the National Flood Insurance Program in the Flood
Insurance Study and accompanying maps shall be used to administer the provisions of
this ordinance.
b) In areas where base flood elevations and floodway limits have not been provided by
the National Flood Insurance Program, i.e.; Zone A, base flood elevation and floodway
information available from State or Federal agencies or other sources, shall be obtained
and reasonably utilized to administer the provisions of these ordinances.
450.5 Development Standards for new construction or substantial improvements.
a) Floodway areas.
(i) Development within the floodway is prohibited unless a registered
professional engineer certifies that the proposed development will not result
in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood.
(ii) Junkyards and storage areas or facilities for floatable materials, chemicals,
explosives, flammable liquids, or other hazardous or toxic materials, are
prohibited within the floodway.
b) Flood hazard areas.
75
(i) All development shall be designed to (i) minimize flood damage to the proposed
development and to public facilities and utilities, and (ii) to provide adequate
drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(ii) Structures (including manufactured homes) shall be (i) designed (or modified)
and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of
the structure during the occurrence of the base flood, (ii) be constructed with
materials resistant to flood damage, (iii) be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage, and (iv) be constructed with electrical,
heating ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service
facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering
or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
(iii) The flood carrying capacity within any altered or relocated portion of a
watercourse shall be maintained.
(iv) New replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood water.
(v) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding.
(vi) New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated on properly
compacted fill such that the top of the fill (the pad) under the entire
manufactured home is above the base flood elevation.
(vii) The lowest floor, including basement, of all new buildings shall be at or
above the base flood elevation.
(viii) An existing building to be substantially improved for residential purposes
shall be modified or elevated to meet the requirements of subsection vii.
(ix) An existing building to be substantially improved for nonresidential purposes
shall either (A) meet the requirements of subsection 2, or (B) be designed to be
watertight below the base flood elevation with walls substantially impermeable
and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A permit for a building
proposed to be flood proofed shall not be issued until a registered professional
engineer or architect has reviewed the structural design, specifications and
plans, and has certified that the design and proposed methods of construction
are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions
of this subsection.
(x) All new construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed areas
below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must
76
either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria: (i) A minimum of two (2) openings
having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot
of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. (ii) The bottom of all
openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. Openings may be
equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided
that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(xi) Areas to be used for junkyards or for storage of floatable, hazardous or toxic
materials shall be filled and graded to at least one (1) foot above the base flood
elevation.
(xii) Motor homes placed on sites within Zone A shall either (i) be on the site for
fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, (ii) be fully licensed and
ready for highway use, or (iii) meet all standards of Section 60.3(b)(1) of the
National Flood Insurance Program Regulations and the elevation and anchoring
requirements for “manufactured homes” of Section 60.3(c)(6) thereof.
450.6 Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrative Officer. The administrative officer shall
have the duty to insure that the following requirements have been satisfied or complied with:
a) All required permits have been issued for all proposed land development in areas
of special flood hazard.
b) The lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved
buildings, are at or above the minimum elevation in relation to mean sea level.
c) Buildings have been flood proofed to above the minimum elevation in relation to
mean sea level.
d) All flood proofing certifications required under this ordinance shall have been
issued.
e) All required variances shall have been granted, including justification for their
issuance.
450.7 Special Exceptions. Special exceptions shall be granted by the DRB only:
a) In accordance with the provisions of 24 V.S.A. § 4424(2)(E) and in accordance with
the criteria for granting variances found in 44 CFR, Section 60.6, of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations.
b) Special exceptions. The DRB, after public notice and hearing, may approve the repair,
relocation, replacement, or enlargement of a nonconforming structure within a
regulated flood or other hazard area, subject to compliance with applicable federal and
state laws and regulations, and provided that the following criteria are met:
(i) The DRB finds that the repair, relocation, or enlargement of the
nonconforming structure is required for the continued economically feasible
operation of a nonresidential enterprise.
77
(ii) The DRB finds that the repair, relocation, or enlargement of the
nonconforming structure will not increase flood levels in the regulatory
floodway, increase the risk of other hazard in the area, or threaten the health,
safety, and welfare of the public or other property owners.
(iii) The permit so granted states that the repaired, relocated, or enlarged
nonconforming structure is located in a regulated flood or other hazard
area, does not conform to the ordinances pertaining to that area, and will be
maintained at the risk of the owner.
450.8 Warning of Disclaimer of Liability. These regulations do not imply that land outside the
areas of special flood hazard or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from
flooding or flood damages. These regulations shall not create liability on the part of the Town of
St Johnsbury or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance
on this regulation or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
450.9 Enforcement and Penalties.
a.) This bylaw shall be enforced under the municipal zoning bylaw in accordance with 10
VSA § 1974a, § 4451, and § 4452. A copy of the notice of violation will be mailed the
State NFIP Coordinator.
b.) If any appeals have been resolved, but the violation remains, the ZA shall submit a
declaration to the Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program requesting a
denial of flood insurance to the property pursuant to Section 1316 of the National Flood
Insurance Act of 1968, as amended.
c.) Violations of the Accepted Agricultural Practices shall be enforced under this Section as
violations of this bylaw. Such violations shall also be immediately reported to the
Secretary of Agriculture for enforcement under 6 V.S.A. Section 4812.
Part 6 Other Permitted Structures
Section 460 Mobile Building
A mobile building shall be treated as a residential dwelling except mobile buildings may be located
on a construction site as provided in Section 402(f) and a mobile home may temporarily be located
on any land classified as either "RL-1" or "RL-2" for so long and only so long as such mobile
home is used as an employee farm dwelling.
Section 461 Signs123
461.1 Sign Permits and Applications. Unless specifically exempted by this section, all signs shall
require the issuance of a zoning permit before public display. A zoning permit application for a
sign shall include the following:
a) A completed application form, signed by the property owner, along with the
applicable fee;
1232014 Adapted from 1973 Section 323
78
b) A scaled rendering of the proposed sign indicating its dimensions in square inches
or feet (length, width, height), and all materials and colors used;
c) Where applicable, the type and method of illumination (i.e. external, internal, or
backlit), including the fixture style, placement, and bulb wattage and type;
d) The total square footage of all existing signs for the establishment; and,
e) Photographs of the buildings or site where the sign is proposed.
f) Applications involving free-standing signs shall also include a scaled site plan
indicating the location of all existing and proposed signs on the lot and all setbacks
in feet from the property lines and/or rights-of-way.
g) Applications involving parallel and projecting signs shall also include a scaled
building elevation indicating the location of all existing and proposed signs on the
building face and the frontage dedicated to the establishment in linear feet.
461.2 Exempt Off-Premises Signs. The following types of signs are allowed in all zoning
districts, shall be exempt from the requirements of this section and may be located off premises.
a) Political signs: Signs advertising political parties and/or candidates provided:
(i) The size of such signs does not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet;
(ii) Such signs are not erected earlier than twenty-five (25) days prior the date
on which absentee ballots may be voted in the election to which they
pertain; and
(iii) All such signs are removed within three (3) days after the date of the
election.
b) Temporary non-illuminated signs directing persons to temporary exhibits, shows or
events provided:
(i) The size of each such sign does not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area;
and,
(ii) Such signs are not posted earlier than two (2) weeks prior to the event and
are removed within three (3) days after the event.
c) Non-illuminated signs used for directing members or patrons to clubs, churches or
other nonprofit organizations provided:
(i) Such signs indicate only the name of the facility and the direction of the
facility; and,
(ii) Such signs do not exceed four (4) square feet in area.
79
d) Highway and official signs: Subject to approval by the town manager or his or her
designee, signs within the public right-of-way or along a public thoroughfare
designed and placed in conformance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices (MUTCD) published by the US Dept. Of Transportation, and other official
public signs or notices placed on a temporary basis for use by emergency services
or public utilities.
461.3 Exempt On-Premises Signs. The following types of signs are allowed in all zoning districts
and shall be exempt from the requirements of this section, but must be located on premises.
a) Directional signs: Non-illuminated signs displayed on private property strictly for
the direction, safety or convenience of the public, including such signs which
identify the location of restrooms, telephone booths, parking area entrances or exits,
freight entrances or the like, provided the area of any such sign shall not exceed
two (2) square feet.
b) Real estate sale/rental sign: One (1) temporary non-illuminated sign advertising
the sale or rental of the premises or indicating that such premises have been sold or
rented, provided the area of any such sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet and
shall be removed within three (3) days after the rental agreement has been executed
or title has been transferred.
c) Flags: The American Flag of any size and other flags or emblems of religious,
educational, or governmental organizations, not to exceed thirty-two (32) square
feet with no single dimension greater than eight (8) feet provided they not exceed
three (3) flags per fifty (50) feet of frontage, and are flown from supports of the
buildings or grounds being occupied by the organization or an individual.
d) Contractor sign: A single non-illuminated sign, not exceeding thirty-two (32)
square feet in area, maintained on the premises while a building is actually under
construction.
e) Property restriction signs: Non-illuminated signs such as those announcing no
trespassing; the private nature of a road, driveway, or premises; or regulating
fishing or hunting on the premises, provided the area of any such sign shall not
exceed two (2) square feet.
f) Holiday decorations: Holiday decorations displayed for and during recognized
federal, state, or religious holidays to the extent they do not interfere with traffic
safety or in any way becomes a public safety hazard.
g) Home occupation signs: One (1) non-illuminated sign for a permitted home
occupation not to exceed eight (8) square feet.
h) Residential sign: A sign of less than two (2) square feet which serve only to indicate
the name and address of residential occupants.
80
i) Yard sale signs: Two (2) signs, each of less than eight (8) square feet displayed for
no more than fourteen (14) days per year at any location advertising a yard sale.
j) Memorials/interpretive markers: Non-illuminated memorial, interpretive signs, or
historical signs or tablets displayed by a public or educational non-profit agency
strictly for the purpose of informing or educating the public provided the area of
any such sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.
k) Banners: In the commercial zoning district, all banners and in all other zoning
districts, banners that do not exceed one hundred forty (140) square feet that are
displayed for no more than three (3) weeks at a time.
l) Streamers, pendants or bunting: In the commercial zoning district, all streamers,
pendants and/or bunting and in all other zoning districts unlettered streamers,
pendants or bunting for up to three (3) months per year at any location.
m) Subdivision name sign: One (1) sign of twenty-four (24) square feet in area at each
street entrance to a subdivision.
n) Sandwich board: One sandwich sign per business located on premises and not on
land owned by the town or a public or private street or road right-of-way.
o) Seed signs: Up to one (1) sign per acre or part thereof, each sign no larger than
four (4) square feet, identifying the source, type or brand of any seeds used to plant
crops.
p) Emergency signs: Signs at any location and of any size as authorized by the fire
chief or his/her designee to address an emergency situation or event.
461.4 Prohibited Signage. No person shall paint, paste, brand, stamp or in any other manner
place on or attach to any tree, rocks or other natural feature, utility pole, or other pole on
any street or public right-of-way, any sign, excluding an official sign, or other
advertisement, bill, notice, card or poster without the owner’s permission. Except as
otherwise provided herein, the following types of signs are prohibited:
a) Any off-premise signs, balloons or other inflatable object which advertises or
otherwise directs attention to any commodity or activity sold, offered or conducted
elsewhere than on the premises upon which such sign is allowed.
b) Any sign or supporting structure located in or over the traveled portion of any
public right-of-way unless the sign is attached to a structural element of a building
or other permanent structure and an encroachment permit has been obtained from
the Department of Public Works.
c) Any sign or other advertising device with visible moving or movable parts or with
flashing animated or intermittent illumination (except signs indicating the time,
date or weather conditions), and any sign that contains any fluorescent paint or
device, including mirrors, which has the effect of intensifying reflected light.
81
d) Signs that are visible from outside a building advertising the sale of products
containing alcohol or tobacco comprising more than 20% of the area allowed for
on-premises signs.
461.5 Non-Conforming Signs. Any existing sign or other advertising device that does not
conform to the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed a non-conforming sign.
Non-conforming signs may remain in use at the same location, and ordinary maintenance and
repair of such signs shall be permitted.
A non-conforming sign shall not be relocated, enlarged, replaced, redesigned, or altered in any
way (except for a change of lettering, logo or colors using the same materials within an existing
sign frame subject to obtaining a zoning permit) except to bring the sign into complete compliance
with this section. Notwithstanding the foregoing, after public notice and hearing, the DRB may
allow a non-conforming sign to be enlarged, replaced, redesigned, or altered so that it is in greater
compliance with this section than the existing nonconforming sign.
When a use is changed or terminated, any nonconforming sign associated with the use shall be
removed within seven (7) days of the change or termination. Sign removal shall include all
nonconforming frames, rods and support material required by the sign, as well as the entire sign
itself.
461.6 Change in Use or Termination of Activity. When a use is changed or terminated, any
conforming sign associated with the use shall be removed within ninety (90) days of the change
or termination unless (a) a permit for a new sign reusing all or some of the existing panel, frames,
rods, and support material has been issued and the sign has been installed, or (b) an extension has
been granted by the administrative officer upon written request. Sign removal shall include all
frames, rods and support material required by the sign, as well as the entire sign itself.
461.7 Allowed signs in Commercial, Industrial, Mixed Use and Health Services Zoning Districts.
82
a) On-premises signs shall be allowed as follows:
Sign Type
Dimensional
Requirements
Commercial Industrial Mixed Use
Health
Services
Parallel
Size
Greater of 50
sq ft total or 2
sq ft per
linear foot of
lot frontage
Greater of 50
sq ft total or
2 sq ft per
linear foot of
lot frontage
Greater of 50
sq ft total or
2 sq ft per
linear foot of
lot frontage
Greater of 50
sq ft total or
2 sq ft per
linear foot of
lot frontage
Maximum
Size Per
Individual
Sign
75 sq ft 150 sq ft 75 sq ft 75 sq ft
Maximum
Height
Up to 20 ft
above the
height of the
building
Up to 20 ft
above the
height of the
building
Up to 20 ft
above the
height of the
building
Up to 20 ft
above the
height of the
building
Projecting
Size
Greater of 50
sq ft total or 2
sq ft per
linear foot of
lot frontage
Greater of 50
sq ft total or
2 sq ft per
linear foot of
lot frontage
Greater of 50
sq ft total or
2 sq ft per
linear foot of
lot frontage
Greater of 50
sq ft total or
2 sq ft per
linear foot of
lot frontage
Maximum
Height
14 ft 14 ft 14 ft 14 ft
Minimum
Height of
Sign Bottom
8 ft 8 ft 8 ft 8 ft
Free-standing
Maximum
Size
75 sq ft 150 sq ft 75 sq ft 75 sq ft
Maximum
Height
40 ft 40 ft 40 ft 40 ft
b) Calculation of allowed sign area. The following shall govern the calculation of a
sign’s allowed area:
(i) The area of a sign shall include all lettering, designs, or symbols, together
with the background, whether open or enclosed, upon which they are
displayed. Not included are any supporting framework incidental to the
display itself.
(ii) Advertising relating to a specific product or products sold on the premises,
or the utilization of corporate symbols, logos, or similar features, shall be
included in the aggregate sign area permitted for each establishment.
83
(iii) Where a sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached, painted, or
applied directly to a building, wall, canopy, or window, the area shall be
considered to be the smallest rectangle encompassing all the letters and
symbols.
(iv) In computing the area of a double-faced sign, only one (1) side shall be
considered if both faces are identical. Notwithstanding the above, if the
interior angle formed by the two (2) faces of the double-faced sign is greater
than forty-five (45) degrees, then both sides of such sign shall be considered
in calculating the sign area.
(v) The maximum allowable area of a sign shall include all permanent signs
attached, painted, or applied to a building façade. If an establishment has
walls fronting on two (2) or more streets, the sign area for each street shall
be computed separately.
(vi) The maximum allowable area of a free-standing sign shall not include any
portion of a sign that is used solely for the purpose of displaying the grades
and prices of motor fuels sold on premises except to the extent such area
exceeds fifteen (15) square feet.
461.8 Signs in Residential and Rural Lands Zoning Districts.
a) Allowed signs: In addition to exempt signs, only the following on-premise signs
shall be permitted in any Residential and Rural districts:
(i) Organization Signs. Parallel, projecting and free-standing signs
representing governmental educational or religious organizations provided
that the total area of all signs for any individual use shall not exceed twenty
(20) square feet.
(ii) Agricultural Signs. Up to four (4) signs advertising for sale agricultural
produce raised on the premises, not to exceed eight (8) square feet in area.
(iii) Non-residential Building Sign. One (1) sign identifying a non-residential
building, use, or activity, provided the area of such sign shall not exceed
twenty (20) square feet.
b) Restrictions on residential and rural district signs: The following restrictions
regarding type and placement of signs pertain to all signs in all Residential and
Rural districts:
(i) No sign shall be located within three (3) feet of any sidewalk or its vertical
plane, except where such sign is attached to the face of the building at least
eight (8) feet above the sidewalk and protruding no more than six (6) inches
from the face of the building.
84
461.9 Sign Location, Design, Safety and Maintenance.
a) Obstruction. No sign shall be placed in such a way as to impair public safety or a
driver’s necessary view along a highway or so that the sign prevents clear and
unobstructed views between a highway and the access area for a driveway or other
highway or between a highway and a public sidewalk. No sign shall be placed to
prevent safe access to and from any door, window or fire escape.
b) Setbacks. No portion of any free-standing sign shall be located any closer to any
property line than fifty (50) percent of the required yard setback for the district in
which it is located.
c) All signs shall be constructed, supported and monitored so as to withstand a wind
pressure of thirty (30) lbs per square foot.
d) All signs supporting materials and mounts shall be maintained in a safe and wellkept
condition.
461.10 Sign Lighting. In addition to the outdoor lighting requirements, the following requirements
shall pertain to the lighting of all signs:
a) Signs shall be illuminated such that the illumination does not create glare or unduly
illuminate the surrounding area.
b) Externally illuminated signs:
(i) Light fixtures used to illuminate signs shall be top mounted and shall direct
the light downward toward the sign.
(ii) Ground mounted lights shall not be used unless under special circumstances
where conditions of (i) above cannot be met and only if approved by the
DRB.
(iii) Light fixtures shall employ the use of grids, hoods, or baffles, aimed so that
light is directed only onto the sign face. The light source or reflective
surfaces of the fixtures shall not be visible from the public way or
surrounding properties.
c) Backlit signs:
(i) Backlit (i.e. reverse channel illumination) signs shall light lettering and logo
and other related sign elements only, and lighting design shall be such that
no excess light spill or glare results from the back lighting fixtures and/or
source. The backlit sign shall not increase the measurable vertical light
level at a point twenty (20) feet distant from the sign in any direction.
(ii) In addition to other permitted lamp types, neon or similar lighting may be
used to illuminate backlit signs.
85
d) Internally illuminated signs:
(i) Internally illuminated signs shall be designed with light lettering and
graphics against a dark field.
(ii) The sign cabinet shall fully enclose the light such that the light source is not
visible from the exterior of the sign.
(iii) Internally illuminated signs shall be designed so that lamps produce no
more than two hundred (200) initial lumens per square foot.
461.11 Design Control District Signs. Within those portions of the Design Control District
that are zoned Residential or Mixed Use, commercial signs, including overhanging signs, shall be
permitted only if approved by the DRB in accordance with the following:
a) Signage concept. Signs by businesses may identify their premises, or the products
and services that they provide; and shall preserve and enhance the appearance of
all structures in the Design Control District; preserve and enhance the appearance
of public street, parks and other public properties and minimize the intrusiveness
of sign structures, and visual clutter and blight and encourage an environment of
economic prosperity and stability.
b) Design and criteria for approval. In approving the design of a sign the DRB shall
consider the following:
(i) The sign design, configuration, color and type face which may reflect the
individual character of the business being advertised but should respect the
character of the building and the streetscape.
(ii) The content of the sign shall be limited to the name, address, function or
activity of the business identified by the sign.
(iii) The sign may include the brand name of a product (i.e. “Ben & Jerry’s
Scoop Shop”), but only when such name is integral to the business name.
(iv) “Symbol Signs” in a shape representative of the business/service conducted
or offered on the premises are permissible (i.e. sign in the shape of a mortar
& pestle for a drug store, or a barber pole).
c) Sign material. The material used in all signs shall comply with the following:
(i) No plastic signs are permitted. Signs are to be made of painted or varnished
wood or other material approved by the DRB.
(ii) Stock signs purchased from distributors of commercial products are
prohibited.
86
d) Supporting hardware. The supporting hardware used in all signs shall comply with
the following:
(i) Have brackets which are made of painted metal.
(ii) Brackets made of threaded pipe and pipe fittings are prohibited.
e) Illumination. The illumination of signs shall comply with the following:
(i) Signs may only be illuminated by external, incandescent light sources.
(ii) All lights must be focused on the sign to eliminate undue glare for residents,
pedestrians and motorists.
(iii) The installation of wire, conduit and electrical hardware shall not
obscure/deface any architectural detail. Installation shall be completed so as
to minimize visual clutter.
f) Placement. The placement of all signs shall comply with the following:
(i) No sign shall cover/obscure any architectural detailing or window openings.
(ii) A business shall be allowed only one (1) overhanging sign per doorway or
per facade.
(iii) No overhanging sign shall exceed ten (10) square feet on each side with a
maximum four (4) foot projection over the sidewalk. The bottom of the
projecting sign shall be at least ten (10) feet above the sidewalk and its top
shall not extend higher than whichever of the following is the lowest:
(A) Twenty-five (25) feet above grade,
(B) The sill of the first level of windows above the first story, or
(C) The lowest point of the roof
Section 462 Fences124
462.1 Fences Required. A private swimming pool that is installed so that the bottom of the pool
is more than two (2) feet below the average grade of the surrounding ground shall be enclosed by
a fence at least five (5) feet in height or other acceptable means of restricting access as approved
by the DRB.125
124 2014 New except as otherwise identified.
125 2014 Adapted from 1973 Section 317.
87
462.2 Fence Permits and Applications. Unless specifically exempted by this section, all fences
shall require the issuance of a zoning permit. A zoning permit application for a fence shall include
the following:
a) A completed application form, signed by the property owner, along with the
applicable fee;
b) A scaled drawing showing the location of the proposed fence and the appropriate
boundary of the lot on which its location is proposed;
c) A scaled elevation showing the appearance of the proposed fence;
d) A description of the materials of the proposed fence.
462.3 Exempt Fences. The following types of fences shall be exempt from the requirements of
this section except they must comply with Subsection 462.5.
a) Fences that are:
(i) Constructed outside of the front yard setback required for a building;
(ii) Set back at least three (3) feet from all property lines; and
(iii) No more than eight (8) feet in height.
b) Fences inside the front yard setback required for buildings that are:
(i) No more than four (4) feet in height;
(ii) At least three (3) feet from any property line; and
(iii) Do not obstruct a driver’s necessary view along a highway or so as to
prevent clear and unobstructed views between a highway and a public
sidewalk and between a highway and the access area for a driveway or
another highway.
462.4 The following fences are subject to conditional use review by the DRB:
a) A fence for any use requiring conditional use review in its zoning district;
b) A fence containing barbed wire installed more than eight (8) feet above the ground.
462.5 General Requirements and Restrictions.
a) Except in the Rural Lands Zoning Districts, no person shall use chicken wire,
barbed wire, hog wire, wire fabric, or razor wire as fencing materials.
b) Except in the Rural Lands Zoning Districts, no fence shall be electrified.
88
c) No person shall construct a fence of wood, metal or plastic products that are
designed specifically for uses other than fence construction. The administrative
officer may require the applicant to provide the manufacturer’s standards to
establish the intended use of a proposed fencing material.
Section 463 Solar Collectors126
Except as regulated by the Vermont Public Service Board, solar collectors shall comply with the
following:
a) Roof-mounted solar collectors located on front and side building roofs visible from the
public right-of-way shall not extend more than twelve (12) inches above the peak of
the roof plane where they are mounted. No portion of any such solar collector shall
extend more than thirty-six (36) inches perpendicular to the point on the roof where it
is mounted.
b) Ground-mounted solar collectors shall not exceed eight (8) feet in total height and shall
be located within the rear yard or side yard at least ten (10) feet inside the property line
and shall be screened from adjacent properties to the extent feasible.
c) All lines serving a ground-mounted solar system shall be located underground.
Section 464 Wind Turbines 127
Except as regulated by the Vermont Public Service Board, all wind turbines shall comply with the
following:
a) The wind turbine shall have a maximum output rating of fifteen (15) kilowatts.
b) The wind turbine shall be set back from property lines and roads at least two (2)
times the height of the overall wind turbine as measured to the top of the blade in a
vertical position. Setbacks may be reduced to one point five (1.5) times the height
of the overall tower if written consent from adjacent property owners is provided.
In no case shall the minimum setback for the wind turbine be less than the zoning
district minimum required setback.
c) Public access to the wind turbine shall be restricted through the use of a fence with
locked gates, non-climbable towers or other suitable methods.
d) Suitable warning signs containing a telephone number for emergency calls shall
face all approaches to the system. Individual signs shall be no larger than six (6)
square feet.
126 2014 New.
1272014 New.
89
e) The wind turbine shall be operated in such a manner that it does not exceed the
sound level limits of the Performance Standards.
f) The following measures shall be followed whenever feasible in order to minimize
the visual impact of the project:
(i) Removal of existing vegetation should be minimized.
(ii) Any accessory buildings should be painted or otherwise visually treated to
blend with the surroundings.
(iii) The turbine should be painted with non-reflective paint to blend with the
surroundings.
g) All utility connection lines serving a wind turbine system shall be located
underground.
Section 465 Public Utility Substations128
Public Utility substations and similar utility structure, where permitted, shall comply with the
following requirements:
a) The facility shall be surrounded by a fence set back from the property lines in
conformance with the district regulations for front, side, and rear yards.
b) A landscaped area at least twenty-five (25) feet wide shall be maintained in front,
rear, and side yards.
128 Same as 1973 Section 318.
90
ARTICLE V Subdivision of Land129
Section 501 DRB Approval
No land may be subdivided except with DRB approval. At its option, an applicant may seek DRB
approval in one (1) (final) or two (2) stages (preliminary and final).
Section 502 Preliminary Subdivision
502.1 Application. Application for preliminary subdivision approval shall be made to the
administrative officer on a form provided by the town for that purpose. A completed preliminary
subdivision application shall include the following:
a) A statement indicating whether the applicant proposes to connect to either public
or off-site water or sewer.
b) A proposed plat, which shall be twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches
outside dimensions, prepared by a Vermont licensed land surveyor. The plat shall
be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of no more than one (1) inch equals forty
(40) feet. The proposed plat must show all of the following as applicable:
(i) Subdivision name or title, address, scales, north arrow indicating magnetic
and true north, date, and legend;
(ii) Names and addresses of the applicant, designer, and other parties to the
subdivision;
(iii) Vicinity map, drawn at a scale of one inch equals six hundred (600) feet,
showing boundary lines of adjoining developed and undeveloped land
within an area bounded by nearest arterial streets or other boundaries that
are natural; identifying type of use and ownership of surrounding land and
showing alignments of existing streets;
(iv) Total acreage of subdivision and number of lots proposed;
(v) Exact boundary lines of the tract by bearings and distances with such
measurements tied into a permanently set or established reference point and
the boundaries of contiguous properties.
(vi) The flood elevation levels if all or some of the parcel(s) lie within a Floodprone
area.
c) An eleven (11) inch by seventeen (17) inch copy of the proposed plat as well as a
digital version of the proposed plat in a form reasonably acceptable to the
administrative officer.
129 2014 Adapted from 1974 subdivision ordinance; Amended December 27, 2005.
91
d) For proposed subdivisions comprising four (4) or more lots, a site plan which shall
be twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches outside dimension drawn to
scale of no more than one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet showing all of the following
as applicable:
(i) Physical features such as water courses with respective buffers, wetlands
with respective buffers, rock outcrops, wooded areas, slopes in excess of
fifteen (15) percent, significant trees with a diameter at breast height of six
(6) inches or greater, and other significant natural or cultural features, and
soil boring data at locations and depths as may be reasonably required by
the administrative officer or city engineer to carry out the purposes and
intent of this chapter.
(ii) Existing and proposed contours at vertical intervals of not more than twenty
(20) feet with elevations indicated in feet above or below a designated
benchmark except where the town engineer may require further delineation
of the topography.
(iii) Proposed layout including streets and alleys with proposed street names, lot
lines with approximate dimensions, approximate location of proposed
structures including public facilities and land to be reserved or dedicated for
public use. Where only a portion of a larger parcel is being subdivided, the
DRB may require a complete site plan of the entire parcel so as to examine
the partial development to be sure it does not adversely affect the
arrangement and continuity of the overall design. The site plan of the entire
parcel shall indicate the types of land uses, densities, and vehicular
accessibility.
(iv) Zoning district and overlay district boundaries of all areas shown on the site
plan.
(v) An eleven (11) inch by seventeen (17) inch copy of the proposed site plan
as well as a digital version of the proposed site plan in a form reasonably
acceptable to the administrative officer.
502.2 Preliminary Subdivision Approval. A subdivision may be preliminarily approved with
conditions, only if the DRB determines that it complies with the following criteria:
a) Protection of important natural features. The arrangement of blocks and lots shall
preserve watercourses, wetlands, steep slopes, flood-prone areas, rock
outcroppings, wildlife habitat and travel corridors, specimen trees and contiguous
stands of forest, and other sensitive ecological and geological areas to the extent
practicable.
b) Block size and arrangement. The size and arrangement of new blocks shall
maintain the size and arrangement of existing neighborhood blocks within the
zoning district and, where feasible, support the pattern of interconnected streets
92
throughout the town. Except as allowed by Article VI of this ordinance, all lots
shall be sized to comply or allow compliance with the quantitative standards
applicable to the zoning district where the lot is located.
c) Arrangement and size of lots. The size and arrangement of new lots shall reflect
and perpetuate the existing development pattern of the surrounding neighborhood.
Lots shall be created in such a way as to enable their development pursuant to the
requirements of this ordinance, and ensure a clear transfer of title.
Interior lot lines extending from a street should be perpendicular or radial to the
street right-of-way line to the greatest extent feasible. Flag lots and through lots
are discouraged, and shall be allowed only to the extent that topography and
existing block and lot arrangement allow no suitable alternative. A minimum
frontage for access of twenty (20) feet shall be required for all flag lots.
d) Connectivity of sidewalks, trails, and natural systems. The established sidewalk
network shall be maintained and extended to the extent possible. Trail networks
and uninterrupted corridors of green space outside of the established street grid
should be maintained and extended wherever possible.
Section 503 Final Subdivision
503.1 Application. Application for final subdivision approval shall be made to the administrative
officer on a form provided by the town for that purpose. For proposed subdivisions comprising
four (4) or more lots final subdivision application and approval is required. The Development
Review Board may waive Final Subdivision application and approval for subdivisions comprising
four (4) or fewer lots, that meet district lot requirements for size and road frontage on an existing
town road or highway. A completed application for final subdivision approval shall include the
following:
a) Those items required to complete an application for preliminary subdivision
approval.
b) For proposed subdivisions requiring the construction of roadways and/or that
include sidewalks, typical cross sections of the proposed grading and specifications
for roadways and sidewalks.
c) For those subdivisions that include connection with the town water supply system
or a community water system serving four or more users, plans and specifications
for the connecting and distribution system.
d) For those subdivisions that include the connection with the town sanitary sewage
system or a community disposal system serving four or more users, plans and
specifications for such connecting and collection systems.
93
e) For those subdivisions that are in a flood prone area assurance that such proposals
meet minimum development requirements to minimize flood damage.
[60.3(a)(4)(i)]130
f) Plans and specifications for any bridges or culverts that will be required.
g) A plan showing all parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public and a written
description of the terms of such dedication.
h) Evidence of compliance with the criteria required for final subdivision approval but
not required for preliminary subdivision approval.
i) Erosion and sedimentation control plan including temporary and permanent
measures to meet the most current town, state and federal water quality standards.
j) Proposed street tree planting including proposed species, size, and spacing.
k) Storm water treatment and drainage analysis.
503.2 Final Subdivision Approval. A subdivision may be finally approved, with conditions, only
if the DRB determines that the applicant is not in default of any obligations under this ordinance
and that proposal complies with the following:
a) Those criteria required for preliminary subdivision approval.
b) The following specifications for roads.
(i) Standards. The minimum requirements for road construction as established
by the select board, if any, but in no event shall all roads be constructed at
least to the standards required by the State of Vermont for Class 3 highways.
(ii) Horizontal and vertical curves. No horizontal curve shall have a center line
radius of less than one hundred and fifty (150) feet. For changes in grade
exceeding one (1) percent, a vertical curve shall be provided ensuring a
minimum sight distance of one hundred and fifty (150) feet.
(iii) Grades. Street grades shall be adequate to provide satisfactory drainage.
The maximum allowable grade shall be ten (10) percent. In no case shall a
grade greater than eight (8) percent be allowed at or within one hundred
fifty (150) feet of an intersection. However, the DRB may authorize on a
cul-de-sac street, a maximum grade not to exceed twelve (12) percent for a
total distance not to exceed nine hundred (900) feet provided that a grade of
not greater than eight (8) percent is permitted at or within one hundred and
fifty (150) feet of an intersection. For grades in excess of eight (8) percent,
the DRB may require safety features as deemed necessary, such as guard
rails and extended shoulders
130 2014 New: NLIP (FEMA) regulations 60.3(a)(4)(i)
94
(iv) Intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as
possible, and no intersection shall be at an angle of less than sixty (60)
degrees.
(v) Tangents. A tangent of at least one hundred (100) feet in length shall be
introduced between reverse curves on all proposed streets.
(vi) Street jogs. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than one hundred
twenty-five (125) feet shall not be allowed.
(vii) Street maintenance. Every lot in a subdivision shall be served from a
publicly dedicated road except the DRB may approve access from private
roads upon a showing of suitable provisions for their maintenance.
(viii) Access road. The DRB may require the applicant to improve any access
road to the subdivision to the appropriate street standards provided in these
regulations if such access would otherwise be inadequate, provided that the
town owns or provides the right-of-way.
(ix) Cul-de-sac. A cul-de-sac street shall not exceed twelve hundred (1,200)
feet in length and shall not provide entrance to other streets. However,
where the density is equal to or less than one (1) residential unit for each
two (2) acres, the DRB may increase the maximum length to two thousand
(2,000) feet. When there are six (6) residential units or less on cul-de-sac,
the DRB may modify the pavement width requirements, provided that the
applicant provides adequate off-street parking facilities. A turn-around
shall be provided with a minimum radius of fifty (50) feet at the end of all
cul-de-sacs. In the event that a proposed street and cul-de-sac is not to be
completed to its permanent turn-around at the time that the street is opened,
then and in that event the applicant shall provide a temporary turn-around
at the temporary terminus of said cul-de-sac. No cul-de-sac street shall be
designed to serve more than two hundred (200) lots including those abutting
on it and those abutting on streets served by the cul-de-sac street.
c) The following standards for other features and services:
(i) Curbs, sidewalks and bicycle facilities. Curbs, sidewalks and bicycle
facilities may be required by the DRB as recommended by Complete Streets
– A Guide for Vermont Communities published in September 2012 by the
Vermont Department of Health.
(ii) Water. In any subdivision having off-lot water, the existing public utility
system shall be extended so as to provide, or a community system shall
provide, the necessary quantity of water at acceptable pressure for fire
protection. If the applicant proposes to connect to the town water system,
the DRB may require the applicant to install at the applicant’s expense,
except as approved by the DRB, larger transmission lines and storage and
95
pumping facilities outside the subdivision if the water supply and pressure
within the subdivision would otherwise be inadequate or to the extent the
subdivision’s connection to the town’s water system reduces supply and
pressure so that they become inadequate for any user.
(iii) Sewerage. If the subdivision is within one-half (1/2) mile of the town sewer
system, the DRB may require connection to the town sewer system by the
applicant. The applicant may be required by the DRB to provide or to have
installed at the applicant’s expense, except as approved by the DRB, larger
sewer lines, pumping and other facilities, outside the subdivision if sewer
service within the subdivision would otherwise be inadequate or if the
subdivision connection to the town sewer system causes sewer service to be
reduced so that it is inadequate for any user.
(iv) Electric and communication lines. Electric and communications
distribution systems shall be underground, including services to residences
and to street lights unless waived by the DRB. The applicant shall
coordinate subdivision design with the utility companies to ensure adequate
and suitable area for underground installations.
(v) Fire protection facilities. Fire protection facilities as reasonably required
by the DRB.
(vi) Street lighting. Street lights shall be installed at the expense of applicant
according to lighting and spacing standards established by the select board
or as reasonably required by the DRB.
(vii) Street signs. All street signs and posts shall be provided and installed by
the town at expense of the applicant.
(viii) Removal of spring and surface water. The applicant may be required by the
DRB to carry away by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that
may exist either previous to or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage
facilities shall be located in the street right-of-way where feasible, or in
perpetual unobstructed easements benefitting the town of appropriate width.
(ix) Drainage structure to accommodate potential development. Culverts or
other drainage facilities shall, in each case, be large enough to accommodate
potential run-off from the entire subdivision including all land draining into
the subdivision.
(x) Responsibility for drainage downstream. Where the DRB reasonably
anticipates that the additional run-off incident to the development of the
subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility so that
there will be damage to private property or an increase in the expenditure
of public funds, the DRB shall not approve the subdivision until the
applicant and the select board agree to share the cost of the necessary
improvement required. The town’s share shall be based upon the portion of
96
run-off which the developed area downstream from the applicant’s
subdivision contributes to the necessary improvement, except that there
shall be credited to the town’s share that portion of the need which can be
met by existing facilities.
(xi) Other drainage. In design of the drainage system, natural waterways shall
be utilized to the full extent feasible. There shall be at least eighteen (18)
inches of cover over culverts crossing roadways and for culverts over fifteen
(15) inches in diameter the public works director may require additional
depth of cover. The minimum size culvert installed shall be twelve (12)
inches. Where catch basins are installed the street shall have curbing unless
the DRB shall approve an alternate. Open roadside drainage ditches in
excess of a five (5) percent grade shall be paved with stone or asphalt as
required by the DRB. All culverts shall have headers. Header design shall
be approved by the DRB. Wherever possible natural drainage courses shall
be extended across a road and not diverted to roadside drainage ditches.
(xii) Street names. Street names shall be as approved by the select board.
d) The following standards for open space and site preservation:
(i) Land with adequate access to and from public streets, shall be reserved for
open space and recreation area. Such land shall be either deeded to the town
or reserved for the common use of all property owners by covenant in the
deed as approved by the DRB. All area shall be of reasonable size, slope
and character for neighborhood playground or other recreational uses,
including open space. When the proposed density is two (2) residential
units or less for each acre of land within the subdivision ten (10) percent of
the area of the entire subdivision shall be reserved for open space and
recreation area. When the proposed density is greater than two (2)
residential units for each acre of land within the subdivision fifteen (15)
percent of the area of the entire subdivision shall be reserved for open space
and recreation area.
(ii) To the extent the DRB reasonably determines that due to the size,
topography, or location of the subdivision, land for park, playground or
other recreation purposes cannot be properly located therein, the applicant
will pay to the town a sum of money in an amount to be determined by the
select board. This cash payment shall be remitted to the town for either land
acquisition or development of public land for recreational purposes for the
benefit of the residents of the subdivision and the town.
(iii) The DRB may also require the filing of a written agreement between the
applicant and the select board covering future deed and title, dedication, and
provision for the cost of grading, development, equipment, and maintenance
of any such recreation area.
e) The following standards for site preservation and landscaping:
97
(i) Existing features. Existing features which would add value to the
subdivision, such as trees, watercourses and falls, brooks, historic spots and
similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved, insofar as possible, through
harmonious design.
(ii) Natural cover. Land shall be subdivided and improved in reasonable
conformity to existing topography in order to minimize grading, cut and fill,
and to retain, insofar as possible, the natural contours, limit storm water
runoff, and conserve the natural cover and soil. After application for
approval has been submitted to the Board, no topsoil, sand or gravel shall
be removed from the subdivision for any other purpose than to meet
construction needs for that particular subdivision or to meet any
requirements of these regulations.
(iii) Erosion and sediment control. Erosion and sediment shall be controlled
according to standards specified by the State of Vermont Agency of Natural
Resources for projects disturbing more than one (1) acre of ground.
f) The following standards for development in a flood plain, if applicable. When
a development is proposed in any area identified as an area of special flood hazard on the
“Flood Insurance Rate Map” and the “Floodway Map” accompanying the Flood Insurance
Study for the Town of St. Johnsbury, Vermont dated July 3, 1986, and now administered
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), which are hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be part of these ordinances, then the DRB shall require the
applicant to provide:
(i) Evidence that such application minimizes flood damage.
(ii) Evidence that public utilities and facilities will be constructed so as to
minimize flood damage.
(iii) Evidence that adequate drainage will be provided.
(iv) Evidence of base flood elevation data for any subdivision application
greater than fifty (50) lots.
Section 504 Security for Completion of Improvements
If the DRB grants final subdivision approval of the Subdivision Plat:
a) In an amount set by the DRB the applicant shall either file with the town clerk a
certified check to cover the full cost of the required improvements or the applicant shall
98
file with the town clerk a performance bond to cover the full cost of required
improvements. Any such bond shall be satisfactory to the select board and town
attorney as to form, sufficiency, manner of execution and surety. A period of one (1)
year (or such other period as the DRB may determine appropriate, not to exceed three
(3) years) shall be set forth in the bond within which required improvements must be
completed. The certified check or bond shall include an amount required for recreation
land or improvements as specified in this ordinance; or
b) The applicant shall complete all required improvements to the satisfaction of the town
engineer designated by the town manager for the project. For any required
improvements not so completed the applicant shall file with the town clerk a bond or
certified check covering the costs of such improvements and the cost of satisfactorily
installing any improvement not approved by the town engineer. Any such bond shall
be satisfactory to the select board and town attorney as to form, sufficiency, manner of
execution, and surety.
Section 505 Plats
Approved subdivision plats must be recorded as provided by 24 V.S.A. § 4463(b).
Note: 24 V.S.A. § 4463(b) provides as follows:
(b) Plat; record. The approval of the appropriate municipal panel shall expire 180
days from that approval or certification unless, within that 180-day period, that plat shall
have been duly filed or recorded in the office of the clerk of the municipality. After an
approved plat or certification by the clerk is filed, no expiration of that approval or
certification shall be applicable.
Section 506 Modification of Design Improvements
If at any time before or during the construction of the required improvements it is demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the town engineer designated by the town engineer for the project that
unforeseen conditions make it necessary or preferable to modify the location or design of such
required improvements, the town engineer may authorize modifications provided these
modifications are within the spirit and intent of the DRB’s approval and do not extend to the waiver
or substantial alteration of the function of any improvements required by the DRB. The town
engineer shall issue any authorization under this section in writing and shall transmit a copy of
such authorization to the DRB at its next regular meeting.
Section 507 Inspection of Improvements
At least five (5) days prior to commencing construction of required improvements the applicant
shall pay to the administrative officer an inspection fee equal to three (3) percent of the cost of the
proposed improvements as estimated by the town engineer designated by the town manager for
the project, or the actual cost of the proposed improvements to be owned by or dedicated to the
99
town as estimated by such engineer, or the actual cost of inspection, whichever is less, payable by
check to the town stating the purpose of the fee; and shall notify the select board in writing of the
time when he proposes to commence construction of such improvements so that the select board
can cause inspection to be made to assure that all town specifications and requirements shall be
met during the construction of required improvements, and to assure the satisfactory completion
of improvements and utilities required by the DRB.
Section 508 Proper Installation of Improvements
If the town engineer designated by the town manager for the project shall find, upon inspection of
the improvements performed before expiration date of the performance bond, that any of the
required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications
filed by the applicant, he shall so report to the select board, administrative officer and the DRB.
The select board then shall notify the applicant and, if necessary, the bonding company, and take
all necessary steps to preserve the town’s rights under the bond.
Section 509 Maintenance of Improvements
The applicant shall be required to maintain all improvements and provide for snow removal on
streets and sidewalks until acceptance of said improvements by the select board. The applicant
shall be required to file a maintenance bond or an irrevocable letter of credit with the select board,
prior to dedication, in an amount considered adequate by the town engineer designated by the town
manager for the project and in a form satisfactory to the select board and town attorney in order to
assure the satisfactory condition of the required improvements for a period not to exceed four (4)
years after the date of their acceptance by the DRB.
Section 510 Public Acceptance of Streets, Recreation Areas
510.1 The approval by the DRB of a plat shall not be deemed to constitute or be evidence of any
acceptance by the town of any street, easement, or other open space shown on such Subdivision
Plat.
510.2 When a school site, park, playground or other recreation area shall have been shown on the
plat, the approval of such plat shall not constitute an acceptance of ownership by the town of such
area.
100
ARTICLE VI Planned Residential and Unit Developments
As enabled by 24 V.S.A. § 4417, the DRB may waive the dimensional requirements governing lot
area, lot dimension, lot frontage and building coverage and the dimensional limitations for
structures governing front yard setback, side yard setback and rear yard setback of this ordinance
as part of a planned unit development (“PUD”) or a planned residential development (“PRD”), or
both, subject to the conditions set forth in this article.
Section 601 General Conditions
a) A PRD shall include only residential uses, home occupations, Class III childcare centers
and community care homes. A PRD may be permitted as a conditional use in all zoning
districts where dwelling units are allowed.
b) A PUD, including any permitted or conditional uses in the zoning district in which it is
located, may be conditionally approved in the MU, COM, IND and HS zoning districts.
Multiple principle structures and/or uses on a lot, or multiple ownership of a single
structure may be allowed.
c) The total number of units in the PUD or PRD shall not exceed the number that would be
permitted if the land were subdivided into lots in conformance with the zoning regulations
for the zoning districts in which such land is located.
Section 602 Applications
Applications for PUD or PRD approval shall be made to the administrative officer on forms
provided by the town for site plan or subdivision approval as applicable.
Section 603 Special Review Criteria
In addition to the general criteria required for conditional use approval, a PUD or PRD may be
approved by the DRB with conditions and only if it complies with the following:
a) Those criteria required for site plan and/or subdivision approval as applicable.
b) The PUD or PRD application does not conflict with any specific requirements of the town
plan.
c) The PUD or PRD is an effective and unified treatment of the development possibilities of
the project site. To the extent feasible, the development plan shall provide for protection
of the following features: streams, stream banks, and water bodies, aquifer recharge areas,
slopes greater than thirty (30) percent, wetlands, soils unsuitable for development,
agricultural lands, meadow lands, productive forest lands, historic features, unique natural
features as identified in the town plan, wildlife habitat, high elevations, ridge tops, and
floodplains.
101
ARTICLE VII Definitions
Certain words are defined for the purpose of this ordinance as follows:
A
Accessory Dwelling Unit: An efficiency or one-bedroom apartment that is clearly subordinate to
a single-family dwelling, and has facilities and provisions for independent living, including
sleeping, food preparation, and sanitation, provided there is compliance with all the following:
The property has sufficient wastewater capacity; The unit does not exceed 30 percent of the total
habitable floor area of the single-family dwelling; Applicable setback, coverage, and parking
requirements specified in the bylaws are met. 24 VSA §4412 (E)
Accessory structure or use: A use or detached structure on the same lot with, and of a nature
customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure. An accessory structure
shall not exceed, in area, fifty (50) percent of the principal structure. An accessory use shall not
exceed, in area, fifty (50) percent of the principal use. A residential accessory use or structure is
incidental and subordinate to a residential use or structure. A commercial accessory use is
incidental and subordinate to a commercial structure or use.
Adult entertainment: Any nightclub, bar or other business establishment, whether or not serving
alcoholic beverages, which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers,
strippers or similar entertainers, or which as a regular and substantial course of conduct offers,
sells or distributes adult oriented merchandise or sexually oriented merchandise, characterized by
an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities.
Agriculture: The cultivation or other use of land for growing food, fiber, Christmas trees, maple
sap, or horticultural and orchard crops; or the raising, feeding or management of livestock, poultry,
equines, fish or bees; or the operation of greenhouses; or the production of maple syrup; or the onsite
storage, preparation and sale of agricultural products principally produced on the farm; or the
on-site production of fuel or power from agricultural products or waste principally produced on
the farm.
Animal hospital: A place, including a veterinarian’s office, where animals or pets are given
medical or surgical treatment and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental
to the hospital use.
Area of shallow flooding: A designated AO or AH zone on the St. Johnsbury Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) with a one (1) percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth
of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized
by ponding or sheet flow.
Artist work space: Space used for the creation, display and sale of artistic work and crafts and
classes concerning such.
102
Assisted living facility: A building (1) containing private residential areas, each for up to two (2)
persons, (2) where assistance with daily living functions is provided for those who need it.
Auto service station: Any area of land, including structures thereon, that is used or designed to
be used for the retail supply of gasoline or oil or other fuel for the propulsion of motor vehicles
and which may include facilities used or designed to be used for polishing, greasing, washing,
spraying, dry cleaning or otherwise cleaning or servicing such motor vehicles.
B
Bank: An institution for receiving, lending, exchanging, and safe guarding money and, in some
cases, issuing notes and transacting of other financial business.
Banner: A temporary sign of flexible substrate on which copy or graphics may be displayed.
Basement: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Bed and breakfast: A dwelling in which accessory residential use is to support overnight
accommodations, with a morning meal, to provide the same to the general public for compensation
such that at least eighty-five (85) percent of the compensation is subject to the Vermont rooms and
meals tax.
Blast furnace: A furnace in which combustion is intensified by a blast of air.
Boarding house: (See: Lodging House) A residence occupied by more than five (5) people who
are not related in which rooms are rented with or without meals to guests for compensation.
Building: A structure with a roof.
Building coverage or coverage: The percentage of the lot area covered by a building. In
determining the percentage of building coverage of a lot or the size of yards, porches or carports
open at the sides but roofed, and all principal and accessory buildings shall be included.
Building front line: Line parallel to the front lot line transecting that point in the building face
which is closest to the front lot line. This face includes porches whether enclosed or unenclosed
but does not include steps.
Building height: Vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished
grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the roof for flat and mansard roofs, and to
the average height between eaves and ridge for other types of roofs.
C
103
Campground: Land upon which two (2) or more campsites are located, established or maintained
for occupancy by camping units of the general public as temporary living quarters for recreation,
education or vacation purposes.
Car wash: Any building or premises or portions thereof used for washing automobiles. Such
buildings may contain a chain conveyor or other method of moving cars along, and automatic or
semi-automatic application of cleaner, brushes, rinse water, and heat for drying.
Cemetery: Property used for the interning of the dead.
Child care: A home or facility where the owner or operator is to be licensed or registered by the
state for child care. Child care homes accommodating more than twelve (12) full-time children are
hereby designated Class I. Child care homes accommodating seven (7) to twelve (12) full-time
children are hereby designated Class II. Child care homes accommodating no more than six (6)
full-time children and four (4) part-time children, as defined in subdivision 33 VSA §4902(3)(A),
are hereby designated Class III. Child care homes accommodating six (6) or fewer full-time
children are hereby designated a permitted one (1) family residential use. (24 VSA §4412)
Church: A building which is erected or converted for use as a church or similar house of worship,
where services are regularly convened which is used primarily for religious worship and schooling
and which a reasonable person would conclude is a church by reason of design, signs, use or other
architectural features.
Clear Sight Triangle: Visibility of oncoming pedestrian and vehicular traffic requires a setback
distance that when measured creates a triangle. A property owner shall avoid placing anything
within this triangle that can obstruct clear view of traffic on the street, sidewalk, or driveway.
Club: Association of a civic, fraternal or social character in which public access or use is restricted.
Includes YMCA, YWCA, YMHA, fraternity, sorority, lodge, religious and similar clubs which
may have dormitory accommodation.
Commercial accessory use: The use by the resident owner of a minor portion of a structure or
lot, but in no event to exceed more than one (1) acre of land, in conjunction with a business whose
principal activity is conducted off site.
104
Commercial event venue: Outdoor spaces and/or whole or partial buildings, including, but not
limited to, barns and other accessory structures, offered to the public to conduct private or public
functions such as meetings, conferences, exhibits, banquets, and celebrations. Food and beverage
may be prepared and/or catered at these locations. Appropriate state and municipal licenses and
permits must be obtained.131
Commercial horse farm: A farm that derives over one-fourth (1/4) of its income from the sale of
equines or their services or from the boarding of equines (see also Riding Academy).
Commercial use: Any use carried out for pecuniary gain that involves the sale of products and/or
services to the general public.
Commercial outdoor advertising sign: A permanent off-premise sign erected, maintained or
used in the outdoor environment for the purpose of providing copy area for commercial or
non-commercial messages may be allowed only in conformance with State Law.
Community care home: A facility licensed by the Vermont Department of Health, or similar state
agency, as a Level III or IV residential care home.
Community center: A building used for the recreational, social, educational, and cultural
activities, usually owned and operated by a public or nonprofit group or agency.
Composting facility: A building or site used to promote the natural oxidation of wastes by
encouraging aerobic microbial activity.
Construction: see land development
Contractor: Any person who agrees to furnish materials or perform services at a specified price,
especially for construction.
Contractor’s yard: Any part of a lot which is used for the temporary or permanent storage of
equipment and/or materials necessary or common for a contractor’s business.
Controlled Substance Dispensary: A facility that sells or provides medical marijuana,
methadone or any Schedule 1 controlled substance as defined in the Controlled Substances Act
(Title II of the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention Control Act of 1970).
Convenience store: A retail store, including a mini-mart, specializing in a limited line of high
volume grocery, beverage, and related items and emphasizing fast service including pumps for the
sale of motor vehicle fuels.
Corner: The space between intersecting streets, the intersection of a street and an alley, the
intersection of a driveway and an alley or the intersection of a street and a driveway.
Cultural facilities: A building or land used for displaying, performing or teaching about the arts.
131 Added August 8, 2016; no petitions were filed.
105
D
Development: See Land Development
Dormitory: A building principally used to provide rooms for sleeping, usually without private
baths, including a fraternity, sorority, nurses’ home, rooms for public, private, college and
secondary school students.
Drive-in restaurant: Any place or premises, including a refreshment stand, used for sale,
dispensing or serving food, refreshments or beverages to people in automobiles, including those
establishments where customers may also serve themselves and may eat or drink the food,
refreshments or beverages on the premises.
Drive-in theater: An open lot used with its appurtenant facilities devoted primarily to the showing
of motion pictures or theatrical productions on a paid admission basis to patrons seated in
automobiles.
Dwelling unit: One (1) room, or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent
housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, rental or lease, and physically separated from
any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure, and containing independent
cooking and sleeping facilities. It shall include prefabricated, modular units and mobile homes,
but shall not include motel, hotel, or similar structures.
E
Earth resources removal Land from which sand, gravel, stone or other similar material is
quarried and processed for sale as a raw material.
Easement: The authorization of a property owner, for the use by another, and for a specified
purpose, of any designated part of his property.
Employee farm dwelling: A one (1) family dwelling, two (2) family dwelling or mobile home
occupied by full-time employees on an operating farm on which the farm dwelling is located.
Essential services: The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by public utilities or
municipal or other governmental agencies of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or
water transmission, or distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes,
conduit cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, street signs, and similar
equipment and accessories in connection therewith and including buildings, reasonably necessary
for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare.
Extended care facility: A facility which provides, on a regular basis, health related care and
services to individuals and the elderly who do not require the degree of care and treatment which
a hospital is designed to provide, but who, because of their mental or physical, condition, require
care, rehabilitation and services (above the level of room and board) which can be made available
to them only through institutional facilities such as these. Compare: assisted living facilities.
106
F
Family: One (1) or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, provided that unless all
members are legally related no such family shall contain over five (5) persons, but further provided
that domestic servants and farm workers employed on the premises may be housed on the premises
without being counted as a family or families.
fc: Foot-candle: A unit of illuminance on a surface that is everywhere one (1) foot from a uniform
point source of light of one (1) candle and equal to one (1) lumen per square foot.
Fence: A barrier, including a wall or a retaining wall, which interferes with passage.
Flag lot: A lot that is shaped like an extended flag with a narrow strip providing access to a street
and the bulk of the lot having no frontage.
Flood hazard area: The land subject to flooding from a base flood. “Base flood” means the flood
having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Further with
respect to flood and other hazard area regulation pursuant to 10 V.S.A. §753, Chapter 19, the
following terms shall have the following meanings:
a. Base Flood Elevation:
b. Floatable: Objects with specific gravity less than one (1).
c. Flood Insurance Rate Map: [FIRM] Official map of a community on which FEMA
has delineated the Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHAs), the Base Flood Elevations
(BFEs), and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
d. Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land that must
be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without accumulatively increasing the
water surface elevation more than one (1) foot.
e. Floor, lowest: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's
lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of the national Flood
Insurance Program regulations.
f. Substantial Improvement: Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure,
the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the
structure either before the improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been
damaged, and is being restored before the damage occurred. However the term does
not include either of the following: (1) any project or improvement or a structure to
comply with the existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications that
107
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or (2) any alteration of a structure
listed on the national register of historic places or a state inventory of historic places.
g. Substantial Damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a building whereby the cost
of restoring the building to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50
percent of the market value of the building before the damage occurred.
Forestry: Establishments primarily engaged in the operation of timber tracts, tree farms, forest
nurseries, the gathering of forest products.
Free-standing retail stand: A structure that is not attached to another structure that is used
exclusively for the sale of material or agricultural goods.
Free-standing sign: A sign principally supported by one (1) or more columns, poles, or braces
placed in or upon the ground.
Freight Storage Containers:132 133
Funeral home: A building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of
the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith.
G
Gross floor area: The floor area of space in a building that is designed for tenant occupancy or
use, including basements, utility and furnace rooms, mezzanines, and upper floors, if any;
expressed in square feet and measured from the outside side wall of any building.
H
Hazardous Materials: Highly flammable liquids or gasses (including, without limitation,
propane) or other inherently dangerous good, such as fireworks or explosives.
Health training facility: A facility that provides instruction for the health care providers,
administrators and trainees.
Hospital: A building where the sick or injured are given medical care, including a sanitarium,
clinic, and any other place for the diagnosis and treatment of human ailments.
Hot-mix plant: A manufacturing facility used to produce asphalt paving material for the paving
of roads, streets, parking lots, sidewalks and other areas that must have hard flat surface.
Hotel: A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public and providing
additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreation facilities. Such facilities
may also include one (1) dwelling unit for the owner or manager.
132 Approved July 12, 2017. No petitions were filed.
133 Removed July 12, 2017 Amendments declared null and void without legal force or effect per Order of Vermont
Superior Court, Environmental Division, in Re: Lucille B. Oakes Conditional Use Application 20170901-082 for a
Conditional Use as a Self-Storage Facility, Docket No.: 153-11-17 Vtec
108
I
IESNA: Illuminating Engineering Society of North America. An organization that recommends
standards for the lighting industry.
Improvements and Betterments: Fixtures, alterations, installations, or additions made or
acquired solely at a tenant’s expense and comprising part of an insured building.
Incinerator: A furnace used to reduce the volume of a waste-to-energy plant, including hazardous
waste, and a crematory.
Indoor theater: A building or room for the presentation of plays, motion pictures, or other
dramatic performances.
J
Junk yard (salvage yard): Any area of land including structures used for collecting, wrecking,
dismantling, storage, salvaging and sale of machinery parts or vehicles not in running condition.
K
Kennel: Any combination of structures, pens, areas or enclosures, covered or uncovered, where
six (6) or more dogs and cats are kept or raised for compensation.
L
Land development: The division of a parcel into two or more parcels, any construction on land,
including any that is covered even partially with water, including the demolition, construction,
reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any buildings or
other structures, of any excavation, mining, re-grading or filling, and any change in the category
of use of a building, other structure, or land, or extension of use of land, or a change in intensity
of such use such as adding dwelling units or the extension of other than residential activities to
new areas on any lot. [§4303(10)].
Large retail store: Shop or store comprising more than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet
gross floor area for the sale of retail goods, personal service shop and department store; and shall
exclude any drive-up service, free-standing retail stand, gasoline service and motor vehicle repair
service, new and used car sales service, trailer and mobile home sales and service, convenience
store, and controlled substance dispensary.134
Library: A building in which literary, musical, artistic, or reference materials, including computer
stations to reference such materials, are kept for use but not for sale.
Light Industrial: Uses engaged in prototype development, testing, repairing, manufacturing,
assembling, packaging, storage, and/or distribution of finished or semi-finished products
134 Amended Aug. 8, 2016; no petitions were filed.
109
conducted within a building, including wet labs, dry labs and/or clean rooms, and not having any
noxious or hazardous character. Uses with similar characteristics of the above-listed activities,
such as telecommunication hub facilities, may also be considered as light industrial uses.
Incidental administrative offices and sales areas occupying less than twenty (20) percent of the
gross floor area of the building are allowed.
Lodging house: (See Boarding House) A building in which the rooms are rented with or without
meals to three (3) or more persons. A boarding house or a rooming house or a furnished room shall
be deemed a lodging house.
Lot: A parcel of land.
Lot depth: The distance in feet between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost
points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.
Lot width: The distance in feet between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each
side of the lot, measured at the depth of the required front yard setback.
M
Manufactured Homes: See Mobile Home and Mobile Home Park
Manufacturing: Establishments engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of
materials, substances, into new products including the assembling of component parts and the
blending of materials such as lubricating, oils plastics, resins, or liquors.
Materials recovery facility (MRF): (See Recycling Center) A facility designed to remove
various materials from the waste stream whether located in a building or out in the open space.
Maximum number of dwelling units: The total allowed housing units that may be located on a lot is
determined by dividing the acreage of the lot in question by the "minimum lot area per family" provision
applicable to a lot as set forth in such table for the housing district as determined by whether water and
sewer are on the lot or off the lot. In all cases, the result of such division shall be rounded up to the nearest
whole number.
110
Medical office135: A medical facility in which one or more licenses medical doctors (e.g.: MD,
DDS, or DMD), usually receive and treat patients. Doctors’ offices are the primary place where
ambulatory care is given, and are often the first place that a sick person would go for care, except
in emergencies, in which case they would go to an emergency room or hospital for immediate
treatment.
Medical Laboratory:136: A medical facility (Level I, II, III, or IV) equipped for experimental
study in a science or for testing and analysis where tests are done on clinical specimens in order to
get information about the health of a patient as pertaining to the diagnosis, treatment, and
prevention of disease. A medical laboratory is a place that is equipped with different instruments,
equipment, and chemicals (reagents), etc., for performing experimental works, research activities
and investigative procedures.
1. Basic Laboratory Level I: The simplest kind and adequate for work with biological
specimens and organisms which have low risk to the individual laboratory personnel as
well as to the members of the community.
2. Basic Laboratory Level II: Suitable for work with organisms that predispose to moderate
risk to the laboratory worker and a limited risk to the members of the community. Such
organisms are categorized under Risk Group II by The World Health Organization (WHO).
They can cause serious human diseases, but not serious hazards due to the availability of
effective preventive measures and treatment. Such laboratory should be clean, provide
enough space, have adequate sanitary facilities and be equipped with autoclave.
3. Containment Laboratory (Level III): More advanced and is used for work with
infectious organisms that present a high risk to the laboratory personnel, but a lower risk
to the community. Such organisms are categorized under Risk Group III by WHO. The
principle is to remove from the basic laboratory those organisms and activities which are
particularly hazardous. They are easily transmitted through airborne, ingestion of
contaminated food or water and parenterally. Such laboratory should be a separate room
with controlled access by authorized staff.
4. Maximum Containment Laboratory (Level IV): Intended for work with viruses, which
predispose to a high risk for both laboratory personnel and the community. Such organisms
are categorized under Risk Group IV by WHO. Most of these organisms cause serious
disease and are readily transmitted from one person to another. These laboratories are
usually a separate building with strictly controlled access.
Mobile home: Mobile home means a prefabricated dwelling unit which: (a) is designed for long
term and continuous residential occupancy; (b) is designed to be moved on wheels, as a whole or
in sections; (c) on arrival at the site, is complete and ready for occupancy, except for incidental
unpacking, assembly, connections with utilities, and placing on support or a permanent foundation,
or installation as a unit in a previously prepared structure; and (d) meets all other criteria and
standards established by rule of the appropriate state agency for distinguishing mobile homes from
other types of residential units.
Mobile home park or subdivision: Land on which two (2) or more mobile homes are parked and
occupied for living purposes.
135 Amended July 13, 2015; no petitions were filed.
136 Added July 13, 2015; no petitions were filed.
111
Motel: Building containing rooms which are rented as a series of sleeping units usually accessed
from the outside for automobile transients, each sleeping units consisting of at least a bedroom and
bathroom. Such facilities may also include a single dwelling unit for the owner or manager.
Motor home: Any vehicle meeting all of the following requirements:
(a) Is built on a single chassis;
(b) Is four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
(c) Is designed to be self-propelled;
(d) Is designed primarily to be temporary living quarters for recreational, camping,
travel, or seasonal use.
Motor vehicle sales and repair facility: Enclosed establishment for the display, sale and repair
of new and used motor vehicles, trailers, mobile homes, and boats without retail sale of gasoline
or oil except as incidental to the repair facility.
Multi-family dwelling: A residential building designed for or occupied by three (3) or more
families, with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units
provided.
Municipal use: Activity or use carried on or operated by or for the town.
N
Neighborhood commercial facility: Any building that is compatible and cohesive with the
neighboring area, comprises multiple stories and not more than five thousand (5,000) square feet
in gross floor area intended principally to serve the neighborhood in which it is located and may
include commercial facilities designed to serve an area beyond the neighborhood. Examples
include, but are not limited to: grocery, general, newspaper or drug store or retail service
establishment.
Newspaper and job printing: Any business involved in the production of newspapers,
magazines, books, pamphlets, or other materials where images and/or text is produced on paper or
other materials using ink and a press or other machinery
Nonconforming structure: A structure or part of a structure that does not conform to a section of
this ordinance but was otherwise in conformance with this ordinance prior to the enactment of
such sections.
Nonconforming use: A use of land that does not conform to any section of this ordinance that
was otherwise in conformance with this ordinance prior to the enactment of that section.
Non-residential use: All uses of buildings, structures, or land except one (1) family dwellings,
two (2) family dwellings and multi-family dwellings.
112
Nursery: Buildings, including greenhouse, structures and gardens where plants are grown for sale,
transplanting, or experimentation and the sale of accessory retail products associated therewith.
Nursing home: A facility licensed by the Vermont Department of Health, or similar state agency,
as a Level I or II residential care home.
O
Office: Place where the business of a commercial, industrial, service or professional organization
is transacted.
Official Submittal Date: The time of submission of the Subdivision Plan considered to be the
date of the regular monthly meeting of the Development Review Board following the submission
of the application for the Plat approval to the Secretary of the Development Review Board,
complete and accompanied by the required fee and all data required in Article V, of these
regulations as long as such submission occurred at least ten (10) days prior to such regular
meetings.
Off-lot water or sewer: The providing of water from a source or the disposal of the sewage not
located on the lot on which is located the building for which these utilities are provided.
On-lot water or sewer: The providing of water from a source such as a drilled well or the disposal
of the sewage by such means as septic and drainage field located on the same lot as the building
these utilities serve.
One (1) family dwelling: A detached residential dwelling unit designed for and occupied by one
(1) family only.
Outdoor light fixture: An electronically powered illuminating device containing a total light
source of more than one thousand eight hundred (1,800) initial lumens per fixture or any spot or
flood luminaire with a reflector contained in the lamp component such as a parabolic aluminized
reflector (PAR) lamp, of more than nine hundred (900) initial lumens, which is permanently
installed outdoors, including but not limited to, devices used to illuminate any site, architectural
structure, or sign.
Outdoor wood-fired furnace, boiler, or stove: A structure excluding a structure when used to
burn wood pellets that:
(a) Is designed, intended, or used to provide heat and/or hot water to any residence or
other structure; and
(b) Operates by the burning of wood; and
(c) Is not located within a structure used for human or animal habitation.
113
Overlay: The St. Johnsbury Zoning Map provides information which is superimposed over the
existing districts to outline such areas as Design Control, Water and Sewer locations, and other
pertinent information as required by the Planning Commission (transportation, etc.).
P
Parallel Sign: A sign that is mounted within one (1) foot of the wall of any building or parallel to
the plane of any wall and not more than one (1) foot outside such plane.
Pellet: A rounded or spherical body with no dimension greater than one (1) inch.
Performance Bond: A surety bond issued by an insurance company or a bank to guarantee
satisfactory completion of a project by a contractor.
Person: An individual, a corporation, a limited liability company, a partnership, an association
and any other incorporated or unincorporated organization or group.
Pet Services:137 138
PRD: A planned residential development subject to Article VI hereof.
Primary street: A street or road providing through access for an average of five hundred (500) or
more cars per day.
Private swimming pool: A pool of water located outdoors for swimming or bathing appurtenant
to a residence and used only by the occupants of the residence and their guests without
compensation.
Projecting Sign: A sign that extends more than one (1) foot from the side of a building on which
it is mounted.
Public: Not restricted; available to or for the general population.
Public building or facility: A building or facility owned, used and controlled for public purposes
by any department or branch of governments, state, county or municipal.
PUD: A planned unit development subject to Article VI hereof.
R
Recreation facility: Indoor or outdoor building, structure or land principally used for activity,
exercise or sport including seating for observation including swimming pools, water slides,
beaches, playgrounds, ball fields, tennis courts, ski hills and jumps, picnic areas, campfires.
137 Approved July 12, 2017. No petitions were filed.
138 Removed July 12, 2017 Amendments declared null and void without legal force or effect per Order of Vermont
Superior Court, Environmental Division, in Re: Lucille B. Oakes Conditional Use Application 20170901-082 for a
Conditional Use as a Self-Storage Facility, Docket No.: 153-11-17 Vtec
114
Recycling center: An area of land including structures used to separate and process for reuse
material that has been extracted from the waste stream.
Rehabilitation center: A facility that provides short-term, primarily in-patient care treatment
and/or rehabilitation service to persons recovering from mental or physical illness or injury who
do not require continued hospitalization but do require medical or psychiatric treatment.
Rendering plant: A facility used for reducing, melting, coating or converting materials by
heating.
Renewable energy resources: Energy available for collection, or conversion from direct sunlight,
wind, running water, organically derived fuels, including wood and agricultural sources, waste
heat and geothermal sources.
Research or testing laboratory: An establishment or other facility for carrying on investigation
in the natural, physical, or social sciences, or engineering and development as an extension of
investigation with the objective of creating end products.
Residential Care Home:139 A place, however named, excluding a licensed foster care home,
which provides for profit or otherwise, room, board, and personal care to three or more residents
unrelated to the licensee. These include Level I, II, III, and IV facilities as licensed by the State of
Vermont.
1. Nursing Home: A level I or II Residential Care Home.
2. Level III Community Care Home: A Residential Care Home licensed and required to
provide room, board, personal care, general supervision, medication management, and
nursing overview.
3. Level IV Community Care Home: A Residential Care Home licensed and required to
provide room, board, personal care, general supervision, and medication management.
Residential use: Includes one (1) family dwelling, two (2) family dwelling and multi-family
dwelling.
Restaurant: (See Restaurant/Bar) An eating establishment not licensed to serve alcohol.
Restaurant/Bar: Eating and drinking establishments serving the general public
Retail service: Establishments providing services or entertainment, as opposed to products, to the
general public, including but not limited to finance, real estate and insurance, photography studios,
hair care and grooming services, amusements and recreation services, health, educational and
social services, or dental or eye care offices.140
Retail store: Shop and store comprising twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet or less of gross
floor area for the sale of retail goods, personal service shop and department store; and shall exclude
any drive-up service, temporary stands or vehicles used by street vendors, gasoline service and
139 Added September 15, 2015; no petitions were filed.
140 Amended Aug. 8, 2016; no petitions were filed.
115
motor vehicle repair service, new and used car sales service, trailer and mobile home sales and
service, convenience store, and controlled substance dispensary.141
S
Sandwich board (A-frame; V-sign): A portable sign that is portable and may be removed during
non-business hours containing two (2) faces of equal size not to exceed eight (8) square feet per
side.
Sanitary landfill: Land that is set aside and developed pursuant to 10 V.S.A., Chapter 159 for the
disposal of municipal solid waste but not hazardous waste.
School: Includes areas for campuses, athletic activities, recreation activities, and buildings for
academic and instructional purposes.
Secure residential facility: A prison, jail or other facility for the detention of criminal offenders
or alleged criminal offenders, or a residential facility used for mental health treatment and
rehabilitation.
Secondary street: A street that is not a primary street.
Self-Storage Unit142 143:
Setback: The nearest distance between any part of a building and a lot line.
Back lot line (Back Yard)
Side lot line Side lot line (Side Yard)
(Side Yard)
Shielded light fixture: A light fixture with cutoff optics that allows no direct light emissions above
a vertical cutoff angle of ninety (90) degrees above nadir (straight down at perfect vertical),
through the light fixture’s lowest light emitting part. Any structural part of the light fixture
providing this cutoff angle must be permanently affixed.
141 Amended Aug. 8, 2016; no petitions were filed.
142 Approved July 12, 2017; no petitions were filed.
143 Removed July 12, 2017 Amendments declared null and void without legal force or effect per Order of Vermont
Superior Court, Environmental Division, in Re: Lucille B. Oakes Conditional Use Application 20170901-082 for a
Conditional Use as a Self-Storage Facility, Docket No.: 153-11-17 Vtec
116
Sign: Any device visible from a public place whose essential purpose and design is to convey
either commercial or non-commercial messages by means of graphic presentation of alphabetic or
pictorial symbols, objects or representations.
Slaughter house: A building or place where animals are butchered for food.
Smelter: A place where metals are processed by fusing or melting the ore containing the metal
being processed.
Start of Construction: For other than new construction or substantial improvements, under the
Coastal Barrier Resources Act (CBRA), this is the date when the building permit was issued,
provided that the actual start of construction, repair, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a building on site, such as the pouring of a slab or footing,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation;
or the placement of a manufactured (mobile) home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement,
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Street: Public way for vehicular traffic which affords the principal means of access to abutting
properties.
Structure: An assembly of materials for occupancy or use including a building, mobile home or
trailer, sign, wall, fence, or pavement.
Subdivision: A change in the boundaries of one (1) or more lots including a change that adds lots.
Summer camp and retreat: A parcel of land, with or without buildings, providing facilities for
sleeping and eating, and usually for learning or participating in swimming, boating, handicrafts,
outdoor games, etc., especially such a camp as attended by children for two (2) or more days during
the summer.
Swimming pool: A pool of water twenty-four (24) inches or greater in depth either indoors or
outdoors and is used for swimming or water related recreations. This also includes spas and hot
tubs.
T
Taxi: The use of any land or structures including office, dispatch and waiting areas for the
provision for compensation of transportation for people or packages or other freight in or on cars
or boats.
Temporary Overnight Shelter:144 A place where people experiencing homelessness stay
overnight for a limited period of time. Descriptions of Temporary Overnight Shelters include:
144 Approved October 5, 2015; no petitions were filed.
117
1. Shelters that operate on a first-come, first-served basis where people must leave in
the morning and have no guarantee of a bed for the next night; or
2. Shelters where people know that they have a bed for a specified period of time as
defined by the managing organization (even if they leave the building every day);
or
3. Shelters that provide temporary shelter due to weather conditions.
This category does not include shelters that operate only in the event of a natural disaster to
accommodate large numbers of displaced residents.
Through lot: A lot that connects to two (2) generally parallel streets.
Transfer station: An area of land, including structures, used as a facility for the temporary
assemblage of solid waste.
Transitional Residence:145 A residential facility operated by a government agency or private
non-profit organization that provides living accommodations to people who previously resided in
a prison, a psychiatric care facility or an addiction treatment facility.
Travel trailer: Any vehicle, including a mobile home, travel trailer or camper, designed for
regular travel on streets and highways, intended to provide temporary sleeping quarters for one (1)
or more persons without being installed on land and permanently connected to utility services.
Trucking terminal: A lot used to park commercial trucks and/or trailers when they are not is use.
This does not apply to trucks or trailers that are non-operational (junk trucks).
Two (2) family dwelling: A detached residential building with two (2) dwelling units.
V
Variance: A grant of relief, or allowed modification, by a participating community from the terms
of its zoning regulations for a singular permit application. A variance may be granted to a use
restriction or an area restriction.
Use Variance: Most zoning ordinances specify the uses (activities) permitted within each
zoning district. The ordinance, enabling statutes, or court precedents may
allow the local jurisdiction to grant a variance to the use restriction when
certain factors, see section 206.4 24 V.S.A. § 4469, are met. For instance,
apartments may be prohibited in a district intended primarily for single-family
homes. But it may be possible to obtain a variance for the addition of a granny
apartment within a single family home.
Area Variance: An area variance would be needed to reduce, say, the minimum setback
required from the front of a proposed building to the edge of a street or a
variance might be granted to the minimum acreage required to build a home.
Violation: The act of breaking or disregarding the rules and regulations.
145 Amended October 5, 2015; no petitions were filed.
118
W
Waiver: Occasionally land use ordinances will allow for a waiver of specific requirements if
certain conditions are met. For instance, an applicant might receive a waiver from storm water
management requirements if it was determined the project would not cause adverse impacts
downstream.
Waiver fee: The payment that is made for a person to “waive” or relinquish a specific right (e.g.
the right to a hearing) with respect to an action of the court. For purposes of this ordinance, when
a party is issued a municipal complaint ticket with a penalty fee and also a waiver fee, that party
may consent to no hearing and instead pay only the designated “waiver” fee and send the payment
with the ticket form in accordance with the procedures of the Judicial Bureau.
Warehouse: Facilities for the storage of furniture, household goods or other commercial goods of
any nature and establishments engaged in selling merchandise to retailers and to industrial,
commercial, institutional, farm or professional business users or for selling merchandise to such
person or companies. This does not include facilities selling large lots at retail with or without a
discount.
Water storage facility: Any facility, manmade or natural, used for the storage of drinking water,
the storage of water for industrial purposes, or any other non-recreational purpose including the
retention of flood waters.
Wetlands: Those areas of the town that are inundated by surface or ground water with a frequency
sufficient to support vegetation or aquatic life that depend on saturated or seasonally saturated soil
conditions for growth and reproduction. Such areas include marshes, swamps, sloughs, fens, river
and lake overflows, mudflats, bogs, and ponds but excluding such areas as grow food or crops in
connection with farming activities.
Wholesale distribution service (non-petroleum): Establishments or places of business primarily
engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional
business users; or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for,
or selling to, such individuals or companies. This term shall not include the wholesale distribution
of petroleum products.
Wholesale distribution (petroleum products): Establishments or places of business primarily
engaged in the wholesale distribution of petroleum products.
Wireless communication facilities: A wireless communications facility consists of the equipment
and structures at a particular site involved in receiving telecommunication or radio signals from
mobile radio communication sources and transmitting those signals to a central switching
computer that connects the mobile unit with the land-based telephone lines. The following defined
terms are associated with Wireless Communication Facilities only.
(a) Adequate coverage: Coverage is adequate within that area surrounding a base
station where the predicted or measured median field strength of the transmitted
signal is such that the majority of the time transceivers properly installed and
operated will be able to communicate with the base station without objectionable
119
noise (or excessive bit-error rate for digital) and without calls being dropped. In the
case of cellular communications in a rural environment, this would be a signal
strength of at least ninety (90) dBm. It is acceptable for there to be holes within the
area of adequate coverage as long as the signal regains its strength further away
from the base station at the outer boundary of the area of adequate coverage,
however is that location past which the signal does not regain.
(b) Adequate capacity: Capacity is considered adequate if the grade of service is p.05
or better for at least fifty (50) percent of the days in preceding month, prior to the
date of application, as measured using direct traffic measurement of the
telecommunications facility in question, where the call blocking is due to frequency
contention at the antenna(s).
(c) Affiliate: When used in relation to an operator, another person who directly or
indirectly owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common
ownership or common control with the operator, or an operators principal partners,
shareholders, or owners of some other ownership interest; and when used in relation
to the municipality, any agency, board, authority or political subdivision affiliated
with the municipality or other person in which the municipality has legal or
financial interest.
(d) Antenna: A device that is attached to a communications tower or other structure
for transmitting and receiving electromagnetic waves.
(e) Antenna height: The vertical distance measured from the base of the antenna
support structure at grade to the highest point of the structure. If the support
structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the highest and lowest
grades shall be used in calculating the antenna height.
(f) Antenna support structure: Any pole, telescoping mast, tower tripod, or any
other structure which supports a device used in transmitting and/or receiving of
electromagnetic waves.
(g) Applicant: A person who applies for a telecommunications facility. An applicant
can be the telecommunications service provider, or the owner of the property.
(h) Available space: The space on a tower or structure to which antennas of a
telecommunications provider are both structurally able and electromagnetically
able to be attached.
(i) Base station: The primary sending and receiving site in a telecommunications
facility network. More than one (1) base station and/or more than one (1) variety of
telecommunications providers can be located on a single tower or structure.
(j) Bulletin 65: Published by the FCC Office of Engineering and Technology
specifying radio frequency radiation levels and methods to determine compliance.
120
(k) Camouflaged: A Wireless Communications Facility that is designed to blend into
the surrounding environment. It may be placed within an existing or proposed
structure disguised or hidden by a compatible part of an existing or proposed
structure, or made to resemble an architectural feature of the building or structure
on which it is placed. Examples of camouflaged facilities may include
architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted antennas
painted to match the existing structure, antennas integrated into architectural
elements, and antenna structures designed to look like light poles, or artificial trees,
clock towers, bell steeples, light poles, silos and similar alternative-design
mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
(l) Cellular service: A telecommunications service that permits customers to use
wireless, mobile telephones to connect via low-powered radio transmission sites
called cell sites, either to the public switchboard network or to mobile cellular
phones.
(m) Cellular telecommunications facility: See Wireless Communication Facility.
(n) Channel: The segment of the radiation spectrum to or from an antenna that carries
one (1) signal. An antenna may radiate on many channels simultaneously.
(o) Co-location: Locating wireless communication equipment from more than one (1)
provider on a single site.
(p) Common carrier or provider: An entity licensed by the FCC or a state agency to
supply local and/or long distance telecommunications services to the general public
at established and stated rates.
(q) Communications equipment shelter: A structure located at the base station
designed principally to enclose equipment used in connection with
telecommunications transmission.
(r) Communications facility: A land facility supporting antennas and microwave
dishes that sends and/or receives radio frequency signals. Communication facilities
may include structures, towers or accessory buildings.
(s) Communications tower: A guyed, monopole or self-supporting tower,
constructed as a free-standing structure or in association with a building, other
permanent structure or equipment, containing one (1) or more antennas intended
for transmitting and/or receiving television, AM/FM radio, digital, microwave,
cellular, telephone, or similar forms of electronic communication.
(t) Concealed: A Wireless Communications Facility that is entirely contained within
the architectural features of a building or other structure the use of which is
otherwise permitted under the zoning ordinances of the town and which is not
visible from outside the structure. Antennas and other components of a wireless
communications facility situated within a free-standing wireless communication
facility shall not be deemed concealed.
121
(u) dBm: Unit of measure of the power level of a signal expressed in decibels above
one (1) milliwatt.
(v) dBu: Unit of measure of the electronic field strength of a signal expressed in
absolute measure for describing service areas and comparing different transmitting
facilities independent of the many variables (see dBm above) introduced by
different receiver configurations.
(w) Electromagnetically able: The determination that the signal from and to the
proposed new antenna will not significantly interfere with the existing signals from
and to other facilities or antennas located on the same tower or structure as
determined by a qualified professional telecommunications engineer. The use of
available technologies to alleviate such interference shall be considered when
making this determination.
(x) Facility site: A property, or any part thereof, which is owned or leased by one (1)
of more telecommunications facility(s) and where required landscaping is located.
(y) FCC: Federal Communications Commission.
(z) FCC 97-303: A report and order that sets new national standards for exposure to
radio frequency emissions from FCC-regulated transmitters.
(aa) Frequency: The number of cycles completed each second by an electromagnetic
wave measured in Hertz (Hz).
(bb) GHz: GigaHem: One billion Hertz.
(cc) Grade of service: A measure of the percentage of calls that are able to connect to
the base station during the busiest hours of the day. Grade of service is expressed
as a number, such as p.05 which means that ninety-five (95) percent of callers will
connect on their first try. A lower number (for example, p.04) indicates a better
grade of service.
(dd) Hertz: One (1) Hertz is the frequency of an electric or magnetic field which
reverses polarity once each second, or one (1) cycle per second.
(ee) Location: References to site location shall be the exact longitude and latitude, to
the nearest tenth of a second. Bearing or orientation should be referenced to true
North.
(ff) Modifications of an existing facility: Any change, or proposed change in power
input or output, number of antennas, change in antenna type or model repositioning
of antenna(s), change in number of channels per antenna above the maximum
number approved under an existing permit.
122
(gg) Modifications of an existing tower: Any change, or proposed change in
dimensions of an existing and permitted tower or other structure designed to
support telecommunications transmission, receiving and/or relaying and/or
equipment.
(hh) Micro-cell: A low power mobile radio service telecommunications facility used to
provide increased capacity in high call demand areas or to improve coverage in
areas of weak coverage.
(ii) MHZ: Megahertz, or one million (1,000,000) Hertz.
(jj) Microwave: Electromagnetic radiation with frequencies approaching I,00DN*IZ,
including UBF, extending to infrared frequencies; highly directional signal used to
transmit radio frequencies from point-to-point at a relatively low power level.
(kk) Microwave antenna: A dish like antenna manufactured in many sizes and shapes
used to link communication sites together by wireless transmission of voice or data.
(ll) Monitoring: The measurement, by the use of instruments in the field, or nonionizing
radiation exposure from the telecommunication facilities, towers, antennas
or repeaters.
(mm) Monitoring protocol: The testing protocol, such as the Cobs Protocol (or one
substantially similar, including compliance determined in accordance with the
National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements, Reports 86 and 119)
which is to be used to monitor the emissions and determine the exposure risk from
telecommunications facilities.
(nn) Monopole: A single, self-supporting vertical pole with no guy wire anchors,
usually consisting of a galvanized or other unpainted metal or wooden pole with
below-grade foundations.
(oo) Omnidirectional antenna: An antenna that is equally effective in all directions
and whose size varies with the frequency and gain for which it is designed.
(pp) Personal communications services or PCS: Digital wireless telephone
technology such as portable phones, pagers, faxes and computers. Such mobile
technology may allow each consumer the same telephone number wherever he or
she goes. Also known as Personal Communication Network (PCN).
(qq) Personal wireless services: Commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless
exchange access services. These services include: cellular services, personal
communications services specialized mobile radio services, and paging services.
(rr) Pre-existing towers and antennas: Any tower or antenna for which a permit has
been issued prior to the effective date of these regulations.
123
(ss) Roof and/or building mount facility: A facility in which antennas are mounted
to an existing structure on the roof (including rooftop appurtenances) or a building
face.
(tt) Radial plots (see also tiled coverage plots): Radial plots are the result of drawing
equally-spaced fines (radials) from the point of the antenna, calculating the
expected signal and indicating this graphically on a map. The relative signal
strength may be indicated by varying the size or color at each point being studied
along the radial. A threshold plot uses a mark to indicate whether the point would
be strong enough to provide adequate coverage i.e. the points meeting the threshold
of adequate coverage. The drawback is the concentration of points close to the
antenna and the divergence of points far from the site near the ends of the radials.
(uu) Radiated-signal propagation studies of coverage plots: Computer generated
estimates of the signal emanating and prediction of coverage from antennas or
repeaters sited on a specific tower or structure. The height above ground, power
input and output, frequency output, type of antenna, antenna gain, topography or
the site and its surroundings are all taken into account to create these simulations.
They are the primary tools for determining whether the telecommunications
equipment will provide adequate coverage for that site.
(vv) Repeater: A small receiver/relay transmitter and antenna of relatively low power
output designed to provide service to areas which are not able to receive adequate
coverage directly from a base or primary station.
(ww) Scenic view: A scenic view is a wide angle or panoramic field of sight and may
include natural and/or manmade structures and activities. A scenic view may be
from a stationary viewpoint or be seen as one travels along a roadway, waterway,
or path. A view may be to a faraway object, such as a mountain, or a nearby object.
(xx) Self-supporting tower: A communications tower that is constructed without guy
wires.
(yy) Spectrum: Relating to any transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves.
(zz) Structurally able: The determination that a tower or structure is capable of
carrying the load imposed by the proposed new antennas under all reasonable
predictable conditions as determined by professional structural engineering
analysis.
(aaa) Telecommunications facility: All equipment (including repeaters) and locations
of equipment with which a telecommunications provider transmits and receives the
waves which carry their services. This facility may be sited on one (1) or more
towers or structure(s) owned and permitted by the provider or another owner or
entity.
(bbb) Telecommunications provider: An entity licensed by the FCC to provide
telecommunications services to individuals of institutions.
124
(ccc) Temporary wireless communication facility: Any tower, pole, antenna, etc.
designed for use while a permanent wireless facility is under construction, or for a
special event or conference where a majority of people attending are wireless users.
(ddd) Tiled coverage plots (see also radial plots): Tiled plots result from calculating
the signal at the uniformly-spaced locations on a rectangular grid, or tile, of the area
of concern. Unlike radial plots, tiled plots provide a uniform distribution of points
over the area of interest; usually the same grid will be used as different sites are
examined, and it is not necessary that the transmitter site be within the grid or area
of interest. As with radial plots, the graphic display or plot can be either signal
strength or adequate threshold. This method requires substantially more
topographic data and longer computer execution time than radial plots, but is
preferable for comparative analysis.
(eee) Tower: A vertical structure that provides telecommunications services.
(fff) Whip antenna: A vertical antenna that normally transmits signals in three hundred
sixty (360) degrees. Whip antennas are typically cylindrical in shape, narrow (less
than six (6) inches in diameter) and long (often measuring eighteen (18) inches in
height or more). Also called omnidirectional, stick or pipe antennas.
(ggg) View corridor: A three-(3)-dimensional area extending out from a viewpoint. The
width of the view corridor depends on the focus of the view. The focus of the view
may be a single object, such as a mountain, which would result in a narrow corridor,
or a group of objects, such as a downtown skyline, which would result in a wide
corridor. Panoramic views have very wide corridors and may include a three
hundred sixty (360) degree perspective. Although the view corridor extends from
the viewpoint to the focus of the view, the mapped portion of the corridor extends
from the viewpoint and is based on the area where base zone heights must be limited
in order to protect the view.
Y
Yard sales: Sales, including garage sales and flea markets, to the general public of new and used
items of personal property conducted upon a lot as an accessory use for not more than twelve (12)
days in any one (1) calendar year. Sales carried on for more than five (5) consecutive days must
secure a permit from the Zoning Administrator.
Z